Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Township Committee
[Adopted 12-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-24]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of Waterford of
a general and permanent nature adopted by the Township Committee of the
Township of Waterford, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Parts I,
II and III, Chapters 1 through 313, together with an Appendix, are hereby
approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Township of
Waterford," hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the 1974 Code of the Township
of Waterford and all other general and permanent ordinances enacted prior
to the enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are hereinafter
expressly saved from repeal or continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Township
of Waterford by impressing thereon the Seal of the Township, as provided
by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk
of the Township, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the
same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of Waterford"
shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of Waterford, pursuant to law, shall cause to
be published, in the manner required, a copy of this Adopting Ordinance
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Sufficient copies
of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Township
Committee, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the
periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township
of Waterford to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more
of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.1
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
1. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 1, Art. II, General Penalty.
§ 1-6 WATERFORD CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to June 26, 1996.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Township's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
N. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a fee or charge
for a Township permit, license, inspection, or service.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Township Committee that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance
as set forth in Schedule A2 attached hereto and made a part hereof
(chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code).
2. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-14B, the chapters and sections which were added,
amended or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by footnotes
referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine supplementation,
footnotes indicating amendments, deletions or additions will be replaced with the
following history: "Amended (added) 12-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-24." Schedule A, which
contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the Township offices.
§ 1-13 WATERFORD CODE § 1-14
1:6
ARTICLE II
General Penalty
[Adopted 6-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-5]
§ 1-15. Violations and penalties.
For violation of any ordinance of the Township of Waterford, other than
Housing or Zoning Code violations, the maximum penalty upon conviction
of the ordinance violation shall be one or more of the following:
§ 1-16. Repeat offenders.
Any person who is convicted of violating any Township of Waterford
ordinance within one year of the date of a previous violation of the same
provision of the same ordinance and who was fined for the previous
violation may, in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge, be required to
pay an additional fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine shall be not
less than the minimum fine, if any, nor more than the maximum fine fixed
for the violation of the ordinance but shall be calculated separately from the
fine imposed for the violation of the ordinance.
§ 1-17. Failure to pay.
Any person convicted of violating any provision of any Township of
Waterford ordinance and who is in default of the payment of the fine
imposed may, in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge, be imprisoned
in the county jail or place of detention provided by the Township of
Waterford for any term not exceeding 90 days, or be required to perform
community service for a period not exceeding 90 days, or any combination
thereof.
§ 1-18. Each day to be separate violation.
Except as otherwise provided in any Township of Waterford ordinance, each
and every day on which a violation of any provision of any ordinance exists
shall constitute a separate violation.
A. A fine not exceeding $2,000, imprisonment for any term not exceeding
90 days, or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
B. For any Housing or Zoning Code Ordinance violations of the Township
of Waterford, the maximum fine upon conviction of the ordinance
violation shall not exceed $1,250.
C. The Municipal Judge before whom any violator of a Township of
Waterford ordinance or any section or part thereof is convicted shall
have the power to impose any fine or term of imprisonment or term of
community service or combination thereof not exceeding the maximum
fixed by Subsection A or B above, as may be appropriate.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:7

ARTICLE III
Codification of Land Use, Development and Zoning
[Adopted 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-5]
§ 1-19. Adoption of revised and renumbered legislation.
The Land Use, Development and Zoning Ordinance of the Township of
Waterford, adopted August 13, 1997 by Ordinance No. 97-14, as amended,
as revised and codified by General Code and numbered as Chapter 176,
is hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the Land Use,
Development and Zoning Ordinance of the Township of Waterford.
§ 1-20. Changes to Land Use, Development and Zoning Ordinance.
A. In compiling and preparing the Land Use, Development and Zoning
legislation for adoption and revision as part of the Code pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical changes and other minor changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Township Committee that all such changes be adopted as part of the
Code as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally
amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance
as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof
(chapter and section number references are to the Ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code).3
C. Nomenclature changes: Throughout Chapter 176, Land Use,
Development and Zoning, the following nomenclature changes have
been made:
(1) "Soil Conservation Service" or "SCS" is updated to "Natural
Resources Conservation Service" or "NRCS."
(2) The references to "appropriate Township Board," "appropriate
municipal board" and "reviewing board" are updated to "Planning
Board."
D. Throughout the Code, statutory references have been updated or
revised to the current citation. Consolidated (N.J.S.A.) references have
been added to unconsolidated (P.L.) where appropriate.
3. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-20B, the parts and sections that were added,
amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the chapter by a
footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: [Amended (added, deleted) 2-23-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-5]. Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Township offices.
§ 1-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-21
1:9
§ 1-21. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are
repealed to the extent of such inconsistencies.
§ 1-22. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is
for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not
affect the remaining portions of this ordinance.
§ 1-23. Copies available to public.
Copies of Chapter 176, Land Use, Development and Zoning, shall be placed
on file for public examination and acquisition at the Township Clerk's Office
during regular business hours, and, upon final passage of Chapter 176,
Land Use, Development and Zoning, copies shall be made available to the
public.
§ 1-21 WATERFORD CODE § 1-23
1:10
Chapter 7
ADMINISTRATOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 40.
§ 7-1. Position established.
The office of Township Administrator in and for the Township of Waterford
is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136 et seq.
§ 7-2. Appointment, term of office.
§ 7-3. Compensation.
A. The Township Administrator shall be appointed by a majority vote of the
Township Committee. [Amended 7-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-9]
B. The term of office of the Township Administrator shall be at the
pleasure of the Township Committee. [Amended 7-9-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-9]
C. The Township Administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the Township
Committee. The Administrator may be removed by a two-thirds vote of
the Township Committee. The resolution of removal shall become
effective three months after its adoption by the Township Committee.
The Township Committee may provide that the resolution shall have
immediate effect; provided, however, that the Township Committee
shall cause to be paid to the Administrator forthwith any unpaid
balance of his salary and his salary for the next three calendar months
following the adoption of the resolution.
D. In the event of removal, resignation, absence or disability of the
Administrator, the Mayor shall appoint an Acting Administrator to serve
for 90 days or until an Administrator is appointed pursuant to
Subsection A above, whichever is sooner.
A. The Township Administrator shall be paid a salary fixed and adopted by
the Township Committee in the Annual Salary Ordinance.4 The
Township Administrator shall be reimbursed for unnecessary expenses
incurred in the performance of his office, subject to approval by the
Township Committee. [Amended 7-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-9]
B. The person appointed to the position of Township Administrator for a
term of not less than one nor more than three years, as provided by this
4. Editor's Note: See Ch. 61, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 1-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3
1:11
§ 7-4. Qualifications.
The Township Administrator shall be appointed on the basis of his executive
and administrator qualifications. Previous experience in local government
is essential, and possession of a master's degree in public administration,
business administration or municipal management shall be preferred.
§ 7-5. General responsibilities.
§ 7-6. Duties and responsibilities.
The Township Administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of
the Township of Waterford and be responsible to the Mayor and Township
Committee for the administration of all Township affairs and have the
following powers and duties:
chapter, shall be entitled to receive, at a minimum, the annual
compensation authorized on the date of initial appointment.
C. Unless otherwise provided, no Acting Administrator shall be paid more
than his regular salary while serving in that capacity, but he shall be
reimbursed for all necessary expenses incurred in the performance of
his office. If the Township Committee, by resolution, increases the
compensation of the Acting Administrator during his tenure, such
increased compensation shall not exceed the minimum salary provided
in the Salary Ordinance for the position of Administrator.
A. Chief administrative officer. The Township Administrator shall be the
chief administrative officer of the Township of Waterford and shall
direct and supervise the administration of all departments and officers
of the Township government, following consultation with and subject to
the approval of the Township Committee. The authority of the Mayor
and Township Committee to supervise the administration of all
departments shall be transmitted through the Township Administrator
where not prohibited by state statute, and all subordinate employees of
the Township shall be responsible to said authority.
B. The Township Administrator shall be required in all instances to consult
and confer with and obtain the consent of the Mayor or the members of
the Committee who serve as chairman or cochairman of a particular
department prior to instituting or undertaking any action with respect
to said department, and the Township Administrator shall implement all
decisions and orders as directed by the Mayor and Township
Committee.
A. Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and
agencies of the Township, except as otherwise provided by law.
B. Recommend to the Mayor and/or Township Committee the
appointments and, when necessary, suspension or removal of
§ 7-3 WATERFORD CODE § 7-6
1:12
department heads and all other employees, except the Township Clerk
and Municipal Attorney.
C. Attend all meetings of the Township Committee with the right to take
part in the discussion and to receive notice of all regular and special
meetings of the Township Committee and all advisory committees.
D. Ensure that all laws and all acts of the Township Committee, subject to
enforcement by him or by officers and employees subject to his
direction and supervision, are faithfully executed.
E. Coordinate with the Chief Financial Officer of the Township in the
preparation and submission to the Township Committee of a proposed
budget for the next fiscal year with an explanatory budget message.
[Amended 5-22-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-8]
F. Submit to the Township Committee and make available to the public a
complete report of finances and administrative activities of the
Township, as required by the Mayor and Township Committee.
G. Coordinate with the Township Finance Department a compilation and
analysis of budget costs and estimates on a regular basis. [Amended
5-22-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-8]
H. Keep the Mayor and Township Committee fully advised as to the current
financial condition and future needs of the Township and make such
recommendations to them concerning the affairs of the Township as he
deems appropriate.
I. (Reserved)5
J. (Reserved)6
K. (Reserved)7
L. Approve all bills and vouchers for payment prior to final approval by the
Township Committee.
M. (Reserved).8
N. Establish a proper purchasing and requisitioning procedure.
O. Authorize any transfer of supplies, materials and equipment between
departments and offices and, with the authorization of the Township
Committee, sell surplus, obsolete, unused or waste supplies, materials
and equipment.
5. Editor's Note: Former Subsection I, pertaining to the responsibility as purchasing agent,
was repealed 5-22-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-8.
6. Editor's Note: Former Subsection J, pertaining to the organizing and establishing of a
central purchasing system, was repealed 5-22-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-8.
7. Editor's Note: Former Subsection K, pertaining to the purchasing of materials, supplies
and equipment, was repealed 5-22-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-8.
8. Editor's Note: Former Subsection M, pertaining to the purchasing of materials, supplies,
equipment, and labor under contract, was repealed 5-22-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-8.
§ 7-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-6
1:13
Chapter 10
CONTRACTS, PROFESSIONAL SERVICE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Purchasing procedures — See Ch. 59.
P. Negotiate contracts for the Township, including personnel or labor
contracts, as authorized and directed by and subject to the approval of
the Township Committee and ensure that all terms and conditions
favorable to the Township in any statute or contract are faithfully kept
and performed; and upon knowledge of any violation of the above
informed to the Township Committee.
Q. Act as liaison between the Township and various state, county and
federal agencies with respect to all applications for funds or services
needed or required by the Township.
R. Review and supervise all paperwork associated with the Township's
insurance programs and policies, including employee health benefit
administration, all areas of liability insurance and workers'
compensation.
S. Receive and review any complaints concerning the functions and
obligations of the Township made by any of its residents or taxpayers
and maintain a permanent record of all complaints and the disposition
of said complaints.
T. Perform such other duties as may be required by the Mayor and
Township Committee.
§ 7-6 WATERFORD CODE § 7-6
1:14
ARTICLE I
Professional Service Contracts
[Adopted 9-27-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-159]
§ 10-1. Adoption of standards; applicability.
The following standards and criteria are hereby adopted and shall be made
applicable to all contracts awarded and/or confirmed by the Township
Committee and any and all boards, authorities, and committees appointed,
either through the authority of statute or ordinance, by the Township
Committee, unless a specific contrary intention is expressed in an individual
case by the Township Committee.
§ 10-2. Award of public professional services and other no-bid
contracts.
A. Purpose and intent. Although professional services contracts and
certain other contracts for goods and services are exempt from the
competitive bidding requirements of the Local Public Contracts Law,
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq., the Township Committee deems it
appropriate, and consistent with the provisions of recently enacted
New Jersey legislation, now codified at N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20.1 et seq., to
henceforth award such contracts through a competitive, quality-based,
fair and open process, unless a specific determination to the contrary is
made by the Township Committee.
B. Process for award of professional services and other no-bid contracts.
The Township of Waterford, or any agency or instrumentality thereof,
shall not enter into a contract, including a professional services
contract, or such other contract which is exempt from public bidding
requirements, having an anticipated value in excess of $17,500, as
determined by the Township of Waterford or any agency or
instrumentality, with a business entity, except through a contract that is
awarded pursuant to a fair and open process if, during the preceding
one-year period, that business entity has made a contribution that is
reportable by the recipient under N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq. to any
municipal committee of a political party if a member of that political
party is in office as a member of the Township Committee when the
contract is awarded or to any candidate committee of any person
serving in an elected public office of the Township of Waterford when
the contract is awarded. The fair and open process shall be qualitybased
and shall be as follows:
(1) Professional services may be awarded by virtue of a publicly
advertised request for proposals (RFP) which will be issued as one
document for those appointments which are made on an annual
basis, such as, but not limited to, the positions of: Township
9. Editor's Note: This ordinance was repealed 12-28-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-23 and then
subsequently reinstated 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-1.
§ 10-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-2
1:15
Attorney, Township Engineer, Township Planner, Planning Board
Attorney, Planning Board Engineer, Zoning Board Attorney, Zoning
Board Engineer, and such other statutory and/or ordinance public
positions.
(2) For said positions, no contract shall be awarded unless and until
the positions are:
(a) Publicly advertised in newspapers or on the internet website
maintained by the Township in sufficient time to give notice in
advance of the solicitation for the contracts;
(b) Awarded under a process that provides for public solicitation of
proposals and qualifications, including the following:
[1] Experience and reputation in the field;
[2] Knowledge of the subject matter of the services to be
provided to the Township;
[3] Knowledge of the Township, its affairs and operations;
[4] Availability to accommodate any required meetings of the
Township;
[5] Compensation proposal;
[6] Compliance with the minimum qualifications established
by the Township for the position;
[7] Other factors determined to be in the best interest of the
Township.
(c) Awarded and disclosed under criteria established in writing by
the Township of Waterford prior to the solicitation of proposals
or qualifications as set forth in this article;
(d) Publicly announced when awarded; and as to those RFPs which
prove to be unsuccessful, the Township Clerk shall retain a
copy of same on file for a period of not less than 60 days.
(3) For contracts which arise on an occasional basis, such as appraisals
needed for the acquisition of land and/or open space, as well as title
searches, surveying, and similar work associated with same; and
comparable assignments, such as planning services needed for
Master Plan updates, appraisals, special counsel, special project
engineer contracts, etc., professional services contracts may be
awarded without following the foregoing provisions, so long as:
(a) The anticipated value does not exceed the $17,500 threshold
set forth above; and
(b) The Township Clerk makes every effort to solicit at least two
proposals for said work.
§ 10-2 WATERFORD CODE § 10-2
1:16
C. Review of RFPs by review committee. A review committee shall be
established by the Mayor, consisting of not fewer than two committee
members, to prepare, process and evaluate any RFP issued pursuant to
the professional services contracting procedures set forth above. The
review committee shall evaluate the respective qualifications and/or
proposals, taking into consideration the designated qualifications and/
or performance criteria, experience, reputation of vendor, quality of
services, quoted fee and other relevant factors in making a
recommendation of award to the Township Committee; and the
Township Clerk may, in his/her sole discretion, conduct negotiations
with qualified vendors, after receipt of proposals, in order to achieve
the best possible contract terms and conditions for the Township and its
taxpayers. No contract shall be awarded, however, unless same is
authorized by resolution duly adopted in public session by the Township
Committee.
D. Contribution statement by professional business entity.
(1) Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure services,
including banking or insurance coverage services, with any
professional business entity, the Township or any of its purchasing
agents or agencies, as the case may be, shall receive a sworn
statement from the professional business entity, made under
penalty of perjury, that the bidder or offer or has not made a
contribution in violation of this article.
(2) The professional business entity shall have a continuing duty to
report any violations of this article that may occur during the
negotiation or duration of a contract. The certification required
under this subsection shall be made prior to entry into the contract
or agreement with the Township and shall be in addition to any
other certifications that may be required by any other provision of
law.
E. Contracts issued without use of the RFP process.
(1) In circumstances where the Township Committee determines that
the use of the RFP process is not appropriate, such as, but not
limited to, contracts with other government agencies, and
agreements with public utilities, the Township Clerk shall use his/
her best efforts to obtain at least two quotations for the work and
shall require the contractor to fully comply with the provisions of
N.J.S.A.19:44A-22 et seq. and related statutes.
(2) No business entity which enters into negotiations for, or agrees to,
any contract or agreement with the Township of Waterford or any
department or agency thereof, or of its independent authorities for
the rendition of professional, banking or insurance coverage
services, or any other consulting services, shall solicit or make any
contribution of money, or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind
contributions, to any Township of Waterford municipal candidate or
§ 10-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-2
1:17
holder of the public office having ultimate responsibility for the
award of the contract, or campaign committee supporting such
candidate or officeholder, or to any Waterford Township party
committee, between the time of first communications between that
business entity and the Township regarding a specific professional
services agreement and the later of the termination of negotiations
or the completion of the contract or agreement.
F. Emergency exceptions. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Township
Committee recognizes that the New Jersey Legislature has provided for
certain emergencies and further recognizes that the procedure outlined
above might not be capable of being achieved in the event of an
emergency or other time constraints. Thus, should a situation arise, and
time does not permit resort to this procedure, and the immediate
performance of services is necessary, then an award for same may be
made in accordance with the provisions of the Local Public Contracts
Law relating to emergency contracts and such rules and regulations as
may be promulgated, from time to time, by the Township Committee
with regard to same. No such emergency contracts, however, may be
awarded without a resolution establishing a basis for the deviation from
the procedures outlined herein.
§ 10-2 WATERFORD CODE § 10-2
1:18
ARTICLE II
Pay to Play
[Adopted 7-18-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-9]
§ 10-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS ENTITY — Whose contributions are regulated by this article:
CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE — (1) Every candidate for Township of Waterford
elective municipal office; (2) every candidate committee established by or
for the benefit of a candidate for Township of Waterford elective municipal
office; (3) every joint candidate committee established in whole or in part
by or for the benefit of a candidate for Township of Waterford elective
municipal office; (4) every political party committee of the Township of
Waterford; and (5) every political committee, continuing political
committee, or other form of association or organization that regularly
engages in the support of candidates for the Township of Waterford
Municipal elective offices or Township of Waterford Municipal political
parties or political party committees. The terms in this definition shall have
the meanings prescribed in N.J.A.C. 19:25-1.7.
CONTRACT FOR PROFESSIONAL OR EXTRAORDINARY SERVICES —
All contracts for “professional services” and “extraordinary unspecifiable
services,” as such terms are used in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5.
A. An individual, including the individual’s spouse, and any child/children;
A firm, corporation, professional corporation, partnership, limited
liability company, organization, association, and any other manner and
kind of business entity;
B.
Any person who owns 10% or more of the equity or ownership or
income interests in a person or entity, as defined in Subsections A and
B above, and their spouses and child/children;
C.
All partners or officers of such an entity, in the aggregate, and their
spouses and child/children;
D.
Any person, subcontractor, subsidiary, corporation, firm, partnership,
limited liability company, organization or association who or which has
received or indefeasibly acquired the right to receive, from a person
described in Subsection A above, more than $100,000 in compensation
or income of any kind (including, by way of illustration and not
limitation, wages, salaries, sums paid to independent contractors,
benefits, dividends, profit-sharing, pension contributions, deferred
contributions, stock, stock options or gifts) in any twelve-month period
prior to the award of, or during the term of, a contract subject to this
article.
E.
§ 10-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-3
1:19
CONTRIBUTION — The meaning prescribed in N.J.A.C. 19:25-1.7. By way of
illustration, and not limitation, this definition includes pledges, loans, and
in-kind contributions.
§ 10-4. Prohibition on awarding public contracts to certain
contributors.
A. To the extent that it is not inconsistent with state or federal law, the
Township of Waterford and any of its departments, instrumentalities or
purchasing agents shall not enter into any agreement or otherwise
contract to procure “professional services,” as such term is defined at
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2(6) and used at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5(1)(a)(i), and/or
banking, insurance or other consulting service (hereinafter
“professional services”), nor “extraordinary unspecified services,” as
such term is defined at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2(7) and used at N.J.S.A.
40A:11-5(1)(a)(ii), and/or media, public relations, lobbying, parking
garage management or other consulting and/or management service
(hereinafter “extraordinary unspecified services”) from any business
entity if such business entity has, within one calendar year immediately
preceding the date of the contract or agreement, solicited or made any
contribution in excess of the thresholds specified in Subsection C of this
section to:
(1) A candidate, candidate committee or joint candidates committee of
any candidate for elective municipal office in the Township of
Waterford or a holder of public office having ultimate responsibility
for the award of a contract;
(2) Any Township of Waterford political party committee; or
(3) Any continuing political committee or political action committee
that regularly engages in the support of the Township of Waterford
candidates and elections.
B. Contributions.
(1) No business entity who submits a proposal for, enters into,
negotiates for, or agrees to any contract or agreement with the
Township of Waterford or any of its departments or
instrumentalities for the rendition of professional services or
extraordinary unspecified services shall, between the time of first
communication between that business entity and the municipality
regarding a specific agreement for professional services or
extraordinary unspecified services and the later of the termination
of negotiations or rejection of any proposal, or the completion of
the performance or specified time period of that contract or
agreement, solicit or make, either directly or indirectly, any
contribution in excess of the thresholds specified in Subsection C of
this section to:
§ 10-3 WATERFORD CODE § 10-4
1:20
(a) A candidate, candidate committee or joint candidates
committee of any candidate for elective municipal office in the
Township of Waterford or a holder of public office having
ultimate responsibility for the award of a contract;
(b) Any Township of Waterford political party committee; or
(c) Any political action committee.
(2) For purposes of this subsection, an indirect contribution shall
include a contribution made to a political organization (as defined
in Subsection F below) that subsequently makes a contribution to
(i) any category of individual or organization described above in
Subsection B(1)(a), (b) or (c) of this section; or (ii) another political
organization, which then directly, or through a series of subsequent
contributions to other political organizations, makes a contribution
to any category of individual or organization described above in
Subsection B(1)(a), (b) or (c) of this section, regardless of whether:
(a) The business entity had knowledge of such political
organization’s or political organizations’, as the case may be,
contributions; or
(b) Such political organization's or political organizations', as the
case may be, use the funds of the business entity in making the
contribution or contributions, as the case may be.
C. Monetary thresholds.
(1) The monetary thresholds of this article are:
(a) A maximum of $300 per calendar year for any purpose to any
single candidate or candidate committee for Mayor or
governing body, or $500 per calendar year to any joint
candidates committee for Mayor or governing body, or $300
per calendar year to a political committee or political party
committee of the Township of Waterford;
(b) A maximum of $500 per calendar year to any political action
committee that regularly engages in the support of Township
of Waterford candidates.
(2) However, for each business entity party to a contract for
professional or extraordinary unspecified services as defined in
Subsection A, when such business entity’s contribution is
aggregated with all “persons” defined in “business entity” in § 10-3
above, by virtue of their affiliation to that business entity party, a
maximum of $2,500 to all Township of Waterford candidates,
candidates committees, joint candidate committees, and holders of
public office having ultimate responsibility for the award of a
contract, all Township of Waterford political committees and
§ 10-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-4
1:21
§ 10-5. Contributions made prior to the effective date.
No contribution or solicitation of contributions made prior to the effective
date of this article shall be deemed to give rise to a violation of this article.
§ 10-6. Contract renewal.
No contract subject to this article may be renewed, extended, or materially
modified unless the resulting renewal, extension, or modification would be
allowable under the provisions of this article if it were an initial contract.
§ 10-7. Contribution statement by business entity.
political party committees, as described herein, combined, without
violating Subsection A of this section.
D. For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall be the Mayor
and Township Committee of the Township of Waterford.
E. Rules regarding subcontractors. No person may be awarded a
subcontract to perform under a contract subject to this article if the
subcontractor would be disqualified by Subsection A from receiving the
contract at the time that the subcontract is awarded; nor may any
person who would be disqualified by Subsection A from receiving the
contract perform substantially all of the obligations described in a
contract for professional or extraordinary services that is subject to this
article.
F. No Waterford Township candidate for committee shall accept any
contribution from any state, county or municipal or other political party
or committee, political action committee, union or any other association
or organization that regularly engages in the support of candidates for
elective office (collectively, ”political organizations” and each, a
“political organization”) to the extent the political organization received
funds constituting such contribution from another political organization
or individual and that results in contributions that exceed the
contribution thresholds, limits and restrictions set forth in this article.
It is the express intent and purpose of this provision to prohibit the
practice commonly known as “wheeling.”
G. Any union whose membership has a direct interest in any contract with
the Township of Waterford shall be subject to the contribution
thresholds set forth in Subsection C above.
A. Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure “professional
services” or “extraordinary unspecified services” from any business
entity, the Township of Waterford or its purchasing agents and
departments, as the case may be, shall receive a sworn statement from
said business entity which is the intended recipient of said contract that
he/she/it has not made a contribution in violation of § 10-4 of this
§ 10-4 WATERFORD CODE § 10-7
1:22
§ 10-8. Return of excess contributions.
A business entity that is a party to a contract for professional services or
extraordinary unspecified services may cure a violation of § 10-4 of this
article if, within 30 days after the date on which the applicable ELEC report
is published, said business entity notifies the municipality in writing and
seeks and receives reimbursement of the contribution from the recipient of
such contribution.
§ 10-9. Exemptions.
The contribution limitations prior to entering into a contract in § 10-4A do
not apply to contracts which are awarded to the lowest responsible bidder
after public advertising for bids and bidding therefor, within the meaning of
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4, or are awarded in the case of emergency under N.J.S.A.
40A:11-6. There is no exemption for contracts awarded pursuant to a “fair
and open process” under N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20 et seq.
§ 10-10. Violations and penalties.10
article. The Township of Waterford, its purchasing agents and
departments shall be responsible for informing the Township
Committee that the aforementioned sworn statement has been received
and that the business entity is not in violation of this article, prior to
awarding the contract or agreement.
B. A business entity shall have a continuing duty to report to the Township
of Waterford any contributions that constitute a violation of this article
that are made during the negotiation, proposal process or the duration
of a contract. The Township of Waterford, its purchasing agents and
departments shall be responsible for informing the governing body
within 10 business days after receipt of said report from the business
entity, or at the next Township Committee meeting following receipt of
said report from the business entity, whichever comes first.
C. The certification required under this section shall be made prior to
entry into the contract or agreement with the Township of Waterford, or
prior to the provision of services or goods, as the case may be, and shall
be in addition to any other certifications that may be required by any
other provision of law.
A. It shall be a material breach of the terms of a Township of Waterford
agreement or contract for professional services or extraordinary
unspecified services when a business entity that is a party to such
agreement or contract has:
(1) Made or solicited a contribution in violation of this article;
10.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 1, Art. II, General Penalty.
§ 10-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-10
1:23
(2) Knowingly concealed or misrepresented a contribution given or
received;
(3) Made or solicited contributions through intermediaries for the
purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the
contribution;
(4) Made or solicited any contribution on the condition or with the
agreement that it will be contributed to a candidate, candidate
committee or joint committee of any candidate for elective
municipal office in the Township of Waterford, or a holder of public
office having ultimate responsibility for the award of a contract, or
any Township of Waterford political committee or political party
committee, or any political action committee;
(5) Engaged or employed a lobbyist or consultant with the intent or
understanding that such lobbyist or consultant would make or
solicit any contribution which, if made or solicited by the
professional business entity itself, would subject that entity to the
restrictions of this article;
(6) Funded contributions made by third parties, including consultants,
attorneys, family members and employees;
(7) Engaged in any exchange of contributions to circumvent the intent
of this article; or
(8) Directly or indirectly, through or by any other person or means,
done any act which, if done directly, would subject that entity to the
restrictions of this article.
B. Furthermore, any business entity that violates Subsection A(1) through
(8) above shall be disqualified from eligibility for future Township of
Waterford contracts for a period of four calendar years from the date of
the violation.
C. Any person who knowingly, purposely, or recklessly violates any
provision of this article, or who conspires with another person to violate
any provision of this article, or who, with the purpose of promoting or
facilitating a violation of this article, solicits another person to commit
it, or aids or agrees or attempts to aid another person in planning or
committing it, shall be subject to punishment, including fines and/or
imprisonment as set forth in N.J.S.A. 19:44A-22, which penalty
provisions shall be utilized by the Township of Waterford in the
enforcement of this article.
§ 10-10 WATERFORD CODE § 10-10
1:24
Chapter 13
COURT, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police department — See Ch. 50. Fees — See Ch. 124, Art. II.
§ 10-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-10
1:25

ARTICLE I
Court Established
[Adopted 12-11-1974 as Ch. 14, Art. I, of the 1974 Code]
§ 13-1. Establishment; name of Court.
A Municipal Court is hereby established under Chapter 8A of Title 2 of the
Revised Statutes of New Jersey,11 as amended and supplemented. The name
of said Court shall be the "Municipal Court of the Township of Waterford."
§ 13-2. Jurisdiction.
Said Municipal Court shall have and exercise the limited civil and criminal
jurisdiction prescribed by said Chapter 8A of Title 2 of the Revised Statutes
of New Jersey, as amended and supplemented from time to time.
§ 13-3. Judge of the Municipal Court; appointment; qualifications.
Said Court shall have a Judge, who shall be known as the "Judge of the
Municipal Court." He shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Township Committee, on January 1 for a term of three years,
and shall possess the qualifications as set forth in said Chapter 8A of Title 2
of the Revised Statutes.
§ 13-4. Clerk and other assistants.12
The Township Committee may by ordinance or resolution provide for an
Administrator and other assistants for said Municipal Court.
§ 13-5. Compensation.13
The compensation of the Judge of the Municipal Court shall be established
by ordinance and shall be in lieu of any and all fees. The compensation of
the Administrator and other assistants may be established by ordinance or
resolution.
§ 13-6. Fees. [Added 3-9-1994 by Ord. No. 94-3]
The Waterford Township Municipal Court is hereby authorized to charge
for the copying of Court records and for issuing certified copies of public
records maintained by the Municipal Court pursuant to the fee schedule set
forth in N.J.S.A. 22A:3-4, which fee schedule is incorporated by reference
herein.
11.Editor's Note: Chapter 8A of Title 2 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey was repealed by
P.L. 1993, c. 293. See now N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq.
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 13-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-6
1:27

ARTICLE II
Municipal Prosecutor
[Adopted 12-11-1974 as Ch. 14, Art. II, of the 1974 Code]
§ 13-7. Office established.
The position or office of Municipal Prosecutor is hereby established, whose
duty shall be to provide the legal representation that is necessary for the
interests of the Township of Waterford in the prosecution of cases before
the Municipal Court of the Township of Waterford.
§ 13-8. Compensation.
There shall be no fixed annual compensation for such Municipal Prosecutor
at this time, but he shall be compensated for his appearance and legal
representation in such matters or cases for which he may be requested to
perform legal services, as aforesaid, as the occasion may require, and such
manner of compensation shall continue until such time as might otherwise
be determined in any salary ordinance that might be hereafter adopted in
which a fixed salary for such position or office is included.
§ 13-9. Term of office.14
The term of such Municipal Prosecutor shall be for one year and shall expire
on the 31st day of December of each year; provided, however, that each
appointee shall continue in office following the expiration of his term until
his or her successor has been appointed and qualified.
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 13-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-9
1:29

ARTICLE III
Public Defender Fee
[Adopted 3-9-1994 as Ord. No. 94-2]
§ 13-10. Application fee.15
All persons seeking and applying for representation by the Waterford
Township Municipal Public Defender shall be required to pay an application
fee to the Waterford Township Municipal Court in an amount as set forth in
the Township Fee Schedule Ordinance.16
§ 13-11. Exceptions.
In the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge and upon good cause shown
by an applicant for a Public Defender, said fee may be waived upon a finding
that the fee would be an unreasonable burden on the applicant seeking this
representation.
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees, Art. II.
§ 13-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-11
1:31
Chapter 15
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 44.
§ 15-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE — Shall include any employee of the Township of
Waterford and shall include any elected or appointed official, counsel or
special counsel, or any officer, employee or servant, whether or not
compensated, who is authorized to perform any act or service for the
Township of Waterford. The term "public employee" shall also include
persons formerly holding office or employment, provided the events giving
rise to a cause of action or claim hereunder conform to the requirements
herein established.[Amended 6-9-2004 by Ord. No. 204-7]
DEFENSE — The means by which such public employee may respond to any
suit, allegation or cause of action. The Township of Waterford shall provide
the defense of any action, suit or proceeding, whether civil, criminal,
administrative or investigative, including a cross action, counterclaim or
cross complaint against any public employee because of any act or omission
of that employee in the scope of his or her employment and shall defray
all costs of defending such action, including reasonable counsel fees and
expenses, together with costs of appeal, if any, excepting actions, suits
or proceedings brought by the Township of Waterford against any such
employee. Expressly exempted from this chapter providing defense and
indemnification to public employees of the Township of Waterford are any
charges, allegations or actions of whatever nature asserted by the Township
of Waterford against its own public employees.
INDEMNIFICATION — To secure against loss or damage which may occur
in the future or to provide compensation for or to repair loss or damage
already suffered; to insure; to save harmless.
§ 15-2. Findings.
The Mayor and Committee for the Township of Waterford finds as follows:
A. The State of New Jersey, through the passage of the Tort Claims Act, as
amended and supplemented, from time to time (N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq.)
has determined the circumstances under which claims may be made
against public entities and their officials, employees and servants.
B. Said Tort Claims Act also specifies under what circumstances a public
entity may defend and indemnify its officials, employees and servants.
§ 13-11 WATERFORD CODE § 15-2
15:32
§ 15-3. Provisions of indemnification.
C. The Mayor and Committee for the Township of Waterford hereby
provides, under certain circumstances, for the defense and
indemnification of its officers, employees and servants in the good faith
performance of their duties and responsibilities.
D. Such defense and indemnification are especially appropriate for
members of appointed boards who serve the Township of Waterford
without monetary compensation.
E. The indemnification of municipal employees is also expressly designed
to avoid a conflict between the employer and the employee when claims
are lodged. The Supreme Court for the State of New Jersey has noted
that because the law does not require, but does permit, indemnification
of local public entity employees, conflicts of interest may arise in the
absence of such indemnification where an entity and an employee are
both sued for compensatory damages in, for example, a civil rights
action and both employ the same attorney to defend. Likewise, the
Court pointed out such conflict could arise because the employee is
liable for punitive damages and the entity is not. (See Petition for
Review of Opinion 552. 102 N.J. 194.) Accordingly, this indemnification
policy is also intended to increase the efficiency and reduce the costs of
defending the Township of Waterford and its employees and agents in
the event of such actions.
A. Whenever a civil action shall be brought against any person holding an
office, position or employment with the Township of Waterford for any
action or omission arising out of or in the course of the performance of
the duties of such office, position or employment, the Township of
Waterford shall provide payment of that portion of any exemplary or
punitive damage award not otherwise covered by a policy of insurance.
Note, however, that the Township of Waterford does not, by
indemnifying its employees against punitive damage, indirectly or
directly waive its own immunity against such claims. (See T&M Homes,
Inc. v. Pemberton Twp., 190 N.J. Super. 637.)
B. Whenever a civil action shall be brought against any person holding an
office, position or employment with the Township of Waterford for any
action or omission arising out of or in the course of the performance of
the duties of such office, position or employment, the Township of
Waterford shall provide payment of that portion of any costs of defense
of said action not covered by a policy of insurance. Whenever any
insurance policy whose purpose is to provide the defense and
indemnification of the Township of Waterford or its public employees is
in dispute, the Township of Waterford will stand in the place of the
insurance carrier, subject to all rights of subrogation, provide for the
defense and indemnification of its employees as specified herein. Said
public employee has an affirmative duty, to be eligible for said defense
and indemnification, to cooperate with the Township of Waterford in
any and all of its efforts to resolve any disputed insurance coverage.
§ 15-2 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 15-4
15:33
§ 15-4. Limit of obligation.
By common law and the express provisions of this chapter, the Township
of Waterford's authority to indemnify is limited to acts by public employees
that are within the scope of their employment and which are not criminal,
fraudulent, malicious or instances of willful misconduct. Additionally, the
Township of Waterford will not provide the means for defense nor indemnify
any public employee in those instances where the Township of Waterford
has initiated the charges or action. In the event that any such public
employee is charged with criminal charges and he or she is later acquitted,
any application to recover the cost of his or her defense is expressly
conditioned upon the ultimate determination of administrative charges
which may or may not arise out of the same conduct or behavior.
Notwithstanding all of the above, in the event that the Township of
Waterford elects to assert such administrative charges and even if the
employee should hereafter prevail, all such claims for reimbursement for
costs of defense will be subjected to the controlling statutory and common
law as opposed to this chapter.
Chapter 16
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 16, Economic Development Commission, adopted
7-14-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-13, was repealed 4-22-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-7.]
Chapter 18
EMERGENCY RESCUE SERVICES, DIVISION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 26.
Emergency and ambulance services — See Ch.
27.
Police Department — See Ch. 50.
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 54.
Volunteer fire fighters and EMS Squad — See
Ch. 69.
Hazardous substances — See Ch. 159.
§ 18-1. Division of Emergency and Rescue Services.
A. The Division of Emergency Rescue Services shall be headed by the
Chief of the volunteer emergency fire and rescue department. Rescue
services shall continue to be provided by the volunteer emergency fire
and rescue department previously organized and governed pursuant to
law, and said volunteer emergency fire and rescue shall be organized,
constituted and administered as heretofore established by ordinance,
except to the extent that any such ordinance is inconsistent with the
Charter, this chapter and general law. The Chief of the volunteer
§ 15-4 WATERFORD CODE § 18-1
15:34
emergency fire and rescue department shall report directly to the
Director of Public Safety and the Township Administrator on a quarterly
basis.
B. Members.
(1) In addition to such other qualifications as heretofore established by
ordinance or by general law, all members of the rescue unit
services providing emergency services shall be limited to those
qualifications to provide emergency care and rescue services as
established by ordinance or by general law.
(2) The objective of the rescue unit is the protection and preservation
of life through providing rescue services. The age of active
members hereafter joining the rescue unit shall be above the age of
18, except for junior members, but shall service at the discretion
and direction of the Chief of the volunteer emergency fire and
rescue department. The head of the volunteer emergency fire and
rescue department shall have the right to require a doctor's
certificate from any current or prospective member at any time as
to their physical fitness and ability to fulfill emergency rescue and
medical service responsibilities. Further, all members must comply
with any and all federal, state or other rules and regulations
pertaining to technical emergency rescue medical service
qualifications for membership.
C. Nonpaid employees; waiver of compensation. All nonpaid members,
including officers, of the volunteer emergency fire and rescue
department shall sign waivers acknowledging that they will not be
compensated by the Township for their services and that they waive any
right to compensation for their services. Said waiver and
acknowledgment shall be on a form approved by the Township Solicitor.
This waiver shall not prevent nonpaid officers from receiving expense
compensation or nonpaid members from receiving incentive
compensation, nor shall it create an entitlement to same. "Expense
compensation" is a yearly amount paid by the fire and rescue
departments to its officers to compensate them for expenses. "Incentive
compensation" is a yearly amount paid by the department to its
members based upon the number of calls responded to in the year.
D. Billing.
(1) The Township of Waterford, in order to support the Division of
Emergency Rescue Services and the volunteer rescue department
comprising same, shall bill for emergency rescue services in the
emergency rescue for persons trapped in vehicles within the
Township of Waterford. The rates of such services shall be set as
follows: The amount to be billed hereinbelow in this chapter.
(2) These charges shall be billed to the insurance company of the
resident or party receiving assistance from the Division of
Emergency Fire and Rescue Department. The rates set herein shall
§ 18-1 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 18-1
15:35
be reviewed annually by the Township Administrator, Director of
Public Safety, and Chief of the volunteer emergency fire and rescue
department. The Township Administrator, with input from the
Director of Public Safety and Chief of the emergency fire and
rescue department, may thereafter recommend to the Township
Committee that the rate schedule be altered to reflect appropriate
increases or decreases.
(3) The Township of Waterford shall obtain services for the mailing and
enforcement of these billings, which services shall be obtained
through public bidding if required under the Local Public Contracts
Law.17 The Township Administrator, with input from the Director of
Public Safety, may grant relief from these billings upon the grounds
of hardship.
E. Use of tobacco. Members, volunteers and employees may not use any
tobacco products while on duty or at any time when in Township
vehicles, public buildings or during training. "Tobacco product" means
smoking and smokeless tobacco, electronic cigarettes or vapor-style
smoking devices. [Amended 10-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-20]
F. Extrication descriptions and corresponding charges.
(1) Light rescue, batteries, fluid, stabilization: $200.
(a) Operations such as stabilization, use of hand tools, hazard
control, and other scene-related light rescue operations.
(2) Medium rescue: $450.
(a) Operations include the use of power tools and hydraulic rescue
tools to perform activities such as opening or removing doors
to provide access to patients as well as stabilizing vehicles and
performing hazardous assessment.
(3) Heavy rescue: $800.
(a) Operations include any technical rescue procedures, including
but not limited to water and ice rescue, rope rescue, confined
space rescue, high angle rescue, trench rescue or structural
collapse rescue. Also includes motor vehicle rescue that
includes the use of power tools and hydraulic tools to perform
operations such as partial or full roof removal, front/dash
displacement, third door access, and separating vehicle from
another.
17.Editor’s Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1.
§ 18-1 WATERFORD CODE § 18-1
15:36
Chapter 19
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 143. Land development and zoning — See Ch. 176.
§ 19-1. Commission established.
There is hereby established a commission to be known as the Environmental
Commission for the municipality of Waterford Township, pursuant to
Chapter 245 of the Laws of the 1968 (N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 to 40:56A-12) as
amended by Chapter 35, P.L. 1972.
§ 19-2. Membership; terms; vacancy.
§ 19-3. Alternate members.
A. The Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Township Committee. All
seven members shall have equal voting power on the Commission. All
members shall be residents of the municipality of Waterford Township,
at least 21 years of age, and are considered "Friends of the
Environment." One of the members shall also be a member of the
Planning Board.
B. The residents of the Municipality serving on the Commission shall serve
for three-year terms, provided that those members first appointed shall
serve as follows:
(1) Two members for the one-year term.
(2) Two members for the two-year term.
(3) Three members for the three-year term.
C. The Mayor shall designate one of the members to serve as chairman,
and the Chairman shall serve for a period of one year. Such other
officers shall be elected by the Commission as deemed necessary for
the conduct of the Commission's business. A vacancy occurring
otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled by the Mayor, with
the advice and consent of Township Committee for the unexpired term.
A. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Township Committee,
shall also appoint two alternates who will vote only in the absence of a
full member. Those alternate members shall be designated at the time
of appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms of
the alternate members first appointed shall be two years for Alternate
No. 1 and one year for Alternate No. 2, so that the term of not more
§ 18-1 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 19-3
19:37
§ 19-4. Associate members.
Upon the approval of the Mayor and Township Committee, the Commission
has the authority to appoint associate members, who are also considered
"Friends of the Environment," to aid in the Commission's business and
operations. Associate members must be at least 18 years of age and
residents of the municipality. Associate members are nonvoting members,
and can be considered for full membership when a vacancy occurs.
§ 19-5. Liaison.
A member of Township Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor and
Township Committee to act as liaison, and to assist in coordinating the
Commission's functions, transactions and operations, and to ensure
compliance with township policies.
§ 19-6. Conflict of interest; removal.
§ 19-7. Compensation of members; expenses.
Commission members shall serve without compensation, but said members
shall be reimbursed for any expenses incurred in the performance of their
duties. The Commission shall keep complete and accurate records of its
accounts in this regard, and shall not exceed its budget and moneys
appropriated from the township for the performance of their duties.
than one alternate member shall expire in any one year. A vacancy
occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filed by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of Township Committee, for the
unexpired term only.
B. An alternate member may participate in discussions of the proceedings,
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote first.
A. No member of the Commission shall be permitted to act on any matter
which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial
interest.
B. The Mayor or Governing Body may remove any member of the
Commission for cause, on written charges served upon the member and
after a hearing thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be
heard in person or by counsel. A vacancy on the commission occurring
otherwise than expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired
term in the same manner as an original appointment.
§ 19-3 WATERFORD CODE § 19-8
19:38
§ 19-8. Purpose; powers and duties of Commission.
The Commission is established for the protection, development or use of
natural resources, including water resources, located within territorial
limits of the municipality of Waterford. The Commission shall have power to
conduct research into the use and possible use of the open land areas of the
municipality and may coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized
for similar purposes, and may advertise, prepare, print and distribute
books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems
necessary for its purposes. It shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly
or privately owned, including open marshlands, swamps and other
wetlands, in order to obtain information on the proper use of such areas
and may from time to time recommend to the Planning Board plans and
programs for inclusion in the Master Plan and the development and use of
such areas.
§ 19-9. Acquisition of property.
The Environmental Commission may, subject to the approval of the Mayor
and Township Committee, acquire property, both real and personal, in the
name of the municipality by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise, or lease
for any of its purposes and shall administer the same for such purposes
subject to the terms of the conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may
be to acquire the fee or any lesser interest, development right, easement
(including conservation easement), covenant or other contractual right
(including a conveyance on condition or with limitations or revisions), as
may be necessary to acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future
use of or otherwise conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other
land and water areas in the municipality.
§ 19-10. Studies and recommendations.
The Environmental Commission shall have power to study and make
recommendations concerning open space preservation, water resources
management, air pollution control, solid waste management, noise control,
soil and landscape protection, environmental appearance, marine resources
and protection of flora and fauna.
§ 19-11. Grants; use of funds.
A. Upon the approval of the Mayor and Township Committee, the
Commission shall have power to seek out and make application in the
township's name for any county, state or federal financial aid, in the
form of grants, to be used for purposes of an environmental nature
within the township. All funds granted shall be in the name of the
township and held by the township and appropriated to the Commission
upon approval by the Mayor and Township Committee.
B. The Commission, upon approval by the Mayor and Township
Committee, may appoint employees and incur such expenses as it may
from time to time require, provided that the same shall be within the
§ 19-8 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 19-11
19:39
§ 19-12. Annual report.
The Environmental Commission shall, on a periodic basis, and no less than
on an annual basis, make an annual report to the Mayor and Township
Committee, or the appointed Township Committee member, setting forth
in detail its operations and transactions for the previous 12 months. The
Environmental Commission shall keep records of its meetings and activities.
§ 19-13. Mayor and Township Committee approval required for
certain actions.
The Environmental Commission shall have no right to appoint any
employees or to retain professional services without approval from the
Mayor and Township Committee. The Commission shall have no power of
condemnation or eminent domain and shall not be authorized to pledge
credit of the township or to create any debt against it, or in any manner
act as the agent of the Township of Waterford except as authorized by
those items contained herein, or as authorized by the Mayor and Township
Committee.
Chapter 26
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 40.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 44.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 137.
§ 26-1. Department created.
There is hereby created and established the Waterford Township Fire
Department in the County of Camden, State of New Jersey.
limits of funds appropriated to it, and in accordance with the terms of
the county, state or federal grant to which it applies and other rules and
regulations established by the township for said employees and fund
usage.
C. The Commission shall be responsible for the completion and submittal
of all required progress reports, completion reports, reports of
expenditures or other documents which may be required to comply with
approved and received grants. The Commission shall be responsible to
arrange for a Commission member to attend any meetings where
attendance may be required to comply with approved and received
grants.
§ 19-11 WATERFORD CODE § 26-2
19:40
§ 26-2. Purpose.
The object and purpose of the Fire Department shall be the preservation
and protection of life and property from and during such fires and
emergencies as may occur in the Township of Waterford and vicinity
thereof.
§ 26-3. Companies designated. [Amended 10-14-1998 by Ord. No.
98-16; 6-25-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-8; 10-12-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-2118]
§ 26-4. Authority.
The Mayor and Committee shall have authority and control over the Fire
Department. The Chief of the Fire Department, who shall be elected as
hereinafter provided, shall report directly to the Mayor and Committee and
be subject to the authority of the Mayor and Committee. The Fire Chief shall
have daily control over the operations of the Fire Department and said fire
equipment and apparatus belonging to the Township of Waterford, subject
only to the authority and direction of the Mayor and Committee. As set
forth below, the Fire Chief shall be responsible to the Mayor and Committee
for the training and efficient operation of the Fire Department. The Fire
Chief shall keep or cause to be kept an accurate inventory record of all
equipment and property of the Fire Department and shall report monthly
to the Mayor and Committee regarding the activities and general condition
of the Department, including such suggestions or recommendations as may
be proper and necessary. The Fire Chief shall also report promptly to the
Township Administrator and Public Safety Director any Fire Department
equipment or apparatus in need of immediate repair so that appropriate
action may be taken as required.
§ 26-5. Fire Department officers. [Amended 10-14-1998 by Ord. No.
98-16; 6-25-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-8]
The officers of the Fire Department shall consist of a Fire Chief, a Deputy
Fire Chief and one Battalion Chief. Any additional officers appointed by
A. The Waterford Township Fire Department shall consist of the following
fire stations and other physical property as needed when designated by
the Fire Chief:
(1) Station 232 located at Atco Avenue.
B. No other stations or volunteer fire companies may be formed without
the consent and approval of the Mayor and Committee of the Township
of Waterford.
18.Editor’s Note: This ordinance removed the reference to Station 233, located at Jackson
Road. It noted that the Louden Fire Company was previously identified as Station 233;
while said fire company remains as a named entity, it is no longer an active fire station to
provide fire service to the Township of Waterford. Property in its ownership name remains
available for emergency use by the Township Fire Department, Police Department, and
Office of Emergency Management.
§ 26-2 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 26-5
19:41
the Fire Chief must meet the qualifications as set forth by this chapter.
Any officers appointed by the Fire Chief would be subject to consent by
resolution of the Mayor and Township Committee.
§ 26-6. Election of Fire Department officers. [Amended 10-14-1998
by Ord. No. 98-16; 6-25-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-8]
A. The Chief of the Fire Department, the Deputy Chief of the Fire
Department, and the Battalion Chief of the Fire Department shall be
elected for three-year terms, and the Chief, Deputy Chief and Battalion
Chief shall be elected by the Fire Department members qualified to
vote. The incumbent Fire Chief, Deputy Chief and Battalion Chief may
run for re-election and succeed themselves in that position without
limitation. The date for the election of Fire Department officers shall be
selected no later than October 1 of each election year. The election will
be conducted during the month of November of the election year using
the date that was set by September 30 to fill the vacancies of chief
officers. Written notification of the member elected Fire Chief, Deputy
Chief and Battalion Chief shall be forwarded to the Municipal Clerk
immediately following the election. The Fire Chief, Deputy Chief and
Battalion Chief shall assume office commencing on the first day of
January after said election and confirmation by the Mayor and Township
Committee. [Amended 10-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-21]
B. Officers.
(1) All candidates for Chief Officer positions must meet voting
eligibility requirements as stipulated in § 26-8 of this chapter.
(2) All candidates for Deputy Fire Chief must have at least 12 years of
fire service experience from the age of 18 and must have served at
least one three-year term as Battalion Chief or Captain of the
Waterford Township Fire Department.
(3) All candidates for Battalion Chief must have at least 10 years of fire
service experience from the age of 18 and must have served at least
one three-year term as Captain or Lieutenant of the Waterford
Township Fire Department.
(4) For purposes of calculating time of experience, length of service
time starts upon successful completion of New Jersey Firefighter I.
If a member transfers from another department, a minimum of one
year must be served as a Waterford Township Firefirefighter before
being considered for a Chief's position unless a special waiver is
granted by the Township Committee.
C. Qualifications for chief officers. [Amended 10-12-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-21]
(1) All chief officers shall meet NFPA 1670 operations level in all
disciplines and technician level in selected disciplines as stipulated
by Departmental policy.
§ 26-5 WATERFORD CODE § 26-6
19:42
§ 26-7. Qualifications for Fire Department officer positions.
[Amended 10-14-1998 by Ord. No. 98-16]
All candidates for Municipal Fire Chief shall have had at least five years of
supervisory fire experience involving the extinguishing of fires and should
possess a knowledge of all fire laws and ordinances and of the problems
encountered and procedures involved in the internal organization of the
Township Fire Department. All candidates should have a thorough
knowledge of all types of emergency responses and characteristics of
accepted firefighting equipment and apparatus, and of the methods used in
fighting and containing small and large fires. Candidates shall be able to
obtain and make effective use of allocated funds, personnel, equipment and
supplies and must be able to oversee the establishment and maintenance
of needed personnel records and fire records as well as any other required
federal, state or local files. Candidates for Municipal Fire Chief shall have
served at least one term as Deputy Chief or Battalion Chief in the Waterford
Township Fire Department.
§ 26-8. Fire Department members eligible to vote; issuance of
Department property. [Amended 10-14-1998 by Ord. No. 98-16;
6-25-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-8]
(2) All chief officers shall meet New Jersey State Police Hazardous
Materials Technician Level and On Scene Incident Commander.
(3) All Fire Department officers shall meet the New Jersey Division of
Fire Safety Fire Officer Requirements (N.J.A.C. 5:73-1.6).
(4) (Reserved)
(5) (Reserved)
(6) (Reserved)
(7) The Deputy Chief shall meet the requisite knowledge and skills in
the following paragraphs of the 2003 Edition of NFPA 1021,
Standard for Fire Officer Professional Qualifications: 3.2, 3.3, 4.3,
4.3.1, 5.4.5, 5.6, 5.6.1, 5.6.2, 5.7, 5.7.1, 6.6. 6.6.1, 6.6.2, 7.3, 7.3.1.
(8) The Chief of the Department shall meet the requisite knowledge
and skills in the following paragraphs of the 2003 Edition of NFPA
1021, Standard for Fire Officer Professional Qualifications: 3.2, 3.3,
4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.3.1, 4.4, 5.4, 5.4.1, 5.4.2, 5.4.3, 5.4.4, 5.4.4, 5.4,
5.6.1, 5.6.2, 5.7, 5.7.1, 6.2, 6.2.1, 6.4.5, 6.4.7. 6.6. 6.6.1., 6.6.2.7.3,
7.3.1., 7.4, 7.4.1, 7.6, 7.6.1.
A. Fire Department members eligible to vote for Fire Department chief
officers shall be all members of the Department who answered 15% of
emergency calls and 60% of called fire drills from the period November
30 through October 1 of the year of the election. A person which has
been a member for at least six months shall be entitled to vote if that
member has answered 15% of emergency calls and 60% of called fire
§ 26-6 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 26-8
19:43
§ 26-9. Confirmation of officers.
The election of the officers set forth hereinabove shall be confirmed by
the Mayor and Committee not later than the first regular meeting of the
governing body following the election of the respective officers.
§ 26-10. Bylaws, rules and regulations.
The membership of the Fire Department may adopt bylaws and rules and
regulations not inconsistent with the terms and provisions of this chapter,
which bylaws and rules and regulations shall be filed with the Mayor and
Committee.
§ 26-11. Administrative duties of Fire Department officers.
The following Fire Department officers shall perform the following
administrative duties as set forth herein:
drills during that six-month period. Fire Department life members who
do not meet the 15% of emergency calls but do attend 60% of called
fire drills and Fire Department sanctioned activities will also be eligible
to nominate and vote for the Department's chief officers. Life members
will be classified as any member in good standing for a period of 20
years of service. Eligibility may be adjusted by the Committee of the
Standing Officers in the event of reasonable documented reasons due
to sickness, education, military service or the like. Those members
with adjusted eligibility as referenced hereinabove will be permitted
to nominate and vote via a signed and sealed letter provided to the
Administrative Secretary of the Fire Department on the announced
dates for nomination and elections. A separate letter will be required
for both the nomination and for election purposes. Only Fire
Department members who meet the qualifications to vote may
nominate officers for election. [Amended 10-12-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-21]
B. Issuance of Department property.
(1) Fire Department members will be issued identification, uniforms,
pagers, personal protective equipment and other such gear as
determined by the Fire Chief. All of these items are property of the
Fire Department. Fire Department members are responsible for
the security and care of said equipment while entrusted with it. If
any equipment is lost or damaged due to the negligence of the
member, willful or unintentional, the member is financially
responsible to the Fire Department for current replacement costs.
(2) Upon severance for any reason from the Fire Department, the
former member is to return all Fire Department identification,
clothing, equipment and gear immediately. Failure to do so will
result in theft charges filed with the Waterford Township Police
Department.
§ 26-8 WATERFORD CODE § 26-11
19:44
§ 26-12. Disciplinary Committee.
A. Fire Chief. It shall be the responsibility of the Fire Chief of the
Waterford Township Fire Department to act as the Administrator of that
Department in regard to funding, personnel, equipment and supplies.
The Fire Chief shall act as the central depository for the maintenance of
needed fire and personnel records and files and shall be responsible for
maintaining the same. The Fire Chief shall from time to time analyze
the fire problems of the township, establish appropriate fire rules and
regulations, make the best use of available funds, personnel, equipment
and supplies, provide needed, financial and budgetary advice and
assistance as required, coordinate requisitions and purchases within
budgetary limits and such other similar administrative duties as are
necessary to fulfill the office of Fire Chief. The Fire Chief shall make all
recommendations to eliminate duplication of services, equipment and
supplies and to develop plans for the continuing protection of the
township from fires. The Waterford Township Fire Chief shall submit a
monthly report to the Public Safety Director, which shall include the
condition of all firefighting apparatus and appurtenances, the number
and date of all emergency calls during the preceding month, the
amount of training provided, listing the dates and times of all drills held
that month, together with the names of the participants, and any other
data deemed appropriate to be provided by the Fire Chief to the
Director of Public Safety.
B. Deputy Chief and Battalion Chiefs. The Deputy Chief and Battalion
Chiefs shall be under the supervision of the Fire Chief and perform all
duties as directed by the Fire Chief and those duties as set forth in the
Fire Department standard operating procedures.
A. A Disciplinary Committee shall be established which shall consist of the
Mayor and Committee. This Committee shall have the authority to
discipline the Fire Chief, Deputy Chief or Battalion Chiefs. Charges for
discipline against the Fire Chief, Deputy Chief or Battalion Chiefs must
be presented in writing and shall be served either personally or by
registered mail within three days after the charges have been filed. The
Fire Chief, Deputy Chief and Battalion Chiefs shall be entitled to a due
process hearing within 30 days of the date that said charges were filed,
unless the Disciplinary Committee and the accused mutually agree to
an extended date. In the event that the charges are upheld and
sustained by a preponderance of the evidence submitted, the Fire Chief,
Deputy Chief or Battalion Chiefs shall be disciplined appropriately,
which discipline can include a period of suspension or dismissal from
the Fire Department. [Amended 10-14-1998 by Ord. No. 98-16]
B. When appropriate and based on the charges, the Mayor and Committee
shall have the power to order a temporary suspension of the accused
from fire duty and other duties and privileges of the Department until
the final outcome of the charges is determined and made known in
writing. If no temporary suspension is ordered, the accused shall be
§ 26-11 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 26-12
19:45
§ 26-13. Standard operating procedures.
§ 26-14. Qualifications for membership.
In order to qualify for active membership in the Fire Department, a person
must satisfy the following provisions:
entitled to continue as an active member of the Department in all
respects.
C. In the event that the Fire Chief, Deputy Chief or Battalion Chiefs is
suspended, that officer shall remain inactive and may not attend
meetings or serve at fires. In the event of discharge from the Fire
Department, he shall no longer be entitled to the rights or privileges of
an officer or member of the Department. The Disciplinary Committee
may also determine and fix other disciplinary measures based on the
specific charges. [Amended 10-14-1998 by Ord. No. 98-16]
D. In the event of a determination that the charges are not founded and
should be dismissed, that officer shall be immediately entitled to
resume all rights and privileges as an officer and member of the
Department in the event a suspension has occurred, or, in the event of
no suspension, his status shall be that of an officer and member in good
standing as though no charges had been brought.
A. There shall be a set of standard operating procedures that govern the
conduct of emergency operations, the training for such operations, any
necessary preparations for such operations, the day to day conduct of
the Department, the duties of officers and members, the establishment
of line and staff officers and the member discipline process.
B. The standard operating procedure shall be determined by the
Department Fire Chief and Deputy Chief. All operating procedures shall
be reduced to writing and a copy of the same provided to each member
of the Fire Department. A copy shall also be filed with the Mayor and
Committee. [Amended 10-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-21]
C. Each member shall be responsible to stay abreast of all standard
operating procedures and any changes that may occur in such
procedures.
D. Failure to adhere to the standard operating procedures can result in
disciplinary action against a member by the Fire Chief and/or Deputy
Chief. [Amended 10-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-21]
E. Any member found to be in serious violation of the standard operating
procedures that results in a hazard to the safety of other members,
equipment or apparatus may be suspended from emergency operation
by the Fire Chief or Deputy Chief pending a hearing pursuant to the
standard operating procedures. [Amended 10-12-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-21]
§ 26-12 WATERFORD CODE § 26-14
19:46
§ 26-15. Application for membership.
A. Be a citizen of the United States.
B. Be at least 18 years of age with proof of birth.
C. Be able to pass a physical examination indicating that the applicant is
physically fit to perform the duties as required, which physical
examination must be evidenced by a certificate from a practicing
physician of the State of New Jersey.
D. Be able to attend 60% of monthly meetings and fire drills and at least
25% of all emergency fire calls each year. An active member not
meeting this requirement shall be reviewed by the Fire Chief and
Deputy Chiefs for a determination on that member's continuing status.
E. Be of good moral character.
A. Every person seeking to join the Fire Department shall be required to
file an application for membership with the Fire Department.
B. Each applicant shall be fingerprinted and investigated by the Waterford
Township Police Department, including the conducting of a criminal
record check.
C. The Waterford Township Police Department shall prepare a factual
summary of the background investigation and criminal records check of
each applicant and provide this summary to the Fire Chief for the
purpose of determining the fitness of an applicant. Background
investigations and records check include records of all convictions as
an adult.
D. In the event that the Police Chief determines that an applicant is to be
denied admittance to membership on the basis of the investigation
summary, that applicant may inspect that summary for the purposes of
clarifying, explaining or denying the accuracy of its contents.
Thereafter, the Police Chief will review the additional information
provided by the applicant with the Township Police Department in order
to reconsider his decision. The applicant shall be notified of any
reconsideration by the Police Chief within a reasonable time period.
[Amended 10-14-1998 by Ord. No. 98-16]
E. In the event that the applicant is deemed qualified for membership in
the Fire Department, he/she shall be approved by the Fire Chief and
officially assigned to the Department. The names of all members shall
be filed with the Mayor and Committee on a regular basis. [Amended
10-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-21]
F. All members, once approved, must complete the following
requirements within one year of the date of confirmation and approval
as a member of the Fire Department:
(1) Basic fire training approved by the Fire Chief and Deputy Chiefs.
§ 26-14 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 26-15
19:47
§ 26-16. Fire duty.
It shall be the primary function and duty of the Fire Department and
every member thereof to respond appropriately to any and all emergency
situations. In addition, it shall be the duty of all officers of the Fire
Department to determine that the provisions of this chapter are being
enforced, together with all of the appropriate fire codes and other
regulations and laws as may be applicable.
§ 26-17. Relief Association and exemption certificates.
(2) (Reserved)19
(3) CPR training with a certificate of satisfactory completion thereof.
(4) Any other state or federally mandated training which may be
prescribed currently or in the future.
(5) Any other relevant training as shall be directed by the Fire Chief
and as may be prescribed by the Fire Department or as set forth in
the rules and regulations, which training shall be completed within
two years of becoming a member of the Fire Department.
G. A failure to complete the above requirements shall be cause for
dismissal and removal from membership in the Fire Department.
H. The Fire Department shall consider all applications for membership for
the purpose of fulfilling a need of the municipality in that all approvals
of membership shall be established on the basis of obtaining the best
qualified person to perform the duties of a member of the Fire
Department.
I. Any member who fails to attend training that the Fire Department has
paid for without a reasonable excuse shall be responsible to reimburse
the Fire Department the cost of that training in a timely fashion after
receipt of written notice of the amount due to the Fire Department.
Failure to make such reimbursement shall subject the member to a
complaint being filed with the Township Municipal Court for the
seeking and issuance of penalties as set forth in § 26-22 of this chapter.
[Added 10-14-1998 by Ord. No. 98-16]
J. Members who transfer in good standing from another fire department
with training equal to the training requirements of the Waterford
Township Fire Department. [Added 6-25-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-8]
A. To be a member of the Relief Association, a member shall satisfy the
statutory requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-55 and 40A:14-56.
19.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(2), which required that a member must complete the
Waterford Township First Aid Course, or its equivalent, was repealed 10-14-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-16.
§ 26-15 WATERFORD CODE § 26-17
19:48
§ 26-18. Mutual assistance.
The Fire Department is hereby authorized to extend aid and assistance
to neighboring municipalities on request for fire protection or emergency
services and to participate in a mutual aid program with other
municipalities in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 26-19. Fire Police.
The Fire Department shall contain a Fire Police unit which shall be under
the direction of the Fire Chief. It shall be their duty to maintain law and
order at all fires and emergency scenes to which they may be detailed,
including direction of traffic, refusal of admittance within the danger zone
to outside or unauthorized parties and for maintaining control at the
emergency scene. Fire Police shall be appointed by the Fire Chief with the
confirmation of the Mayor and Committee. The appointment shall be for
a term of five years. The Fire Chief shall prescribe all required training
for Fire Police, which must be completed within one year of appointment.
Failure to complete the training within one year shall be cause for removal
and dismissal from the position of Fire Police Officer.
§ 26-20. Restrictions on use of Department property.
Except for members of the Fire Department, no person or persons shall
enter the Fire Department quarters or any of the fire station buildings,
or handle any Department property, equipment or apparatus, unless
authorized to do so or accompanied by or having the special permission of
an officer or authorized member of the Department, except that members
of the governing body shall have authority to inspect Fire Department
equipment on notice to the Fire Chief or Deputy Chiefs.
§ 26-21. Injury and obstruction prohibited.
It shall also be unlawful for any person to injure, deface or in any manner
destroy any building or fire apparatus or property of the Fire Department or
any police or fire alarm, or to hinder or obstruct any automotive equipment
of the Fire Department from freely passing along the streets or highways of
the municipality, or from passing over public or private property or in any
manner hinder or prevent any of the fire equipment or apparatus or any
officer or member of the Department from operating at any fire or other
emergency to which the Department is responding.
§ 26-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, before the Municipal Court of the
B. An exempt active member of the Fire Department is a member who has
served seven years of active duty and who has performed 60% duty in
the Fire Department each and every year during that seven years, and
as further set forth and provided in the controlling New Jersey Statutes.
§ 26-17 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 26-22
19:49
township, be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment in
the county jail not to exceed six months, or both, at the discretion of the
Municipal Judge before which such defendant shall be convicted. A separate
offense may be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 26-23. Severability and repealer.
§ 26-24. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication as required by law. Upon adoption of this chapter, § 26-3 shall
become effective retroactive to October 13, 1993.
Chapter 27
EMERGENCY AND AMBULANCE SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 26.
Police Department — See Ch. 50.
Volunteer firefighters and EMS Squad — See
Ch. 69.
§ 27-1. Purpose.
The Mayor and Township Committee of the Township of Waterford hereby
desire to fully designate and officially authorize an entity for the handling of
emergency and ambulance services for the Township of Waterford.
§ 27-2. Emergency and ambulance first responder designated.
Effective immediately, the Mayor and Township Committee of the Township
of Waterford hereby designate, endorse and authorize the Waterford
Township Emergency Medical Services, Inc., as the official emergency and
ambulance first responder for the Township of Waterford.
Chapter 32
A. If any article, section, paragraph, clause or provision of this chapter
shall be adjudged invalid by any Court of competent jurisdiction, such
adjudication shall apply only to the article, section, paragraph, clause
or provision so adjudged, and the remainder of this chapter shall be
deemed valid and effective.
B. Ordinance No. 93-13, dated October 13 1993, entitled "An Ordinance
Creating the Waterford Township Fire Department," is hereby
specifically repealed, and all other ordinances and part thereof
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed.
§ 26-22 WATERFORD CODE § 27-2
19:50
HEALTH SERVICES ADVISORY BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health legislation — See Part III of
this Code.
§ 32-1. Board created.
The Board of Health of the Township of Waterford shall be known as
the Health Services Advisory Board of the Township of Waterford created
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:3-1.
§ 32-2. Composition; terms of office; vacancies.
Said Board of Health shall consist of three members who shall be appointed
by the Mayor with advice and consent of the Township Committee of the
Township of Waterford. The persons so appointed shall be citizens of this
state and residents of the Township of Waterford. The terms of office of
the three members shall be staggered for not less than one year and not
more than three years. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for three-year
terms. Vacancies in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
Appointment to a vacancy to the Health Services Advisory Board shall be
made in the same manner as the original appointment.
§ 32-3. Oath of office.
Each member before taking office shall sign and file with the Township
Clerk an oath of office.
§ 32-4. Powers and duties.
The Health Services Advisory Board of the Township of Waterford shall
cooperate with the County of Camden Health Department to provide a
program of health services in compliance with the Health Services Act.20
Further, the Health Services Advisory Board may, from time to time, serve
as liaison between the Camden County Health Department and the Mayor
and Township Committee of the Township of Waterford in an effort to
promote the enforcement of any and all county health ordinances. The
Health Services Advisory Board shall perform any and all related functions
necessary to meet the standards of performances under the Health Services
Act.
§ 32-5. Designation of local provider.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-10, the Camden County
Department of Health is hereby designated as the entity responsible for
20.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-1 et seq.
§ 27-2 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 32-5
19:51
compliance with the Local Health Services Act for any and all functions
which would be performed by the local health services provider, including
meeting standards of performance.
§ 32-6. Cooperation with County Health Department.
The Health Services Advisory Board of the Township of Waterford, County
of Camden, and State of New Jersey, shall cooperate with the Camden
County Health Department to provide a program of health services in
compliance with the Health Services Act. Further, the Township Health
Services Advisory Board may serve as liaison between the Camden County
Health Department and the Mayor and Township Committee of the
Township of Waterford in an effort to promote the enactment and
enforcement of any and all county health ordinances.
Chapter 34
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 34, Historical Advisory Committee, adopted 12-13-2006 by Ord.
No, 2006-7, was repealed 11-9-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-16.]
Chapter 40
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrator — See Ch. 7.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 15.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 44.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 61.
§ 32-5 WATERFORD CODE § 32-6
19:52
ARTICLE I
Code Enforcement Officer
[Adopted 8-24-1977 by Ord. No. 77-13]
§ 40-1. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Code Enforcement Officer in the
Township of Waterford, County of Camden, State of New Jersey.
§ 40-2. Appointment; term.
The Code Enforcement Officer may be appointed each year at the
organization meeting of the Township Committee or any subsequent
meeting thereof, and said appointment was accomplished or when a
successor is duly appointed and qualified, whichever is the latter. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of
the majority of the members of the Township Committee.
§ 40-3. Duties.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall perform various types of field and
office services under the direction of superior officials of the Township
of Waterford to maintain a high standard of compliance with municipal
ordinances regarding the utilization of lands and premises within the
Township of Waterford. He shall conduct inspections and develop factual
information to provide for the compliance and enforcement of municipal
ordinances. He shall prepare reports as well as maintain records which
will assist in the enforcement and promulgation of municipal ordinances,
as well as provide such other related activities as required by members
of the Township Committee or other superior officials of the Township of
Waterford.
§ 40-4. Qualifications and requirements. [Amended 5-13-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-6]
The person appointed as Code Enforcement Officer shall have strong
writing and oral communication skills, computer literacy, a valid New Jersey
driver's license, knowledge of New Jersey municipal land use law and the
Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan regulations and the ability to
read and understand surveys, site plans, subdivisions and related types of
drawings. Previous investigative experience in the performance of these
type of duties will be considered. For further definition/information, see the
ordinance establishing the Waterford Township Department of Planning and
Zoning.21
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. 47, Planning and Zoning, Department of.
§ 40-1 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 40-5
19:53
§ 40-5. Hours; compensation.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall provide the necessary hours per week
requested by the Township Committee. The compensation shall be as fixed
by resolution or ordinance of the Township Committee.
§ 40-5 WATERFORD CODE § 40-5
19:54
ARTICLE II
Chief Financial Officer
[Adopted 2-22-1989 by Ord. No. 89-3]
§ 40-6. Position created; term.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq., the
position of Chief Financial Officer of this municipality is hereby created. The
term of office shall be for one year.
§ 40-7. Duties.
The Chief Financial Officer shall be a municipal finance officer who has been
certified, as such, in accordance with the procedures, rules and regulations
of the Division of Local Government Services of New Jersey. The position of
Chief Financial Officer is created in order to carry out the responsibilities,
duties and obligations set forth in N.J.S.A. 52:27BB-26 et seq.
§ 40-8. Compensation.
The Chief Financial Officer shall be compensated in accordance with the
local municipal salary ordinance. Said officer shall be appointed by the
Township Committee.
§ 40-6 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 40-8
19:55

ARTICLE III
(Reserved)22
§ 40-9. through § 40-12. (Reserved)
22.Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Comptroller, adopted 11-28-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-25, was
repealed 8-13-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-13.
§ 40-9 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 40-9
19:57

ARTICLE IV
Municipal Engineer
[Adopted 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-3]
§ 40-13. Position established.
There is hereby established the office of Municipal Engineer, subject to
appointment requirements of the Local Public Contracts Law and the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.
§ 40-13 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 40-13
19:59

ARTICLE V
Municipal Attorney
[Adopted 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-4]
§ 40-14. Position established; term.
There is hereby established the office of Municipal Attorney, subject to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-139 enabling the term of office of one year.
§ 40-14 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 40-14
19:61

ARTICLE VI
Township Coordinator
[Adopted 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-6]
§ 40-15. Position established; responsibilities.
There is hereby established the position of Township Coordinator, to be
appointed in accordance with Chapter 44, with the following
responsibilities:
A. Oversight of administration of all Township departments to enable
enhanced constituent service.
B. Attendance and participation at all meetings of Township Committee.
C. Serve as budget officer with responsibility to propose and explain
budgetary recommendations.
D. Oversight of Township finances.
E. Informing the elected officials of financial conditions, future needs and
department recommendations.
F. Acting as purchasing agent with a new and improved system.
G. Assistance in contract negotiations.
H. Consult and confer with Township Committee in recruitment, retention
and/or removal of employees and/or department officials.
I. Liaison between Township and all county, state and federal government
entities in securing financial support, grants, funds, assistance,
services, etc.
J. Review, supervise and process all paperwork associated with all
Township and Joint Insurance Fund programs and policies.
K. Serve as constituent complaint center to receive and review and
oversee response thereto, including those declared by public at public
meetings.
L. Complete all other duties as may be required in absence of
Administrator as may be required by Mayor and/or Township
Committee.
§ 40-15 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 40-15
19:63

ARTICLE VII
Assistant to the Assessor
[Adopted 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-20]
§ 40-16. Position established; term.
The governing body hereby establishes the Assistant to the Assessor, with
credentials of certification but with a term of appointment for a calendar
year only, commensurate with the annual reorganization.
§ 40-16 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 40-16
19:65

ARTICLE VIII
Deputy Municipal Clerk
[Adopted 7-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-8]
§ 40-17. Creation of office.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-135, the office of Deputy Municipal Clerk is
hereby created.
§ 40-18. Term of office.
The term of office shall be for one year, commencing on the date of hire,
with a sixty-day probationary period.
§ 40-19. Appointment.
Said Deputy Municipal Clerk shall be appointed and approved by vote of the
Mayor and Township Committee.
§ 40-20. Compensation.
Said Deputy Municipal Clerk shall receive a salary established by the
Township Committee.
§ 40-21. Powers and duties.
In the absence or disability of the Municipal Clerk, the Deputy Municipal
Clerk shall have all the powers of the Municipal Clerk and shall perform the
functions and duties of such office.
§ 40-17 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 40-21
19:67

ARTICLE IX
Director of Community Development
[Adopted 2-8-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-3; amended in its entirety
2-28-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-4]
§ 40-22. Position created.
§ 40-23. Appointment; term.
The Director of Community Development shall be appointed by the Mayor
and Township Committee. The term of appointment shall be for one or more
years, commencing from date of appointment to end of designated term.
The position shall be full time, requiring at least 35 hours per week.
§ 40-24. Duties.
The Director of Community Development will perform, but not be limited to,
the following duties as listed below:
A. There is hereby created the position of Director of Community
Development in the Township of Waterford, County of Camden, State of
New Jersey.
B. The purpose of this position is to provide leadership and guidance to the
Construction Planning and Zoning Departments which includes
municipal planning, land use, historic preservation, building
inspections, code enforcement, housing, redevelopment, neighborhood
and urban renewal, and community relations programs of the Township
of Waterford. The Director shall implement policies and procedures;
respond to inquiries and requests; develop goals and objectives for each
area of responsibility; review the status of major projects; and oversee
and evaluate staff performance.
A. Department administration.
(1) Manage Department personnel.
(2) Oversee the hiring, training and development of Department
personnel.
(3) Conduct annual performance evaluations.
(4) Address performance and conduct issues.
(5) Attend Township Committee Meetings.
(6) Coordinate and complete presentations and reports to the
Township Committee, Planning Board and other groups as needed
and as directed by the Township Administrator.
(7) Prepare regular reports on the Department's activities and
performance to the Township Committee and Township
Administrator as requested.
§ 40-22 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 40-24
19:69
§ 40-24.1. Employment requirements.
(8) Perform Township inspections.
(9) Oversee Township Planning and Zoning redevelopment, code
enforcement, historical preservation, and oversee Township
Planning and Zoning neighborhood relations.
(10) Execute high-level organizational strategies.
(11) Delegate and monitor work assignments.
(12) Assist with the development of project schedules and scopes of
work.
(13) Review the status of major projects and initiatives.
(14) Conduct program assessments by inspecting the Department's
efficiency regularly.
(15) As assigned by Township Committee or Township Administrator.
B. Budget oversight.
(1) Oversee financial resources by supervising Department budget
use.
(2) Monitor and review Department expenditures.
C. Community relations.
(1) Working with the Township Administrator to oversee the
Department's public outreach efforts and programs by ensuring the
appropriate measures are being implemented.
(2) Provide and designate Department representation when necessary
for events.
(3) Identify issues in the community.
(4) Compose responses to citizen inquiries.
(5) Ensure responses to the public are appropriate and professional.
(6) Educate the public on the operations and programs of the
Department.
(7) Establish partnerships with various parts of the community.
D. Municipal duties: to oversee the daily operations of the combined
Planning/Zoning Boards, all Construction and Zoning Office duties and
will also include, but not to be limited to, collection of prior approvals,
maintaining the bond list, including scheduling inspections with the
professionals, recording of escrow moneys and processing all
applications to the Boards.
§ 40-24 WATERFORD CODE § 40-24.1
19:70
§ 40-24.2. Licenses; certificates; special requirements.
A valid New Jersey driver's license. Recommended, but not required, to hold
designation of New Jersey Pinelands Local Review Officer, to hold or ability
to be licensed/certificated in the following: Construction Official, Building
Subcode Official, Building Hazardous High Rise Specialist (HHS), Building
Industrial and Commercial Specialist (ICS), Buildings Residential and Small
Commercial Specialist (RCS), Electrical ICS and/or Subcode, Plumbing ICS
and/or Subcode, Fire ICS and/or Subcode.
§ 40-25. Compensation.
The Director of Community Development shall be compensated in
accordance with the adopted Township Salary Ordinance.23
A. At least seven years of demonstrated and responsible experience in
Planning and Zoning, community development, or related fields. At
least two years of experience in a supervisory position to include
experience in managing and monitoring Department personnel work
performance, evaluating program objectives and effectiveness, broad
organizational goals.
B. Ability to make final decisions regarding policy development and
implementation. Interaction with others outside the organization and
management skills that support team efforts and quality processes.
C. Advanced skills and knowledge in current approaches and systems,
which affect the design and implementation of major programs and/or
processes organization-wide. Independent judgment and
decisionmaking abilities are necessary to apply technical skills
effectively.
D. This job title has responsibility for final approval of budgetary
recommendations to the Township Administrator for the Director's
Departments. Monitors progress toward fiscal objectives and adjusts
plans as necessary to reach the goals.
E. Theory, principles, practices and techniques of community development
planning, building inspection, code enforcement, economic
development, and related community development services; applicable
federal, state and local laws, codes and regulations governing the
administration of planning and community development; New Jersey
UCC laws and regulations of community housing.
23.Editor's Note: See Ch. 61, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 40-24.1 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 40-25
19:71
Chapter 44
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 40.
§ 40-25 WATERFORD CODE § 40-25
19:72
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 12-11-1974 as Ch. 28 of the 1974 Code; amended in its
entirety 12-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-24]
§ 44-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
DEPARTMENT HEAD — A member of the Township Committee responsible
for the operation of the specified department.
PART-TIME EMPLOYMENT — Refers to an employee with unscheduled
hours performing less than 30 hours of normal duty weekly.
TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT — Refers to an employee hired for a term not
exceeding 90 days.
§ 44-2. Contracts. [Added 8-11-1982 by Ord. No. 82-10]
All of the provisions of contracts between the Township of Waterford and its
employees, during the time of any such valid contract, shall be made a part
of this chapter by reference.
§ 44-3. Employment in salaried positions.
A. The benefits extended in this chapter shall apply to all full-time hourly
or salaried employees.
B. The Township Committee must create by ordinance or resolution any
new position and authorize the filling of it. In addition, there must be
provided in the proper current budget account specific and adequate
funds to compensate the appointee.
C. Whenever a vacancy exists or a new position is created, Township
employees will be advised by the Township Administrator/Clerk in order
that those who believe they possess the necessary qualifications may
apply for the position, if they so desire. Such applications shall be by
letter, addressed to the Township Administrator/Clerk, and filed before
the deadline date specified.
D. When qualified applicants are not available on the Township roster,
vacancies for full-time positions will be advertised in an official paper
by the Township Administrator/Clerk, with an application deadline date
specified.
E. An application for employment form, obtained at the office of the
Township Administrator/Clerk, must be completed by each person
applying for a position with the Township of Waterford.
F. The Township Administrator/Clerk shall forward a copy of the
application to the Committeeman heading the department and shall
§ 44-1 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 44-3
19:73
§ 44-4. Hourly paid employees.
§ 44-5. Time and attendance.
refer the applicant to said Committeeman heading the department for
an interview.
G. If the Committeeman heading the department, following his interview,
concludes that the applicant meets the qualifications for the opening,
he will conduct a reference investigation and check of previous
employment.
H. After approval by a member of the Committee, the Township
Administrator/Clerk will so notify the applicant, advise him of his
starting date and arrange for him to report to his office to complete the
necessary employment formalities.
I. The Township Administrator/Clerk will check all papers for
completeness and set up a personal history file for the employee.
J. Each new employee shall be considered as being on trial or probation
for the first 30 days of employment and shall be so advised when his or
her appointment is made.
K. Temporary employees, when first employed, will complete an
application for employment, and a personnel record file will be set up in
the Township Administrator/Clerk's office.
A. Whenever a vacancy exists or additional employees are needed, the
department head shall arrange for the proper communication of that
fact to prospective applicants.
B. Any person seeking such employment shall request of the Township
Administrator/Clerk an application for employment form, which should
be completed and supplied to the department where the opening exists.
C. If after an interview and a check of references, including previous
employers, the applicant appears to be qualified, he shall be referred to
the Township Administrator/Clerk so that arrangements can be made
for a physical examination for the applicant.
D. Upon final approval of the applicant for work, the Township
Administrator/Clerk shall notify the applicant of his employment.
E. Temporary employees for emergency work may be employed by a
department head on a short-term basis not to exceed a total of 90 days
on any one occasion. In such cases, an application for employment form
shall be in the hands of the Township Administrator/Clerk at the earliest
convenient time and, wherever possible, a physical examination should
be conducted unless the applicant has had such an examination within
the preceding 12 months.
§ 44-3 WATERFORD CODE § 44-5
19:74
A. Accurate and complete time and attendance records will be maintained
by each departmental unit of the Township. The Supervisor of the
department will certify as to the accuracy of the time and attendance
records of the Township Administrator/Clerk at the end of each week.
B. All Township employees are to be at their assigned posts ready for work
as specified by the department head unless on vacation or leave of
absence or absent for good cause.
C. Being punctual is of the utmost importance; consequently, any lateness
and the reason for it will be noted on the time record. Recurring or
chronic lateness will be referred to the department head for
appropriate action.
D. It is the responsibility of each employee to notify his or her department
head without delay if he or she will be absent from or delayed in
reaching his or her assigned post. If unable to reach the department
head, the Township Administrator/Clerk should be notified. Failure to
report when absent is a serious offense which cannot be tolerated and
may lead to disciplinary action or dismissal by the department head.
E. Salaried employees shall receive one hour lunch and hourly employees
shall receive 1/2 hour lunch each workday.
F. The regular workweek for clerical administration shall consist of 30
hours; dispatchers, 30 hours; and public works, 40 hours.
G. The following days will be considered as holidays for salaried and
hourly employees, with Township offices closed and normal operations
suspended:
(1) New Years Day.
(2) Martin Luther King, Jr., Day.
(3) Presidents Day.
(4) Good Friday.
(5) Memorial Day.
(6) Fourth of July.
(7) Labor Day.
(8) Columbus Day.
(9) General Election Day.
(10) Veterans Day.
(11) Thanksgiving Day.
(12) Day after Thanksgiving.
§ 44-5 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 44-5
19:75
§ 44-6. Overtime.
§ 44-7. Vacations.
(13) Christmas Day.
H. Salaried employees required to work on a holiday will be given an
alternate day off, except where otherwise specified by state statutes.
I. When a recognized holiday falls on a Sunday, it shall be observed the
following Monday. When such a holiday falls on a Saturday, it shall be
observed the prior Friday.
A. Overtime work will be kept to a minimum and, except in cases of
emergency, must be authorized in advance by the department head.
Records will be kept of all overtime and filed with the Township
Administrator/Clerk weekly.
B. Salaried employees who incur an undue amount of overtime may be
granted time off at the discretion of the appropriate department head.
C. Hourly employees who work in excess of 40 hours in the workweek will
be paid overtime at the rate of time and one-half their base hourly rate.
D. In computing overtime compensation, the nearest 1/2 hour shall be the
smallest fraction of an hour to be reported.
A. Full-time, regular employees will receive vacations with pay as follows:
(1) Date of employment to one year: one day per month.
(2) One year to four years: 11 days per year.
(3) Five years to nine years: 16 days per year.
(4) Ten years to 14 years: 21 days per year.
(5) Fifteen years to 19 years: 26 days per year.
(6) Nineteen years to retirement: 31 days per year.
B. Department heads. Department heads shall schedule vacations, giving
consideration to employees' requests and seniority.
(1) If an official holiday falls during an employee's vacation period, an
additional day of vacation will be granted in lieu of the holiday.
(2) All vacations must be taken during the current year and may not be
accumulated.
(3) Temporary and part-time employees are not eligible for vacation
benefits.
§ 44-5 WATERFORD CODE § 44-7
19:76
§ 44-8. Absence due to personal illness or disability.
(4) In order that employees may receive the maximum benefit from
their vacations, not more than five days of vacation may be taken
one or two days at a time.
(5) All vacations must be scheduled and approved by the department
head. It is his responsibility to schedule individual vacations so that
activities of the Township will be carried on with a minimum of
interruption and inconvenience. Employees with seniority will be
given first preference in assignment of vacations insofar as
possible.
A. The rules which follow in this section and in § 44-9 apply to the payment
of salaries during periods of illness or disability for regular full-time
employees. Temporary or part-time employees are not entitled to
compensation for such absences.
B. Regular full-time salaried and hourly employees of the Township shall
be entitled to the following periods of sick leave:
(1) One day per month.
(2) Fifteen days per year thereafter.
C. All absences due to illness or disability shall be reported immediately by
or for the employee to his or her department head.
D. In all cases or reported illness or disability, the Township reserves the
right to send a visiting nurse or the Township medical officers to
investigate the report.
E. Any absence due to illness or disability for three or more working days
must be certified by a written statement from the attending physician.
The Township also reserves the right to waive this requirement or to
require the employee to be examined by a qualified physician and
certified as fit for duty before returning to work.
F. The term "fit for duty," as used in Subsection E, is herein defined as the
ability to perform the duties and tasks during the hours and in the
manner heretofore understood to be part of the job classification held
by the employee in question, without special consideration or changes
in the aforesaid duties, tasks, hours and manner to accommodate said
employees because of the illness or injury suffered.
G. Light-duty assignments are not normally available to an employee. In
the event an employee is unable to be certified as "fit for duty," as
described above, but is able to be certified to perform light duty while
recovering from an illness or injury and light-duty employment tasks
are available to be assigned, the employee then shall return to work and
undertake the light-duty work assignments. Light duty is recognized as
only temporary in nature until an employee can return to his/her normal
§ 44-7 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 44-8
19:77
§ 44-9. Absence due to disability in performance of duty.
§ 44-10. Administrative records.
work assignments. Light duty is not an accommodation to an employee
under the Americans with Disabilities Act or any other federal or state
law. Accommodations under the American with Disabilities Act or any
other federal or state law are reviewed on a case-by-case basis in
accordance with applicable statutory and case law requirements.
[Added 12-26-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-27]
A. A salaried or hourly employee injured in the performance of his or her
duties shall receive full salary payments during his or her absence in
accordance with the sick leave schedule for personal illness. When
payment under workmen's compensation is made to the employee, the
Township shall pay the employee the difference between the
compensation payment and his or her full pay during the period of his
or her allowable sick leave in accordance with the sick leave schedule.
B. A leave of absence without pay may be requested by any employee of
the Township by submitting the reasons for the requested leave in
writing to his or her department head. Such requests will require the
approval of the Township Committee and will usually not exceed a sixmonth
period.
C. In the event of a death in the employee's immediate family or the death
of a relative who resides with the employee, the department head may
grant the employee three days' leave of absence with pay. Extension of
leave beyond the three-day period will require the approval of the
Township Administrator may not exceed five working days.
A. No part of the pay due an employee for work done shall be withheld
from his check, except as required by law or authorized in writing by
the employee.
B. Employees may not accept donations or other gratuities, contributions,
etc., that would in any sense put the employee under obligation to the
person or persons making the donations and violate the principle that
all citizens be treated alike.
C. Any private employment by any employee in off-duty time should not
conflict with the Township's interest and should not be such as to
reduce the employee's ability adequately to perform his or her duty of
employment with the Township.
D. Unless specific authorization is given by the department head for extra
salary, fees or compensation, regular salary is the full compensation for
services tendered to the Township.
E. The Township Committee reserves the right to add, change or eliminate
personnel policies, practices and rules whenever it appears to be in the
best interest of the Township to do so.
§ 44-8 WATERFORD CODE § 44-10
19:78
F. A separate personnel history file will be established and maintained for
each employee of the Township.
G. Personnel history files are confidential records and will be maintained
in the office of the Township Clerk in a locked file. The files will be in
two groups: "active," representing employees on the payroll; and
"closed," for employees no longer in the service of the Township.
H. All personnel history files will be carefully maintained and safeguarded
permanently. Material placed in any file shall not be removed
therefrom.
I. Each personnel history file will contain the following forms and
documents:
(1) Summary of personnel actions. On this form is noted a brief digest
of salary increases, promotions, transfers, etc.
(2) Application for employment and reference letters, if any.
(3) Applicant's letter of reason for desiring to work for the Township, if
any.
(4) Medical examination blank.
(5) Personnel action authorization for the appointment of the applicant
and for each change in position or salary.
(6) Letter of commendation or of censure.
(7) Any correspondence, memoranda or other pertinent material
directly concerning the employee.
(8) Reports of hearings involving the employee.
(9) Compensation record.
J. In addition to the foregoing, each closed file will also contain the
following:
(1) Letter of resignation, if any.
(2) Personnel action authorization form to cover termination of
services.
(3) Termination receipt.
§ 44-10 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 44-10
19:79

ARTICLE II
Rules of Conduct
[Adopted 6-24-1987 by Ord. No. 87-10]
§ 44-11. Purpose; intent.
§ 44-12. Critical rules.
The Township deems the following rules to be critical and provides for the
immediate discharge of the employee for the following reasons:
A. The following rules and regulations of Waterford Township of Camden
County, in the State of New Jersey, are hereby adopted. The right is
reserved to alter, amend or abrogate any of the rules and regulations or
to make or adopt additional rules and regulations from time to time, as
the service of the Township may require.
B. Every employee of the Township should understand that these rules and
regulations are not intended to cover every case which may arise in the
discharge of his/her official duties.
C. Each employee of the Township will be furnished a copy of these rules
and regulations, which he/she must familiarize himself/herself with, in
order to understand them.
D. It shall be the duty of each employee of the Township to carefully read
and strictly conform to the rules and regulations in this manual.
E. Misconduct not specifically described in these rules and regulations will
be handled as warranted by the circumstances of the case.
F. If an employee of the Township violates these rules and regulations in
such a way to indicate a pattern of flagrant or continuing infraction,
disciplinary action of greater severity than is shown in this article will
be taken.
G. Shop stewards should be included or advised of any action prior to its
taking place.
A. Bringing, consuming or being under the influence of intoxicants while
on duty within the area of work.
B. Bringing, consuming or being under the influence of drugs while on
duty within the area of work (other then prescription drugs).
C. Deliberate destruction of Township property.
(1) Removal of Township property without prior approval of
Supervisor.
D. Sleeping on duty.
§ 44-11 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 44-12
19:81
§ 44-13. Group A rules.
E. Reading of books, magazines or newsprint while on duty, except where
required in the line of duty.
F. Failure to report for duty without a bona fide reason, after the third
such failure.
G. Smoking in prohibited areas.
H. Unsanitary practices endangering the health of others.
I. Endangering the lives of others.
J. Falsification of any official records or giving false information for
official records.
K. Engaging in fighting during work hours.
L. Insubordination or direct disobedience to supervisors.
M. Leaving work area without permission during work hours.
N. Knowingly punching the time card for another employee or having one's
own time card punched by another person.
O. Gambling in work area or while on duty.
P. Performing work of inferior quality due to the employee's negligence or
by willful intent.
Q. Soliciting or accepting a bribe.
R. Personal use of department vehicles.
S. Conduct that will reflect discredit upon the Township during working
hours.
T. Failing to report a vehicle accident.
A. These are important rules, and violations are considered major
infractions. They do not necessarily require immediate discharge.
However, the penalties for violations of these rules are as follows:
(1) First offense: written warning.
(2) Second offense: written warning and suspension without pay for
two working days (same rule within one year).
(3) Third offense: final written warning and suspension without pay for
five working days (same rule within two years).
(4) Fourth offense: discharge (same rule within three years).
B. Violations are as follows:
§ 44-12 WATERFORD CODE § 44-13
19:82
§ 44-14. Absenteeism.
(1) Creating or contributing to unsanitary conditions.
(2) Failing to report a personal injury sustained by oneself.
(3) Soliciting for personal gain.
(4) Soliciting for any other purpose within the Township property area
without permission of the department supervisor.
(5) Failing to be at work or to start work at the time the shift begins or
at the time that lunch begins and ends.
(6) Writing the time in or out on a time card without a supervisor's
permission.
A. Absences fall into three categories:
(1) Prearranged and excused.
(2) Not prearranged, but excused by the department supervisor upon
presentation of an acceptable excuse.
(3) Not excused.
B. Frequency of absences:
(1) One unexcused absence: first written warning.
(2) Second unexcused absence within three months after first warning:
two-day suspension.
(3) Third unexcused absence within six months from first warning:
five-day suspension.
(4) Fourth unexcused absence within one year from first offense:
dismissal.
C. Clearance of record. It is fully intended that an employee's record will
be cleared, and he/she will be given a clean slate if, after any of the
steps detailed above, an unexcused absence does not occur within the
next specified period.
D. Administrative procedure and/or disciplinary action regarding
frequently excused absences or a continuing pattern of absences,
excused or unexcused. If any employee is too frequently absent or
establishes a continuing pattern of absences (either excused or
unexcused) which disrupt or hamper the department operations, under
these conditions he/she will consider himself/herself liable for
disciplinary action up to and including termination of his/her
employment; and in such cases, the following will apply:
§ 44-13 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 44-14
19:83
§ 44-15. Doctor's certificates.
In cases of illness of three days' duration or more, a doctor's certificate is
required on the day that the employee returns to work or the employee will
not be permitted to return.
§ 44-16. Lateness.
One of the greatest problems in operating an entity efficiently is the
attendance problem. An employee who arrives late for work or who fails
to report for work at all makes it necessary to rearrange personnel
assignments. When an employee is late, it cannot be known at the start of
the day whether he/she will be late several minutes or hours. It is the desire
of the Township to keep this problem to a minimum, not only to keep costs
down, but to be fair to those employees who are not habitually late.
(1) When it becomes apparent that the employee has been absent too
often, as compared with attendance records within the department,
the first written warning will be issued.
(2) If no marked improvement occurs, the final written warning will be
issued.
(3) If no marked immediate improvement occurs after the final written
warning: dismissal.
A. Types of lateness.
(1) Prearranged and excused.
(2) Caused by extreme weather conditions hampering transportation
generally.
(3) Unexcused.
B. Daily procedure.
(1) Any employee who is less than 15 minutes late will punch his time
card and report to his/her immediate supervisor and will advise him
of his/her presence and reason for lateness.
(2) Any employee who reports more than 30 minutes late (unless
prearranged) will report to his/her immediate supervisor before
punching in.
C. Procedures for unexcused lateness.
(1) An employee will be docked for the following:
Number of Minutes Late Docked
5 to 15 minutes 1/4 hour
16 to 30 minutes 1/2 hour
§ 44-14 WATERFORD CODE § 44-16
19:84
§ 44-17. Attendance and personal record card.
An attendance and personal record card will be maintained for each and
every employee of the Township.
Number of Minutes Late Docked
31 to 45 minutes 3/4 hour
46 to 60 minutes 1 hour
(2) For the first three unexcused latenesses: first written warning.
(3) For six or more latenesses during a three month period from the
first written date: three days off without pay.
(4) For any lateness after the sixth lateness during the twelve-month
period from the first written warning: dismissal.
D. Clearing of records. Any employee can clear his/her record if he/she is
not late for a period of six months after receiving the first written
warning.
§ 44-16 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 44-17
19:85

ARTICLE III
Employee Policy Manual
[Adopted 4-9-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-8]
§ 44-18. Approval of manual.
The Township Employee Manual is hereby approved, with this article
becoming effective subsequent to legal advertisement, public hearing,
adoption and requisite advertisement.
§ 44-19. Copy on file; provision to officers and employees.
A copy of the manual shall be available for review in the office of the
Township Clerk and also provided to all officers and employees through the
respective collective bargaining unit representatives.
§ 44-18 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 44-19
19:87

ARTICLE IV
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 5-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-10]
§ 44-20. Participation required for eligible positions.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 44-21. Exemption positions.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
§ 44-22. Legislative authority.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.), as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
A. Township Administrator;
B. Township Solicitor that does not meet the status as an independent
contractor;
C. Municipal Court Judge;
D. Municipal Prosecutor;
E. Municipal Public Defender;
F. Planning Board Attorney.
A. Registered Municipal Clerk;
B. Chief Financial Officer;
C. Treasurer:
D. Principal Public Works Manager;
E. Tax/Utility Collector;
F. Tax Assessor;
G. Court Administrator;
H. Qualified Purchasing Agent;
I. Zoning/Code Enforcement Officer;
J. Licensed Uniform Subcode officials and inspectors.
§ 44-20 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 44-22
19:89
Chapter 47
PLANNING AND ZONING, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use, development and zoning — See Ch.
176.
§ 47-1. Creation.
There is hereby created a Department of Planning and Zoning in the
Township of Waterford for the administration of the township's Land Use,
Development and Zoning Ordinance. The document creating this
Department and defining the duties of the officials therein and the
jurisdiction of said Department is attached hereto and incorporated by
reference herein.24
§ 47-2. Appointment of Planning and Zoning Official; term. [Added
11-28-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-26]
The Planning and Zoning Official shall be appointed by the Mayor and
Township Committee. Said appointment may be accomplished at the
organization meeting of the Township Committee or any subsequent
meeting as appropriate. The term of the appointment shall be for one
year during the first three years of the appointment/employment. Following
completion of three one-year terms, the term of the appointment may be
for a period of three years, at the discretion of the Mayor and Township
Committee.
Chapter 50
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 50-1. Establishment; mission and purpose.
A. There is hereby established a Police Department in the Township of
Waterford, County of Camden and State of New Jersey, pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, et seq. This chapter is intended to
ratify the existence and operation of the Police Department which has
historically operated within and served the Township of Waterford and
at the same time satisfy the statutory requirements of the legislation
amended in 1981 and 1988, respectively.
B. The mission and purpose of said Police Department is generally threefold:
to preserve life and property; to provide a general police service
for the residents of the Township of Waterford, Camden County, State of
24.Editor's Note: This document is on file in the township offices.
§ 44-22 WATERFORD CODE § 50-1
47:90
§ 50-2. Composition; line of authority; jurisdiction.
New Jersey; to enforce federal, state, county and municipal laws,
statutes and ordinances; and as hereinafter may be more expressly
defined.
C. The hours of employment of the uniformed members and officers of the
Waterford Township Police Department shall not exceed eight
continuous hours in any one day nor more than 40 hours in any one
week.
A. Government and composition of the Police Department. The Police
Department will be governed by the Township Committee and shall
consist of one appropriate authority, one Chief of Police, one Executive
Assistant to the Chief of Police, two Lieutenants, four Sergeants, two
detectives, 20 patrol officers, and civilian employees as deemed
necessary and appropriate by the appropriate authority in his/her
discretion and judgment, with the approval of the Mayor and Township
Committee. The express purpose for naming these offices is to establish
a statutory line of authority from all police employees to higher elected
authority. Whenever any office is left vacant, due to the absence of a
qualified candidate, it will be deemed not to exist and will be bypassed
in the chain of command. No person may be promoted or appointed to a
position in the Township of Waterford Police Department until they have
satisfied all statutory requirements and have complied with the
selection process and standards established by this chapter and the
rules and regulations adopted by the appropriate authority to govern
the Police Department. [Amended 7-8-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10]
B. Authority and responsibilities.
(1) Chief of Police: The Chief of Police shall be the head of the
Department and shall be directly responsible to the appropriate
authority for the conduct, efficiency and management of the
Department and, pursuant to policies established by the
appropriate authority, shall:
(a) Be the chief executive officer of the police force;
(b) Organize and control all resources of the Department and be
responsible for their care and safekeeping;
(c) Administer and enforce rules and regulations for the control,
disposition and discipline of the Department and of its officers
and employees. Also, recommend to the appropriate authority
changes to said rules and regulations;
(d) Implement the procedures for the hearing and determination
of charges alleging violation of Department rules and
regulations by any subordinate member of the police force;
provided that a member may be penalized only on written
charges made or preferred against him, after such charges
§ 50-1 PLANNING AND ZONING, DEPARTMENT OF § 50-2
47:91
have been examined, investigated and heard by the proper
hearing authority, upon such reasonable notice to the member
charged, and according to such practice, procedure and
manner as may be prescribed by rules and regulations of the
Department. Said written charges shall contain a request for
penalization by the applicable staff officer. If the Chief of Police
is the officer charged with a violation of departmental rules
and regulations and is to be removed from service, demoted in
rank or suspended, fined, or otherwise penalized, the appeal
and hearing must be under the jurisdiction of the appropriate
authority;
(e) Have, exercise, and discharge any functions, powers, and
duties of the Department;
(f) Prescribe the internal organization of the Department and the
duties of his subordinates and assistants, pursuant to Township
ordinance and policies established by the appropriate
authority;
(g) The Chief of Police shall make periodic unannounced and
unexpected inspections of police headquarters and patrols at
various and diverse times during the day and night. Records/
forms will be kept documenting all such inspections either on
the Chief's car sheet or such other form developed for that
purpose.
(h) Delegate such of his powers as he may deem necessary for the
efficient administration of the Department, to be exercised
under his direction and supervision, and shall hold supervisors
responsible for effective performance of their duties;
(i) Reports. [Amended 7-8-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10]
[1] Report, as required monthly, on the work of the
Department to the appropriate authority in the format
prescribed by the appropriate authority to include the
following.
[2] The Chief of Police shall prepare a monthly report to the
Public Safety Director which shall include:
[a] Departmental performance (calls for service,
summons issued, arrests etc).
[b] Police-related training.
[c] Highlights of the prior months calls and incidents.
[d] Upcoming events that may be of interest to the
Township Committee and the public.
§ 50-2 WATERFORD CODE § 50-2
47:92
(j) In case of riot, insurrection or threat thereof, he shall take
command of the Police Department in person and direct its
movements and operations in discharge of its members'
respective duties;
(k) He shall be responsible for the maintenance of all daily police
records in which each member shall record his name, rank and
time of reporting and leaving duty, complaints, and matters
pertaining to the Police Department;
(l) Administer personnel and financial policies in conformance
with the ordinances of the Township of Waterford and the laws
of the State of New Jersey, and shall:
[1] Cause examination to determine the qualifications of
persons applying for positions;
[2] Recommend promotions, demotions, releases or other
disciplinary measures subject to the ordinances of the
Township of Waterford and the laws of the State of New
Jersey;
[3] Administer wage and salary payroll and personnel rating
programs; [Amended 7-8-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10]
[4] Require that all personnel be trained and approve training
programs;
[5] Grant temporary leaves of absence to members of the
Department with approval of the Mayor and Committee;
[6] Submit the annual budget and proposed expenditure
programs to the Mayor or other appropriately designated
officials;
[7] Approve payment from allotted funds for operating
expenses and capital expenditures.
(m) Graphic table of organization: A graphic table of organization
(T.O.), shall be maintained by the Chief of Police to show the
following:
[1] The Waterford Township Police Department operational
structure.
[2] The Waterford Township Police Department personnel
structure. The express function of each position will be as
defined by this chapter and within the rules and
regulations of the Waterford Township Police Department
promulgated by the appropriate authority but is not
necessarily limited to the same.
§ 50-2 PLANNING AND ZONING, DEPARTMENT OF § 50-2
47:93
(n) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Chief of Police
shall be responsible to the appropriate authority for the
performance of the Chief's duties. As such, the Chief of Police
shall be considered a subordinate in relation to the appropriate
authority and shall be duty-bound to obey any otherwise lawful
direct orders or policies of the appropriate authority in the
discharge of his or her duties. As such, the appropriate
authority may issue such orders directing the day-to-day
performance of the Police Chief's duties in any manner and to
any degree not directly prohibited by law, specifically including
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 and case law thereunder, as applicable.
(2) Executive Assistant: This is a top management position with
supervisory responsibility over police personnel to include duties
involved in the investigative process and charging members of the
department in the event misconduct is encountered. These duties,
on occasion, will also involve serving management's interests in
support of future negotiations with organizational bargaining units.
The Executive Assistant provides executive support services such
as data processing, accounting, purchasing, personnel and
scheduling consistent with organizational need.
(a) This is a salaried, executive position, which falls outside of any
union representation or bargaining unit.
(b) Additionally, the following duties are assigned, but the position
is not necessarily limited to same:
[1] Edits detailed correspondence containing factual content
that may also convey management opinion concerning
personnel and related matters and programs.
[2] Keeps currently informed of new and revised personnel
policy statements, regulations, directives, and other
communications received from the Township and develops
plans and procedures for implementation of such
communications.
[3] Assists in writing procedural instructions for use in
personnel manuals, bulletins, and management directives.
[4] Collects data for and assists in preparation of executive
reports in support of Department activities.
[5] Collects data for and assists in preparation of executive
aspects of the annual budget request.
[6] Expedites services such as maintenance, repairs, supplies
and mail.
[7] Grant development, application and management.
§ 50-2 WATERFORD CODE § 50-2
47:94
[8] Assists with coordination of office operations including
clerical work, internal reporting systems, forms, space and
office equipment, and suggests methods for office
improvements.
[9] Plans, schedules, and/or attends meetings and
conferences, and prepares reports thereon.
[10] Directs the establishment and/or maintenance of records
and files required for effective personnel and executive
operations resulting in efficient data retrieval.
[11] Maintains and organizes executive administrative police
records consistent with approved record retention
procedures and schedules.
[12] Performs alternative responsibilities of Executive
Assistant assigned to the Chief of Police.
[13] Reviews and/or prepares routine correspondence.
[14]Will be required to learn to utilize various types of
electronic and/or manual recording and information
systems used by the agency, office or related units.
[15] Proficiency in various computer programs, including but
not limited to Microsoft Word, Excel, Access, etc.
[16] Maintain confidential files including but not limited to
personnel, medical, disciplinary, firearms and
expungement.
[17] Develop forms, policies and procedures necessary for the
implementation and maintenance of an Integrated system
of personnel management.
(3) (Reserved)25
(4) Police Lieutenant. In the absence of a Chief of Police, the
Lieutenant with the most seniority will serve as the Chief Executive
Officer of the Department. The Chief and the Lieutenants shall not
take the same vacations, comp days or otherwise absent
themselves all at the same time from the Department or from
availability to the Department. At all times there will be at least one
Lieutenant available to the Police Department whenever the Chief
is on vacation or out of the area. The most senior ranking
Lieutenant is second in command of the Department; is directly
responsible for the efficiency and operation of all divisions; and is
further assigned the following responsibilities: [Amended
7-8-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10]
25.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(3), Police Captain, was repealed 7-8-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-10.
§ 50-2 PLANNING AND ZONING, DEPARTMENT OF § 50-2
47:95
(a) Supervision. Closely supervise the activities of their
subordinates, making corrections where necessary and
commending where appropriate.
(b) Leadership. Provide on-the-job training as needed for efficient
operation and coordination of effort when more than one
member or employee is involved.
(c) Direction. Exercise direct command, when necessary, in a
manner that assures the good order, conduct, discipline, and
efficiency of subordinates. Exercise of command may extend to
subordinates outside their usual sphere of supervision if the
police objective or reputation of the Department so requires, or
if no other provision is made for personnel temporarily
unsupervised. This authority shall not be exercised
unnecessarily. If a supervisor required a subordinate other
than his own to leave a regular assignment, the supervisor so
directing will inform the subordinate's own supervisor as soon
as possible.
(d) Enforcement of rules. Enforcement of Department rules and
regulations and requiring compliance with Department
policies and procedures.
(e) Inspection. Inspection of activities, personnel, and equipment
under their supervision and initiation of suitable action in the
event of a failure, error, violation, misconduct or neglect of
duty by a subordinate.
(f) Assisting subordinates. Having a working knowledge of the
duties and responsibilities of his subordinates. Observing
contacts made with the public by his subordinates and being
available for assistance or instruction as may be required. He
shall respond to calls of serious emergencies, crimes in
progress, assaults, and others unless actively engaged in a
police incident. He should observe the conduct of the assigned
personnel and take active charge when necessary.
(5) Police Sergeants: The Sergeants, during their tours of duty,
exercise the same authority and have the same responsibilities as
their Lieutenant, subject to the Lieutenant's authority. In the
absence of a Sergeant, the senior available member of the shift is in
charge, unless otherwise provided. When two supervisory officers
are assigned to the same command (i.e., a lieutenant and a
sergeant assigned to the same platoon), they will coordinate their
time off so that one is always present. In addition to the general and
individual responsibilities of all members and employees, the
Sergeants are specifically responsible for the following:
(a) Command. The direction and control of personnel under his
command to assure the proper performance of duties and
adherence to established rules, regulations, policies, and
§ 50-2 WATERFORD CODE § 50-2
47:96
procedures. He shall provide for continuation of command and
supervision in his absence.
(b) Good order. The general good order of his command during his
tour of duty includes proper discipline, conduct, welfare, field
training, and efficiency.
(c) Loyalty and esprit de corps. The development and maintenance
of esprit decorps and loyalty to the Department.
(d) Discipline and morale. The maintenance of discipline and
morale within the command and the investigation of personnel
complaints not assigned elsewhere.
(e) Organization and assignment. Organization and assignment of
duties within his unit to assure proper performance of
Department functions and those of his command.
(f) Reports and records. Preparation of required correspondence,
reports, and maintenance of records relating to the activities of
his command. Assurance that information is communicated up
and down the chain of command, as required.
(g) Reporting. Reporting as required by the Chief of Police.
(h) Maintenance. Assurance that quarters, equipment, supplies
and material assigned to his command are correctly used and
maintained.
(i) Other such supervisory duties as may be assigned from time to
time.
(6) Detective: Detective duties shall be carried out as assigned by the
Captain and Chief of Police, with emphasis in such investigative
assignments in the specialized areas as follows:
(a) Initial and follow-up investigations of serious crimes, vice
crimes and other investigations specifically assigned by the
Chief of Police.
(b) Preparation of cases for prosecution.
(c) Recovery of stolen property.
(d) Performance of all identification functions.
(e) Prevention and control of juvenile delinquency.
(f) Processing of juvenile offenders.
(g) Maintaining liaison with the juvenile courts.
(h) Crime prevention.
(i) Evidence storage and control.
§ 50-2 PLANNING AND ZONING, DEPARTMENT OF § 50-2
47:97
(7) Patrol officers: Patrol officers are responsible for performing a
variety of duties related to the protection of life and property,
enforcement of criminal and traffic laws, prevention of crime,
preservation of the public peace, and the apprehension of
criminals. They will perform these duties as prescribed in
Department orders and as directed by their supervisors. In addition
to these and the general and individual responsibilities of all
members and employees, patrol officers are specifically
responsible for the following:
(a) Police mission. A patrol officer is responsible for the
accomplishment of the police mission on his patrol. He shall
constantly be alert for violations of the laws and ordinances
and shall make every effort to prevent breaches of the peace
and offenses against persons and property. He shall be held
accountable for crime, accidents, disorders, and other criminal
conditions on his patrol beat or post.
(b) Reporting for duty. He shall report promptly at the designated
hour and place, in proper uniform for assignment and
inspection. He shall listen attentively to orders and
instructions of his superior officers and read such materials as
are made available to him. He shall make written memoranda
of such information as necessary and shall immediately
proceed to his post or beat upon completion of these tasks.
(c) Familiarization with patrol. A patrol officer shall thoroughly
familiarize himself with the Township. He shall be familiar with
all public businesses, offices, and their entrances, exits,
skylights, fire escapes, and other possible means of escape.
While making security checks of doors, he shall familiarize
himself with the location of safes and night lights. Changes in
night lights will be particularly noted.
(d) Method of patrol. During his tour of duty, the patrolman shall
continuously patrol every part of his assigned area, giving
attention to and frequently rechecking locations where the
crime hazard is great. As far as possible, he shall not patrol his
assigned area according to any fixed route or schedule, but
shall alternate frequently and backtrack in order to be at the
location least expected.
(e) Unlocked buildings.
[1] When a door or window is found open under suspicious or
unusual circumstances on any tour of duty, a patrol officer
shall make a thorough investigation and determine, if
possible, whether a burglary or other crime has been
committed and whether the door or window can be
secured. He shall, if necessary, summon assistance to
examine the premises and to secure such doors and
§ 50-2 WATERFORD CODE § 50-2
47:98
windows. He shall notify his shift commander and the
property owner.
[2] Under circumstances indicating that an intruder is still
inside a building, the officer discovering same should
immediately summon assistance and then stand guard.
When the assistance arrives, he may enter and search the
building.
(f) Field interviews. When the occasion demands it, the patrol
officers shall courteously, but firmly, question persons on the
public streets as to their names, addresses, reason for being on
the street, and other matters relating to the circumstances. In
all cases, good judgment, probable cause, and discretion shall
be used in making a decision to arrest.
(g) Traffic law enforcement. Patrol officers are charged with the
enforcement of all provisions of local and state traffic codes.
Failure to take appropriate action in traffic violation cases is
considered neglect of duty.
(h) Complaint action. A patrol officer shall carefully investigate all
complaints on or near his patrol which are assigned to him or
which are brought to his attention by citizens. He shall take
suitable action in those cases which come under his
jurisdiction and inform interested parties of the laws or
ordinances relative to the particular complaint or incident. If
the legal remedy of the complaint lies outside the jurisdiction
of the Police Department, he shall advise the complainant
accordingly and refer him to the proper authority.
(i) Preliminary investigations. At the scenes of major crimes,
subject to direction from higher authority, the first officer at
the scene, after it has been established that the perpetrator is
no longer present, will begin the preliminary investigation
(except in the case of homicide or apparent homicide; in those
instances, the Chief of Police or Captain will be called to the
scene immediately). In all instances, members not assigned
will not enter the premises or do any other thing that might
interfere with the investigation or destroy evidence. In cases of
homicide, the first duty of the patrol officer is to guard the
scene, exclude all unauthorized persons, and detain all
witnesses for interrogation.
(j) Radio failure. Patrol officers shall pay strict attention to all
regular radio transmissions. When they fail to hear any radio
transmissions or time signals for a period not to exceed 15
minutes, they shall immediately call the dispatcher for a
special test. If he fails to receive an acknowledgment, he shall
immediately contact the dispatcher or commander. In case of
§ 50-2 PLANNING AND ZONING, DEPARTMENT OF § 50-2
47:99
§ 50-3. All members of the Police Department.
It shall be the responsibility of all sworn police members of the Police
Department to enforce the laws of the State of New Jersey and the Township
of Waterford.
§ 50-4. Salaries and wages.
The pay for all Waterford Police Department personnel will be as set forth in
the Township Salary Ordinance and/or the applicable labor contracts. Said
ordinances and contracts will be made available to the public by request
through the Township Clerk's office.
§ 50-5. Secondary employment (moonlighting).
Waterford Township police officers are expected to give their whole time
and attention to their duties in serving the public interest and public safety
of/for the residents of Waterford Township. They are required by police
rules and regulations to be armed at all practical times and are subject to
duty recall when determined to be necessary by the Chief of Police or other
appropriate authority. Additionally, there are certain private employment
activities that are in direct conflict with police power vested in the officer
by the Township of Waterford. Accordingly, effective upon passage of this
chapter, no Waterford Township police officer will be allowed to "moonlight"
in employment apart from their Township-held position except as follows:
radio trouble, the officer shall notify his shift commander and/
or dispatcher of the nature of the trouble.
(k) Patrol officers will be further responsible for daily performance
standards and such other duties as defined by S.O.P.
A. Any officer wishing to moonlight must first submit a written request
through the Chief of Police, with his endorsement recommending
approval or not, to the appropriate authority for a permit to do so. The
request will contain all necessary information, to include at a minimum:
the type of employment; the hours to be worked; the name, address and
phone number of the prospective employer and company; a certification
from the employer that the duties will not involve police powers, that
there will not be any conflict with the officer's police career, and that
the company will provide the officer with full insurance benefits to
indemnify the Township and cover the officer for his actions or inactions
or if injured in the course of or during actions arising out of or related to
the prospective moonlighting job. That is, the outside employer must
provide proof of sufficient insurance coverage to protect the Township
against liability for tort actions or other actions of the officer outside
the officer's official Police Department duties, and to defend and
indemnify and hold the Township and the officer harmless in any legal
proceedings not arising out of and not directly related to the lawful
exercise of police powers in furtherance of official police duties and
related to the moonlighting employment. Said permit will only be issued
§ 50-2 WATERFORD CODE § 50-5
47:100
by the appropriate authority, with the approval of the Mayor and
Township Committee, for officers who have been productive employees
for the Township as documented and certified by the Chief of Police.
All such permits will be revoked for employees whose performance
deteriorates after the secondary employment is started. The approved
permit will be valid for a period of two years and will need to be
reapplied for within 90 days prior to expiration. At any time this permit
may be revoked by the Chief of Police, without due process, if it
impedes or diminishes the ability to attain the departmental objectives
of this agency in any way or compromises the reputation of the Police
Department. [Amended 7-8-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10]
B. Entrepreneurial endeavors (e.g., self employment) are strictly
prohibited subject to the same permit requirements listed in Subsection
A above. Additionally, no permits for those endeavors will be issued for
any business conducted within the boundaries of Waterford Township.
The appearance of impropriety (even in the absence of actual wrongful
behavior) necessarily stemming from paying attention to such business
practices on Township time and/or using police powers in regard to
such business enterprises has arisen in the past and may be particularly
troublesome. [Amended 7-8-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10]
C. Permit criteria. The following standards shall be used to guide the
appropriate authority in deciding requests from officers to engage in
off-duty employment as well as operation of a business enterprise (i.e.,
self employment) off duty:
(1) Whether the business/employment has the potential to be aided or
furthered by an officer's use of confidential information that the
officer is privy to solely by virtue of his police position, whether or
not the officer may actually so use such information, based on the
appearance and potential conflict created;
(2) Whether the business/employment might tend to result in a loss of
departmental control or authority over the officer while engaged in
the business/employment beyond any loss of control over other offduty
officers not so employed or engaging in their own private
business;
(3) Potential for loss of the officer's police services as a result of injury
sustained in the alternate employment/business;
(4) Whether the employment/business has the potential to create the
appearance that those who patronize the business or place of
employment might curry favorable treatment by the officer in his
police capacity or by the Department, or the appearance that those
who patronize a competitor of the business/employer might be
subject to unfavorable treatment by the officer or Department;
§ 50-5 PLANNING AND ZONING, DEPARTMENT OF § 50-5
47:101
§ 50-6. Police related off-duty employment.
(5) Whether the business/employment has the potential to cause
diminished physical and mental capacity of the officer while on
duty;
(6) Whether the employment/business is in a publicly regulated
industry which might create actual or appearance of conflicts of
interest, even if with other branches or levels (e.g., state, county,
municipal) of government;
(7) Whether the employment/business has the potential for the
creation of an appearance of favoritism among officers from the
operation of a joint enterprise among multiple police officers
holding different ranks on the police force when the same officers
exercise their supervisory authority over each other in the course
of their police duties;
(8) The potential for possible pursuit of police time or resources to
pursue private employment/business functions;
(9) The potential civil liability of the Township for acts committed by
the officer in the private employment/business;
(10) Potential for the employment/business to affect the reputation and
effectiveness of the police force;
(11) The potential for the officer to be involved in the collection/
accounts receivable aspects of the business/employment such that
those dealing with the officer in the employment/business capacity
might feel pressure/coercion in paying debts beyond that which
would be present if such activities were not performed by an offduty
police officer;
(12) Any other factor unique to the employment/business request with
the potential to create a conflict or appearance of conflict with
police employment.
D. Divestiture. All employees currently moonlighting, conducting a side
business, or involved in any form of secondary employment without the
required permit will immediately submit written application for same or
terminate such employment within two weeks and/or divest themselves
of all side businesses prohibited in Subsection B above within 30 days.
A violation of this chapter constitutes grounds for immediate removal
from service as a Waterford Township police officer.
A. Police officers employed by the Township of Waterford shall be
permitted off-duty police-related employment pursuant to the
provisions set forth herein. Off-duty employment shall not be permitted
if the police officer and/or outside contractor fail to comply with the
provisions set forth herein either prior to the commencement of the
employment or at any time during the period of employment.
§ 50-5 WATERFORD CODE § 50-6
47:102
§ 50-7. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONTRACTOR — The person, corporation, or other legal entity employing
a Waterford Township police officer to provide off-duty police-related
services.
OFF-DUTY EMPLOYMENT — Any employment by a Waterford Township
police officer for police-related services where the source of compensation
to the police officer does not originate from the municipal budget line item
for police wages and salary.
§ 50-8. Request for off-duty employee; special assignments by Chief
of Police.
§ 50-9. Assignment of police officers.
The Township Police Department shall maintain a list of police officers who
have volunteered for off-duty employment. Assignment of off-duty police
work shall be made in accordance with a rotation list to be maintained by
the Chief of Police. When a police officer is assigned off-duty employment or
if a police officer refuses an assignment, the officer's name will be placed at
the bottom of the list.
B. All off-duty police-related services performed by a Waterford Township
police officer shall be in his/her official capacity as an employee of the
Waterford Township Police Department and shall be subject to the
control and supervision of the Police Department.
C. Waterford Township police officers are prohibited from engaging in any
employment for police-related services with any private person,
corporation or other entity except in the manner set forth in this
chapter.
A. Contractors seeking to employ off-duty Waterford Township police
officers shall make said request through the Waterford Township Police
Department, to the attention of the Chief of Police. The request shall be
in writing, except in case of emergency, and shall include the specific
nature of the services desired.
B. The Chief of Police or his designee may assign Waterford Township
police officers for police-related services based upon a determination
that the police-related services are required for the public safety. The
cost for said police-related services shall be the responsibility of the
person or entity on whose behalf the services are provided or the
property owner whose property or activities on said property cause the
need for police-related services. All costs shall be paid as set forth at
§ 50-13 hereof.
§ 50-6 PLANNING AND ZONING, DEPARTMENT OF § 50-10
47:103
§ 50-10. Remitted hours; emergency duty.
Under no circumstances shall a police officer be permitted to work more
than 20 hours per week during a regularly scheduled work week in off-duty
employment, and off-duty employment can be immediately terminated if the
police officer performing said work is required for emergency police duty
for the Township of Waterford as shall be determined by the Chief of Police.
§ 50-11. Police uniforms, equipment and vehicles.
Waterford Township police officers performing off-duty police-related
services for private contractors shall be in full police uniform while said
services are being provided. However, Waterford Township police vehicles
shall not be used by police officers during the performance of off-duty
police-related services unless specifically authorized by the Chief of Police.
§ 50-12. Authorizing contract.
The Mayor and Township Clerk are hereby authorized to execute a contract
with the contractor for the services required, which contract shall set
forth, inter alia, the specific nature of the services to be performed, the
location that said services will be performed, the dates and hours of service,
payment arrangements, arrangements for the use of police vehicles,
arrangements for insurance coverage, and any other provisions mandated
by this chapter or any law or regulation of the State of New Jersey.
§ 50-13. Payment requirement; escrow accounts.
A. Any person or entity requesting the services of an off-duty law
enforcement officer in the Waterford Township Police Department shall
estimate the number of hours such law enforcement services are
required, which estimate shall be approved in writing by the Chief of
Police, and shall establish an escrow account with the Chief Financial
Officer of the Township by depositing an amount sufficient to cover the
rates of compensation and administrative fees for the total estimated
hours of service. A separate dedicated by rider trust fund shall be
established by the Township of Waterford, and all funds collected and
disbursed relating to off-duty employment shall be made through said
account.
B. Prior to posting any request for services of off-duty law enforcement
officers, the Chief of Police or his designee shall verify that the balance
in the escrow account of the person or entity requesting services is
sufficient to cover the compensation and fees for the number of hours
specified in the request for services. The Chief of Police shall not post a
request for services from any person or entity unless all fees and
compensation required in the manner described above have been
deposited with the Chief Financial Officer. No officer shall provide any
such services for more hours than are specified in the request for
services.
§ 50-10 WATERFORD CODE § 50-13
47:104
§ 50-14. Payment to officers.
C. In the event the funds in such an escrow account should become
depleted, services of off-duty law enforcement officers shall cease and
requests for further or future services shall not be performed or posted
until additional funds have been deposited in the escrow account in the
manner prescribed above.
D. The person or entity requesting such services shall be responsible for
ensuring that sufficient funds remain in the escrow account in order to
avoid any interruption of services.
E. Salary and fee schedule. [Amended 7-8-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10]
(1) Contractors hiring Township police officers for off-duty
employment shall be charged pursuant to the following schedule,
which includes an hourly rate of pay for the police officer, the cost
for the use of the police vehicle, plus a fair and reasonable sum
representing the administrative costs, overhead and out-of-pocket
expenses to the Township of Waterford for providing this service.26
[Amended 6-14-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-16]
(a) Traffic control.
(b) Other traffic control.
(c) Other police services.
(d) Police vehicle fee.
(e) Administrative fee.
(2) The above mentioned rates will apply except when the job is funded
by Camden County in which instance the rate will be that which is
applicable according to current law and the amount received per
hour shall be paid to the officer.
F. Contractor shall submit payment to Waterford Township within five
business days of receipt of said invoice. Failure of the contractor to
make payment within said five days shall result in the immediate
cessation of the police services being provided, and this agreement
shall be deemed terminated. In the event this contract is terminated,
the contractor shall forfeit all sums paid in advance and Waterford
Township shall have the right to pursue any remedy at law for the
collection of any amounts that may be due and owing for the services
provided prior to termination.
A. Police officers performing off-duty police-related services for private
contractors shall be paid for said services by the Township of Waterford
at the rate set forth at § 50-13(e).
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees, § 124-8A.
§ 50-13 PLANNING AND ZONING, DEPARTMENT OF § 50-14
47:105
§ 50-15. Insurance.
The contractor shall be responsible for providing all necessary insurance
coverages as required by law, including but not limited to workers'
compensation and general liability insurance. Coincidental with the
execution of the contract referred to in § 50-12, the contractor shall provide
the Township with appropriate insurance binders insuring that the police
officer and Waterford Township are provided general liability coverage with
respect to the services to be provided and that the police officer is covered
by appropriate workers' compensation insurance.
§ 50-16. Indemnification.
B. All sums due a police officer performing off-duty employment shall be
paid subsequent to the submission of a voucher which is approved by
the Chief of Police or his designee.
A. To the fullest extent permitted by law, contractor shall indemnify,
defend, and hold harmless the Township of Waterford, its agents and
employees, from and against all claims, damages, losses, liabilities and
expenses, including but not limited to attorney's fees and court costs,
arising out of, resulting from or in any way relating either directly or
indirectly to:
(1) The performance of the work;
(2) Any and all claims made by said police personnel for injuries and/or
illnesses while performing the off-duty employment;
(3) The breach by contractor of any of the terms and conditions of the
agreement;
(4) The negligent or intentional acts or omissions of the police and/or
the contractor, its employees, agents, and/or subcontractors;
(5) Bodily injury, sickness and/or disease, including death at any time
resulting from such bodily injury, sickness or disease, sustained by
any person while in, on or about the site and surrounding areas
where such injury, sickness, disease and/or death arose out of or
was in any way connected with the work of, the performance of, or
failure to properly perform the work;
(6) Any liability based upon contractor's negligence imputed to the
Township of Waterford;
(7) Damage to property of contractor, the Township of Waterford or
any other person or entity arising out of, incident to, or in
connection with the performance of the work;
(8) Laborers, mechanics and materialmen's liens, and all other liens
and charges of every character whatsoever, arising out of work to
be performed by this agreement; and/or
§ 50-14 WATERFORD CODE § 50-16
47:106
§ 50-17. The appropriate authority.
§ 50-18. Probationary periods.
All patrol officers are initially appointed subject to a one-year probationary
period. Sergeants, Lieutenants and the Captain promotions are subject to
a probationary period of six months, after which the appropriate authority
may make such promotions permanent. In the event the appropriate
authority does not make the promotion permanent, the probationary period
may be terminated without the necessity of giving any cause for termination
of said probationary period, and the officer will revert back to the previous
rank/position held.
(9) Any other cause of action which may be brought against the
Township of Waterford arising out of or in any way relating to the
work and contractor's obligations hereunder.
B. This indemnification and hold harmless agreement shall apply in all
instances whether the Township of Waterford is a plaintiff or is made a
direct party to the initial action or claim or is subsequently made a
party to the action by third-party in-pleading or is made a party to a
collateral action arising, in whole or in part, from any of the issues from
the original cause of action or claim.
A. Jurisdiction/authority. The Police Department shall come under the
jurisdiction of the appropriate authority, which position is hereby
created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118. Said appropriate authority
shall be the Director of Public Safety. Should there be any temporary or
interim absence of a Director of Public Safety, the Mayor or his/her
designee may serve as the appropriate authority on an interim basis.
The appropriate authority shall be responsible for the promulgation,
adoption, updating, and/or ratification of rules and regulations for
police personnel which shall be known as the Rules and Regulations for
the Police Department of the Township of Waterford. (N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118)
B. Policies to govern day-to-day operations. Pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118, the Chief of Police is directly responsible to the
appropriate authority for the efficiency and routine day-to-day
operations of the police force, and the Chief of Police performs his
duties "pursuant to policies established by the appropriate authority."
Therefore, the appropriate authority shall issue whatever policies,
which may be referred to as operational policies, general policies,
standard operating policies or otherwise, that are deemed appropriate
and necessary for the operation of the Department. Any such policies
promulgated by the Chief of Police shall require ratification by the
appropriate authority. Any such policies issued by the Chief shall be
submitted to the appropriate authority and will take effect 10 days later,
absent a response from the appropriate authority to the contrary; this
provision to be referred to as the ten-day review rule.
§ 50-16 PLANNING AND ZONING, DEPARTMENT OF § 50-19
47:107
§ 50-19. Special law enforcement officer.
The appropriate authority shall, with the approval and consent of the Mayor
and Township Committee, appoint such special law enforcement officers
as he/she or they may deem necessary. They shall be a part of the Police
Department established herein and subject to all the laws, rules and
regulations governing the same. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq.,
the term of said appointment shall be at the discretion of the Mayor and
Township Committee, but in no event shall exceed one year. The personnel
referred to in this section shall be compensated at such hourly rate as
designated in the Township's Salary Ordinance. Said personnel shall serve
for the appointed term only and at the compensation, if any, established
by ordinance or as modified or changed by the Mayor and Township
Committee.
§ 50-20. Civilian employees. [Amended 7-8-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-10]
The appropriate authority shall, with the approval and consent of the Mayor
and Township Committee, appoint such civilian members of the Police
Department to serve in the services division as he/she or they may deem
necessary. Said members are to provide executive assistance to the Chief of
Police, secretarial duties, dispatching services, clerical duties and logistics
in support of the Police Department. Said positions will be one Executive
Assistant to the Chief of Police and one police records clerk and additional
civilian staff as deemed necessary.
§ 50-21. Police employees.
The appropriate authority shall, with the approval and consent of the Mayor
and Township Committee, appoint, promote, assign or reduce in force for
reasons of economy all police personnel employed by the Township of
Waterford. Appointment of any additional police personnel shall require an
amendment of this chapter.
§ 50-22. Appointment.
A. All members of the Police Department shall be recommended by the
appropriate authority and appointed by and with the advice and
consent of the governing body, and are to hold their offices as provided
by law.
B. No person shall be appointed a member of the Police Department in the
Township of Waterford who has failed, prior thereto, to have duly
executed and signed a written application for such employment, upon a
form supplied by the Township Clerk, requiring relevant data to be
submitted by the applicant therein, and shall have also indicated
therein his willingness to undergo a required preemployment physical
examination and a preemployment psychiatric examination.
§ 50-19 WATERFORD CODE § 50-22
47:108
§ 50-23. Qualifications.
§ 50-24. Oath of allegiance.
Each member of the Police Department shall, before entering upon the
performance of his duties, take and subscribe an oath to bear true faith
and allegiance to the government established in this state, to support the
Constitutions of the United States of America and the State of New Jersey
and to faithfully, impartially and justly discharge and perform all the duties
of his office. Such oath or affirmation shall be filed with the Township Clerk.
§ 50-25. Disciplinary procedures.
C. The hours of employment of the uniformed members and officers of the
Waterford Township Police Department shall not exceed eight
continuous hours in any one day nor more than 40 hours in any one
week.
D. Appointments to new positions or offices or to fill vacancies shall also be
subject to state laws.
A. Each applicant shall comply with all the laws of the State of New Jersey
pertaining thereto. No person shall be given or accept a permanent
appointment as a police officer in the Township unless he has first been
given a probationary or temporary appointment to such office for a
period of one year after successfully completing a police training course
at a school approved and authorized by the Police Training Commission
in the Department of Law and Public Safety of the State of New Jersey,
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 56 of the Laws of 1961 and
amendments thereto.
B. No person shall be appointed to the Police Department as a regular or
probationary member unless, at the time of making application, he is
between the age of 18 and 35 years of age, except as otherwise
provided by law. The applicant shall be a citizen of the United States of
America, the State of New Jersey, and preference shall be given to those
applicants who have been residents of the Township of Waterford for a
period of at least six months prior to the date of application. The
Township Committee shall also require that an applicant for or
appointee to the Police Department successfully complete a physical
training test, a medical examination, a psychological examination, an
oral interview (to include a writing exercise with a handwriting sample)
by a panel to be determined by the Director of Public Safety, and they
must have attained a minimum of an Associate's Degree from an
accredited institution of postsecondary education, The Township
Committee may waive the educational requirement in lieu of on-the-job
police experience or completing acceptable active-duty military service.
A. Hearing authority.
§ 50-22 PLANNING AND ZONING, DEPARTMENT OF § 50-25
47:109
(1) In the event of any disciplinary proceedings against any member of
the Police Department of the Township of Waterford, the
appropriate authority or his/her designee shall be the sole hearing
officer and person in charge of all such proceedings. The decision
of the appropriate authority shall be final. The right of appeal shall
be to the New Jersey Superior Court pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-150, if and as applicable.
(2) In the event the appropriate authority designates a hearing
authority other than himself/herself, and the designated hearing
authority is to be an officer within the Waterford Township Police
Department, only a person of greater rank than the person charged
may be so designated for that purpose. Whenever Special Counsel
is designated to be the hearing authority, prior approval must be
obtained by resolution of the Mayor and Township Committee. The
decision of said hearing authority shall be provided within 10 days
to the appropriate authority, who shall render the final and binding
decision, both as to violation and penalty, within 10 days from when
he/she receives the decision and supporting documentation such as
a hearing transcript. The time lines established herein are to be
construed flexibly in the interest of justice so that fair and reasoned
decisions will follow. Should the appropriate authority fail to act
within 10 days or give notice of necessary extension, the decision of
the hearing authority shall become final.
B. Charging authority.
(1) In the event a Waterford Township Police Department officer is to
be charged in a disciplinary action and said employee is
subordinate to the rank of the Chief of Police, only the Chief of
Police or his/her designee may initiate such charges (N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118). In the event the office of the Chief of Police has been
abolished through intentional vacancy, pursuant to § 50-2A, then
the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall function as the
charging authority. Failure to initiate charges when same are
indicated may constitute a neglect or dereliction of duty [Gauntt v.
Bridgeton, 194 N.J. Super. 468, 477 A.2d 381 (App. Div. 1984)], but
the function of the charging authority may not be circumvented.
(2) In the event the Chief of Police for the Township of Waterford is to
be charged in a disciplinary action against the chief, the
appropriate authority or Special Counsel named by the appropriate
authority to act on his/her behalf shall be the charging authority.
The appropriate authority is hereby empowered to name a
designated Special Council to function as an alternative charging
authority without prior Council approval in an emergency. This is
necessitated by the statutory time lines involved in the charging
process. Notwithstanding this authority, at the earliest opportunity
the appropriate authority shall inform Council of the action that he/
she has taken and obtain its approval.
§ 50-25 WATERFORD CODE § 50-25
47:110
§ 50-26. Appeals.
Disciplinary action against any member of the Police Department shall be
taken in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147. Any employee seeking to
appeal disciplinary charges shall do so in writing submitted to the office
of the appropriate authority. Said appeal shall be filed within five days, not
including Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, of the date said charges were
served upon said employee. In either event, the appropriate authority shall
schedule a hearing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
state statute. Administrative disciplinary charges sewed on any employee
shall contain the date, time and location for a prospective hearing as
required by statute. Any failure to submit the required written request
for an appeal would constitute an act of insubordination and may effect
the employee's rights pertaining to said statutory time lines, the discovery
proceedings, as well as other legal rights and remedies appurtenant
thereto.
§ 50-27. Administrative investigations.
The Mayor and Township Committee, or the appropriate authority with
governing body approval, may appoint a committee and/or designate special
counsel to conduct investigations of the operation of the police force and
may delegate to such committee or special counsel any and all lawful
powers of inquiry. The appropriate authority or his designee for this
purpose, or special counsel appointed by the governing body, may examine
the operations of the force or the performance of any officer or member
thereof. Any resolution of the governing body appointing special counsel for
the purpose of examining or investigating the operation of the police force
or the performance of any officer or member thereof shall be considered
to vest the examining or investigating official or body with the authority
to perform a municipal investigation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-25 and
the County and Municipal Investigations Law, N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 to 4. Any
such subpoenas as authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:48-25 shall be in the name of
the appropriate authority. In conducting any such external investigation or
examination, the investigating or examining authority shall not be bound by
those internal affairs investigation guidelines or regulations governing the
Police Department in conducting its own internal investigations, although
all applicable statutory restrictions and particularly N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147
shall not thereby be circumvented.
(3) Whenever any person, whether police officer, Special Counsel, or
the appropriate authority, serves in an investigative capacity and/or
as the charging authority relevant to a Waterford Township Police
Department disciplinary action; he/she may not thereafter be
designated as or serve as the hearing authority in that same
disciplinary action.
§ 50-25 PLANNING AND ZONING, DEPARTMENT OF § 50-28
47:111
§ 50-28. Emergency directives.
Nothing herein contained shall infringe upon or limit the power or duty of
the appropriate authority to act to provide for the health, safety or welfare
of the municipality in an emergency situation through special emergency
directives. (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118; 40A:14-146.9)
§ 50-29. Police Department Rules and Regulations and Police
Manual.
A. Adoption and promulgation. The appropriate authority, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, is hereby authorized to update, adopt and
promulgate rules and regulations for the governing of the Police
Department and for the discipline of its members with a view to making
the Police Department and all members thereof efficient, vigilant and
effective in the service of the Township of Waterford. Said rules and
regulations will be in manual form and shall be called the "Rules and
Regulations of the Police Department for the Township of Waterford"
and shall govern the conduct of and be binding upon the entire
membership of said Police Department. Said rules and regulations shall
provide for discipline of the members of the police force. In the event of
any mutually inconsistent provisions between the police ordinance and
the rules and regulations, the ordinance shall govern; however, both
shall be interpreted so as to give full affect to both this chapter and the
rules and regulations wherever possible.
B. Distribution: The Rules and Regulations shall be distributed through
Power DMS as follows: An electronic copy will be issued to and
electronically signed for by each employee of the Police Department for
the Township of Waterford. A copy will be maintained by the Township
Clerk for the personnel designated as "special officers" and to provide
public access to same. [Amended 7-8-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10]
C. Members' responsibility for manuals. No Police Department operating
policies will be inserted as part of this manual unless and until properly
assimilated by the appropriate authority. Each police officer and each
civilian employee is duty-bound to thoroughly familiarize himself/
herself with the provisions of the police manual. Failure to comply shall
be considered neglect of duty. In the event neglect of duty is charged
against a member for failure to observe the rules and regulations or
Department procedures or orders, ignorance of any provision of this
manual will not be accepted as an excuse. [Amended 7-8-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-10]
§ 50-28 WATERFORD CODE § 50-29
47:112
Chapter 54
PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 44. Solid waste — See Ch. 235.
§ 54-1. Definitions.
The following words will have the meanings described wherever the same
appear in this chapter, unless the context clearly denotes the contrary:
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Public Works of the township.
DIRECTOR — The Committeeperson of the Township Committee assigned
the responsibility for the Department of Public Works and/or the Chairman
of the Public Works Committee.
PUBLIC WORKS MANAGER — The employee of the Department of Public
Works designated by the Township Committee to exercise direct daily
supervision over the Department.[Added 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 96-29]
SUPERINTENDENT — The employee(s) of the Department of Public Works
designated by the Director with approval of the Public Works Committee to
exercise direct supervision of a division of the Department.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Waterford in the County of Camden and the
State of New Jersey.
§ 54-2. Creation.
There is hereby created and established in the township a Department of
Public Works to be supervised and administered by a Director or Committee
of Public Works, who will be appointed by the Township Committee for a
term not to exceed one year expiring each December 31.
§ 54-3. Responsibilities of Department.
The Department will have full responsibility for the following:
A. Roads, alleys and easements (township).
B. Maintenance of public property.
C. Drainage and retention ponds.
D. Snow removal.
E. Trash and garbage collection.
F. Gravel pits.
§ 50-29 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 54-3
54:113
§ 54-4. Authority of the Director/Public Works Committee.
The Director/Public Works Committee will:
§ 54-5. Responsibilities of Director/Public Works Committee.
The Director/Public Works Committee will:
G. Recreation fields (maintenance only).
H. Department equipment.
I. Streetlighting.
J. Any other assignments or items designated or deemed necessary by the
Director and/or Township Committee.
K. Recycling program.
L. Heavy trash.
M. Composting.
A. Have the authority to manage and direct the Superintendent(s) and
other personnel of the Department.
B. Be instructed, empowered and authorized to implement, alter, modify
or rescind operating procedures, recordkeeping procedures and
equipment maintenance schedules and other procedures designed to
achieve efficiency, to reduce costs and to preserve the useful life of
township equipment.
C. Have the authority to control the use, operation and allocation of all
equipment of the Department and its divisions.
A. Cause the preparation of all operating budget requests of the
Department and its division within the time specified by the Township
Committee. The Director will review the operating budget requests of
the Superintendent(s) and will have authority to alter or modify such
requests after consultation with the Superintendent(s).
B. Supervise the development of all bid and contract specifications for the
purchase of services, products or property or the sale of services,
products or property required by the Department or as may be directed
by the Township Committee.
C. Review all bids received by the township pertaining to the Department
and will represent to the Township Committee, with the Township
Engineer, compliance of the bidder with township and other
requirements imposed by law and the responsibilities of the lowest
bidder.
§ 54-3 WATERFORD CODE § 54-6
54:114
§ 54-6. Appointment of employees.
All employees of the Department will be screened by the Department
Superintendent and then interviewed by the Director/Public Works
Committee. Final appointment will be made by the Director.
§ 54-7. Responsibilities of Superintendent.
Superintendents shall have the following responsibilities:
§ 54-8. Composition.
The Department shall consist of the following:
§ 54-9. Term and compensation of Public Works Manager. [Added
12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 96-29]
A. To evaluate work performance of personnel.
B. To exercise direct supervision of such personnel.
C. To maintain records necessary to the operations of the Department.
D. To submit monthly mileage and fuel consumption reports to the
Director, usually by the last day of the month.
E. To implement work orders from the Director/Public Works Committee.
F. To interview and recommend for hiring applicants for work when
necessary.
G. To provide assistance as required during heavy work assignments.
H. To hold a New Jersey State auto-articulated license and be able to
operate all Department equipment.
A. Superintendent(s), as required by Director/Public Works Committee.
B. Operators.
C. Driver/operators.
D. Drivers.
E. General laborers.
F. Mechanic.27
A. At the discretion of the Township Committee, the Public Works
Manager may be appointed to a term of three years. At no time will the
27.Editor's Note: Subsection A of former § 35-9, Term of Superintendent; termination of
employees, was repealed 4-13-1994 by Ord. No. 94-7. Former Subsection B was deleted
12-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-24. For current provisions see Ch. 44, Personnel Policies.
§ 54-6 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 54-9
54:115
Chapter 59
PURCHASING PROCEDURES, PAYMENT OF BILLS AND
PAYROLL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 61.
Public Works Manager be appointed to a term of less than one year,
unless appointed in an acting capacity.
B. The person appointed to this position for a term of not less than one nor
more than three years, as provided by this section, shall be entitled to
receive at a minimum the annual compensation authorized on the date
of initial appointment.
§ 54-9 WATERFORD CODE § 54-9
54:116
ARTICLE I
Purchasing Procedures
[Amended 8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-13; 9-28-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-18]
§ 59-1. Applicability.
The purchasing procedure in Article I shall not apply to professional
services rendered to the municipality by those individuals with professional
service contracts as defined in the Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A.
40A:11-1 et seq.)
§ 59-2. Institution of system.
A purchase order system shall be instituted.
§ 59-3. Authorization required.
No employee or official of the Township of Waterford shall incur any liability
on the part of the Township of Waterford unless the funds to pay for the
services have been pre-encumbered through a properly executed purchase
order of the Township.
§ 59-4. Emergency purchases.
In case of emergencies, work may be authorized by the appropriate
department director, department head or purchasing agent, but a purchase
order must be obtained no later than the next working day to pre-encumber
the funds to pay for these services.
§ 59-5. Designation of authorized purchaser. [Amended 5-22-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-9]
The Purchasing Agent or Qualified Purchasing Agent appointed by the
Township is hereby authorized to prepare and sign purchase orders. All
purchase orders over $900 (recommended to be increased to $2,600 with a
QPA) must be approved by a majority of the full Township Committee before
a purchase order may be processed.
§ 59-6. Operation of purchasing system. [Amended 3-11-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-3; 5-22-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-9]
The purchase order system shall be operated as follows:
A. Under the MCSJ system, no requisitions will be generated. All purchase
orders will be numbered by the computer system from which they are
generated. The Purchasing Agent or Qualified Purchasing Agent
appointed by the Township shall be responsible for issuing all purchase
orders.
§ 59-1 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 59-6
54:117
§ 59-7. Purchasing Agent or Qualified Purchasing Agent authority
and duties. [Amended 5-22-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-9]
§ 59-8. Distribution of purchase order.
The original purchase order shall be sent to the vendor for signature. A copy
of the signed purchase order shall be filed with all pertinent documentation
together with the signed original when returned from the vendor.
B. All purchase orders shall be signed by the Purchasing Agent or
Qualified Purchasing Agent appointed by the Township and Township
Committee person(s). A Qualified Purchasing Agent shall be able to sign
all purchases less than $2,600 without a Committee person(s)'
signature.
C. In those cases when the goods or services which are purchased exceed
a dollar amount as established by the State of New Jersey Quotation
Threshold, then the Purchasing Agent or Qualified Purchasing Agent
appointed by the Township shall be responsible for obtaining three
quotations, in writing, from different qualified vendors for these goods
and/or services in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:11-6.1. At the time
quotations are requested, a copy of the qualified vendor's New Jersey
Business Registration shall be requested and subsequently obtained
with written quotations. Failure to obtain said business registration will
result in a vendor’s exclusion from this process.
A. The Purchasing Agent or Qualified Purchasing Agent appointed by the
Township shall compare the purchase order to the budget appropriation
line item. If the balance is sufficient in the budget appropriation, he/she
shall sign the purchase order and obtain signatures of the members of
the Township Committee.
B. The Purchasing Agent or Qualified Purchasing Agent appointed by the
Township is authorized to prepare and process for payment, without
signatures of Township Committee, all statutory and contractually
obligated payments (i.e., PERS, PFRS annual payments, health
insurance invoices, liability insurance invoices, debt payments,
property tax overpayments and all recurring monthly bill payments
(i.e., utility bills). It is the intent of this section to allow the Purchasing
Agent or Qualified Purchasing Agent appointed by the Township to
make timely payment of all normally occurring bills of the Township. No
checks for payment of any invoices covered by this section shall be
issued until duly authorized by a majority of the Township Committee
voting on payment.
C. For purchase orders less than $900, only the signature of the
Purchasing Agent or Qualified Purchasing Agent appointed by the
Township shall be required. For purchase orders of more than $900, the
signatures of three Township Committee persons shall be required.
§ 59-6 WATERFORD CODE § 59-8.1
54:118
§ 59-8.1. Qualified Purchasing Agent. [Added 5-22-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-9]
A. Position created. The position of Qualified Purchasing Agent is hereby
created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-9.
(1) "Qualified Purchasing Agent" shall mean a Purchasing Agent who is
the holder of a Qualified Purchasing Agent certificate issued
pursuant to Section 9 of P.L. 1971, c.198 (N.J.S.A. 40A-11-9).
(2) The Qualified Purchasing Agent shall maintain all of the
qualifications and shall have completed all of the training set forth
in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-9.
B. Power to award contracts. The Qualified Purchasing Agent shall have
the ability to award contracts for the providing of goods or the
performance of services on all quotations or bids to be received in
excess of $2,600 only if expressly permitted in the contract
specifications. On all contracts of $2,600 or less, the Qualified
Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to award said contract on
behalf of the Township utilizing the procedures set forth in the Local
Public Contract Law and this chapter.
C. Authority to solicit bids and requests for proposals. Upon prior
authorization by the Mayor and the Township Committee, the Qualified
Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to solicit the following:
(1) Requests for proposals for contracts between $17,500 and
$40,000; [Amended 8-12-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
(2) Requests for proposals for contracts for the providing of goods or
the performance of services in excess of $36,000 which are exempt
from public bidding;
(3) Bids for contracts which are repetitive in nature, including, but not
limited to, uniform rental, radio maintenance, traffic light
maintenance and solid waste collection;
(4) Bids for contracts for the providing of goods or the performance of
services where funding has been previously provided.
§ 59-8.1 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 59-8.1
54:119

ARTICLE II
Payment of Bills
[Amended 8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-13; 9-28-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-18]
§ 59-9. Bill of demand. [Amended 5-22-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-9]
Any person claiming payment from the Township shall present a detailed bill
of demand along with a signed Township purchase order to the Purchasing
Agent or Qualified Purchasing Agent appointed by the Township on or
before the Friday preceding a scheduled meeting of the Township
Committee. The certificate of claimant appearing on the purchase order
must be executed prior to payment in order for the bill to be considered
for payment, except for bills meeting the criteria set forth in 59-7B. Bills
received after this date shall not be processed for payment until the next
scheduled meeting of the Township Committee, unless a Township
Committee person shall otherwise direct.
§ 59-10. Verification of services completed.
The Township shall verify that the goods or services for which a purchase
order has been prepared have been provided and/or received in a
satisfactory manner. Upon verification that all goods and services have been
provided and/or received by the appropriate department, the department
head shall sign the purchase order.
§ 59-11. Presentation of bills to governing body. [Amended
5-22-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-9]
A bill list shall be presented to the Township Committee, which shall
approve the same by roll call vote, except that the Township Committee
may reject any bill presented, and state the reason for such rejection.
Any rejected bill shall be referred to the Purchasing Agent or Qualified
Purchasing Agent appointed by the Township with such instructions as the
Township Committee may give at the time of disapproval.
§ 59-12. Verification by Township Treasurer; preparation of checks.
§ 59-13. Recording of claims.
It shall be the duty of the Township Clerk to record the total amount of all
bills in the official minutes and keep a detail of all bills in a permanent file,
indicating that the Township Committee has, by formal action, approved the
same with appropriate records as to any claims disapproved or rejected.
A. After approval by the Township Committee, the Township Treasurer
shall verify all bill lists were approved prior to issuance of checks.
B. The checks shall be signed by those individuals designated as
signatories with the appropriate banking institution and mailed. The
purchase orders shall be kept on file in the Treasurer's office.
§ 59-9 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 59-14
54:121
§ 59-14. Claims for professional services.
§ 59-15. Public advertisement for bid required.
§ 59-16. (Reserved)
§ 59-17. (Reserved)
A. Professional services are defined as set forth in the Local Public
Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) and which are services
rendered or performed by a person authorized by law to practice a
recognized profession and whose practice is regulated by law and with
whom the Township of Waterford has a professional service contract.
B. Payment for professional services shall be made in accordance with
Article II of this chapter.
A. The New Jersey Local Public Contract Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.)
requires that individual purchases or annual cumulative purchases
within a particular category of materials or services, which in the
aggregate the amount surpasses that set forth in or the amount
calculated by the Governor pursuant to Section 3 of P.L. 1971, c. 198
(N.J.S.A. 40A:11-3), are required to be publicly advertised for bid.
B. A department with a category of purchases which is expected to be
above the maximum amount stated above will so inform the Purchasing
Agent or Qualified Purchasing Agent appointed by the Township and
assist in the preparation of specifications for bids, as necessary. Any
question regarding the bid threshold amount shall be directed to the
Chief Financial Officer or Township Clerk. [Amended 5-22-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-9]
C. Prior to a bid being publicly advertised, the Purchasing Agent or
Qualified Purchasing Agent appointed by the Township shall receive
authorization from the Township Committee. [Amended 5-22-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-9]
D. After a contract has been awarded by formal resolution adopted by the
Township Committee, the Purchasing Agent or Qualified Purchasing
Agent appointed by the Township shall encumber the full amount of the
contract. Contract payments shall be made through the normal
payment procedures. [Amended 5-22-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-9]
§ 59-14 WATERFORD CODE § 59-17
54:122
ARTICLE III
Payroll
[Amended 4-11-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-4]
§ 59-18. Establishment of account. [Amended 5-22-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-9]
A payroll account is hereby established in the Township of Waterford.
To meet Township employee payroll needs, the payroll provider shall be
Paychex, Inc., which shall process payroll from input submitted to them
electronically as prepared by the Township Treasurer. Upon receipt of
the payroll checks, reports and direct deposit earnings statements from
Paychex, Inc., the Purchasing Agent or Qualified Purchasing Agent
appointed by the Township will prepare purchase orders charging
appropriate budgetary accounts. Upon receipt of the amount due, the
Township Chief Financial Officer, or others as designated by Township
Committee, shall have deposited, by wire transfer, this amount due to
the payroll account. All payroll checks shall be signed by the individuals
with signatory authority on the payroll account as established by Township
Committee.
§ 59-19. Certification of payroll by department heads.
The head of each department shall certify the payroll to the Treasurer no
later than 9:00 a.m. the first business day (Monday) following the close of
a normal payroll period (Saturday). In the event a holiday occurs on the
normal payroll input day, certification of payroll shall be submitted not later
than 9:00 a.m. of the business day preceding payroll input. Notification shall
be given to each department head with sufficient time to comply.
§ 59-20. Submission to Township Committee.
The Treasurer shall submit to the Township Committee for approval the
necessary payrolls for the amount due to the officers and employees as
compensation. The payroll shall be submitted to the Township Committee in
the form of a bill list and shall be considered in due course and approved
if found to be correct. In case of error or adjustment in the payroll, the
Treasurer shall promptly correct any error or make an appropriate record
of the correction or adjustment.
§ 59-18 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 59-20
54:123

ARTICLE IV
Compliance
[Amended 4-11-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-4]
§ 59-21. Disciplinary action.
Failure to comply with the foregoing provisions of this chapter shall result
in disciplinary action against any or all said individuals so failing to comply,
which may include termination depending upon the severity or nature of the
violation.
§ 59-21 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 59-21
54:125
Chapter 60
RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use, development and zoning — See Ch.
176.
Parks, playgrounds and recreation
areas — See Ch. 201.
§ 60-1. Establishment; number of members; residency.
There is hereby established a recreation advisory committee composed of
seven members and two alternate members, who shall be residents of the
Township of Waterford.
§ 60-2. Compensation; appointment; Recreation Director's role,
vacancies.
§ 60-3. Meetings.
The Recreation Advisory Committee shall meet twice monthly. Minutes of
each meeting shall be recorded by a secretary to be selected by a majority
vote of the members of the committee. All minutes shall be approved by
the committee at a subsequent meeting, and copies of all approved minutes
shall be forwarded to the Township Clerk.
A. All members of the Recreation Advisory Committee shall serve without
compensation and shall be appointed by the Waterford Township
Committee as follows:
(1) Three members shall be appointed for an initial term of three years,
three members shall be appointed for an initial term of two years
and one member shall be appointed for an initial term of one year.
At the expiration of each of the initial terms, each member shall be
appointed for a term of three years.
(2) There shall be two alternate members, one of whom shall be
appointed for a term of two years and one of whom shall be
appointed for a term of one year.
B. The Township Recreation Director shall serve as an ex-officio member
who may attend and participate at all meetings, but shall not be a
voting member.
C. Any vacancy occurring other than the expiration of a term shall be filled
for the unexpired term only.
§ 59-21 WATERFORD CODE § 60-4
60:126
§ 60-4. Powers and responsibilities.
The powers and responsibilities of the Recreation Advisory Committee shall
be as follows:
Chapter 61
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
Chapter 63
SOLID WASTE ADVISORY COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 235.
§ 63-1. Establishment.
There is hereby created the Waterford Township Solid Waste Advisory
Commission.
§ 63-2. Appointments; eligibility requirements; terms; selection of
officers.
The Waterford Township Solid Waste Advisory Commission shall consist of
seven members appointed by resolution of the township governing body.
The seven members will include township officials, resident business people
and other residents of the township and one individual, who need not be
a resident of the municipality, who in the governing body's opinion has
experience and/or qualifications to assist in developing the solid waste
policy for the township. The term of appointment shall be for one year. A
A. Advise the Director of Recreation regarding recreational programs
within the Township and capital improvements.
B. Advise the Township Committee regarding the recreational needs of the
Township.
C. Advise the Township Committee regarding ordinances affecting
recreation within the Township.
D. Advise the Planning Board regarding recreation and open space within
the Township.
E. Review subdivision applications and advise the Planning Board
concerning proposed recreational facilities within new developments.
F. Make recommendations to the Township Committee with regard to the
budget of the Department of Recreation.
§ 60-4 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 63-2
61:127
member of the Commission shall be selected Chairman for a period of one
year. Such other officers shall be selected by the Commission as deemed
necessary for the conduct of the Commission's business.
§ 63-3. Duties.
The Solid Waste Advisory Commission shall serve only in an advisory
capacity to the township governing body. The duties of the Solid Waste
Advisory Board shall be:
§ 63-4. Compensation.
The members of the Solid Waste Advisory Board shall receive no
compensation for their time, but said members shall be reimbursed for
any expenses incurred in the performance of their duties so long as said
expenses have been previously approved by the township governing body.
The Solid Waste Advisory Board shall keep complete and accurate records
of any moneys expended in this regard in order for said reimbursement to
be made.
§ 63-5. Restrictions.
The Commission shall have no right to any employees or to retain
professional services. The governing body, however, upon request by the
Solid Waste Advisory Board, will provide reasonable resources, which can
include but not be limited to copies of pertinent documents, technical
assistance and secretarial services.
A. To review current township ordinances and other solid waste rules and
regulations relating to the disposal of solid waste and to make
recommendations, as applicable, for any revisions to said ordinances or
township regulations.
B. To review the current waste flow, collection practices and disposal
practices for solid waste and make any recommendations for revisions
to said process.
C. To review the present bidding specifications for solid waste collection
utilized for awarding contracts with private water haulers and to make
any recommendations for change in said specifications.
D. To review and study all other relevant and pertinent information
relating to the control and disposal of solid waste, recycling and
composting.
E. To develop means to provide information to the public on solid waste
collection and disposal, recycling and composting.
§ 63-2 WATERFORD CODE § 63-5
63:128
Chapter 66
(RESERVED)
Chapter 69
VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire department — See Ch. 26.
§ 63-5 (RESERVED) § 63-5
66:129

ARTICLE I
Emergency Responders Stipend
[Adopted 12-26-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-29; amended in its entirety
10-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-22]
§ 69-1. Policy established.
A financial stipend shall be paid to the Waterford Township volunteer
firefighters based on the following procedure.
§ 69-2. Budgeting of funds; amount; allocation.
§ 69-3. Eligibility.
§ 69-4. Calculation time period.
The time period for calculating a volunteer firefighter's eligibility for a
stipend shall be from December 1 to November 30 of each year.
§ 69-5. Payment.
Payment of the stipend to all eligible volunteer firefighters will be during
the month of December of each year.
A. Township budget. The Township shall establish a separate line item in
its annual budget captioned "Emergency Responders Stipend
Program."
B. Amount; allocation. The amount placed into the annual budget for this
purpose shall be at the discretion of the Township Committee.
C. At the discretion of the Township Committee, the amount placed into
the annual budget for the purpose of duty crew shall not exceed the
sum of $4,160 per budget year. Each qualified firefighter assigned to
work duty crew assignment will receive not more than $20 per shift.
The duty crew stipend will be paid to a volunteer firefighter who meets
the identified eligibility requirements set forth in § 69-3A.
A. A stipend will be paid to a volunteer firefighter who responds to at least
15% of emergency calls and attends 40% of scheduled drills during a
one-year time period.
B. The total amount of the stipend to be paid to each volunteer firefighter
meeting the minimum eligibility requirements as set forth above will be
based on the total amount of emergency calls and drills attended by the
firefighter, which total will then be added together with the total
number of emergency calls and drills attended by all other volunteer
firefighters in the case of the Waterford Township Fire Department,
which total number will then be divided by the dollar allotment
provided to the Waterford Township Fire Department.
§ 69-1 (RESERVED) § 69-5
66:131
Chapter 72
WATER/SEWER UTILITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 226. Water — See Ch. 278.
§ 69-5 WATERFORD CODE § 69-5
66:132
ARTICLE I
Utility Established
[Adopted 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 72-1. Establishment.
The Township Committee of the Township of Waterford does hereby declare
and establish a Municipal Water/Sewer Utility. This Utility shall hereafter be
operated and maintained as a self-liquidating utility for all purposes of the
Local Bond Law and Local Budget Law of the State of New Jersey. All real
property, inventory, fixed assets, accounts receivable, contracts or other
personalty previously owned by the Waterford Township Municipal Utilities
Authority, which was dissolved by ordinance of the Township Committee
and approved by the State of New Jersey Local Finance Board, shall
hereafter be the property of the said utility.
§ 72-2. Fees and charges.
Said utility is hereby authorized to charge such fees, rents, rates or other
charges for or in connection with the use or services of such Municipal
Utility, which sums shall be held, used and applied in accordance with the
Local Bond Law and the Local Budget Law of the State of New Jersey as
well as other applicable statues.
§ 72-3. Management.
Management of the Utility hereinabove established shall be vested in the
Township Committee of the Township of Waterford and shall be comprised
effectively of those members of the Township Committee (governing body).
The Township Committee shall have the power to establish reasonable rules
and regulations governing the utility and its operations.
§ 72-4. Assumption of W.T.M.U.A. debt.
A. The existing debt service of the dissolved Waterford Township
Municipal Utilities Authority shall be assumed by this newly created
Water and Sewer Utility as permitted by N.J.S.A. 40A:5A-20.
B. As referenced in the executive summary of the application to the Local
Finance Board, debt service coverage as required by the existing bond
resolution will be maintained, and the services provided to the
residents by the dissolved Authority will continue to be provided by the
newly created Water and Sewer Utility.
C. A certified copy of this article will be on file with the Township Clerk
and shall be forwarded to the State of New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs, Division of Local Government Services.
§ 72-1 (RESERVED) § 72-4
66:133

ARTICLE II
Rules, Regulations and Rates
[Adopted 7-14-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
§ 72-5. Adoption.
The Township of Waterford hereby adopts for the Municipal Water/Sewer
Utility the rules, regulations and rates governing application for sanitary
sewer and water service in the Township of Waterford, as prepared by
Owen, Little & Associates, Inc., dated February 1998, and revised through
June 26, 2003.28
28.Editor's Note: Current water and sewer rates, as amended from time to time, are on file in
the Township offices.
§ 72-5 (RESERVED) § 72-5
66:135
Chapter 74
WILDFIRE SAFETY COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 26.
Emergency and ambulance services — See Ch.
27.
Police Department — See Ch. 50.
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 54.
Volunteer fire fighters and EMS Squad — See
Ch. 69.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 137.
§ 74-1. Creation.
The Waterford Township Wildfire Safety Council is hereby established.
§ 74-2. Purpose.
The purpose of the Wildfire Safety Council (WSC) is to coordinate wildfire
prevention efforts within the Township. To coordinate these efforts, the
WSC may, with municipal approval, seek grant funding, propose and
conduct outreach efforts, and develop educational opportunities to inform
residents what they can do personally to reduce their wildfire risks. The
WSC may act as the point of contact for the New Jersey Forestry Services,
Forest Fire Service and their many outreach and educational efforts,
including but not limited to Firewise Communities, Community Wildfire
Protection Plans (CWPP), and Ready Set Go, for the purpose of reducing
the risk of wildfire for all residents. The WSC may seek technical assistance
from state and federal agencies and arrange and conduct training exercises
for residents and municipal staff. The WSC's purpose is to increase the
wildfire preparedness and planning capacity in the Township.
§ 74-3. Members.
A. The WSC shall consist of a minimum of five members appointed by the
Mayor, with membership as follows: the OEM Coordinator, the local
Fire Chief(s) [or representative of the local fire company(s)],
representatives from businesses or companies with an interest in
wildfire, safety, (insurance and utility companies), as well as interested
residents. The members shall serve without compensation unless
otherwise provided. The Mayor shall designate one of the members to
serve as Chairman and presiding officer of the Council. The terms of
office of the first Councilmembers shall be for one, two, or three years,
to be designated by the Mayor in making his/her appointments, and
their successors shall be appointed for terms of three years and until
the appointment and qualification of their successors. The first
members of the Council shall be appointed for the following terms:
§ 72-5 WATERFORD CODE § 74-3
66:136
§ 74-4. Powers and duties.
(1) Class A member (member for the one-year term expiring December
31, 2018): the Waterford Township Fire Chief or designee.
(2) Class B member (one member for the two-year term expiring
December 31, 2019): OEM Coordinator or Deputy.
(3) Three to five members for the three-year term expiring December
31, 2020: interested members from the local community, which can
include, but not be limited to, local Planner, Construction Code
Official, residents in fire-prone area, insurance company
representatives, utility company representatives, land trusts, large
landowners.
(4) One member from the Township Committee to serve as a liaison in
an ex officio, nonvoting position.
(5) External advisors from the New Jersey State Forestry Services,
New Jersey Forest Fire Service, etc., as needed in ex officio,
nonvoting position(s).
B. The Mayor, on notice to the Township Committee, may remove any
member of the Council for cause, on written charges served upon the
member. The member shall be entitled to a hearing within 30 days
before the Township Committee and has the right to representation by
legal counsel. The member must advise, in writing, to the Township
Clerk of request for a hearing within three days after receipt of
charges.
C. A vacancy on the Council occurring otherwise than expiration of a term
shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an original
appointment.
A. The WSC is hereby established for the protection of municipal residents
by increasing the capacity of education, training and prevention efforts.
The WSC may seek grant funds in accordance with municipal policies,
coordinate efforts to increase outreach, provide education and training
and act as a link to the local fire companies for evacuation and training
efforts. The WSC may conduct studies, training and outreach, and seek
technical and financial assistance for wildfire risk reduction. The WSC
may coordinate local planning efforts to ensure fuel breaks may be
constructed in new developments and with the Construction Code
Official to ensure that appropriate fire-retardant building materials are
used when practical and applicable in fire-prone areas.
B. On written notice to the Mayor and Township Committee, the WSC may
form subcommittees of volunteers or enlist advisors to increase the
Council's ability to address specific wildfire needs as they are identified.
§ 74-3 (RESERVED) § 74-5
66:137
§ 74-5. Records and reporting.
The WSC shall conduct all meetings pursuant to the Open Public Meetings
Act (OPMA) and record minutes to reflect the business conducted during
the meetings. The WSC shall meet quarterly or more frequently as needed
to address the specific needs of the municipality. The WSC shall submit an
annual report to the Mayor and is encouraged to also submit a report to the
State Forest Firewarden at the New Jersey Forestry Services, Forest Fire
Service, to provide an accounting of the official duties performed and tasks
completed by the Council during the preceding year. The report is to be
submitted by February 1 of each calendar year.
§ 74-6. Finance and appropriations.
The WSC may seek, accept and spend grant or donated funds for projects
submitted to address the wildfire needs of the Township subject to required
municipal auditing practices as established by the Waterford Township
Chief Financial Officer. Any member responsible for managing and spending
funds shall be bonded by the Township.
Chapter 77
(RESERVED)
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 80
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Smoke detectors — See Ch. 137, Art. II.
§ 80-1. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person who operates,
maintains or owns any alarm device, alarm system, dial alarm or local alarm
designed to produce a visual or audible signal of an emergency or otherwise
designed to call and/or summon the Waterford Township Police Department,
the Waterford Township Fire Department or any other municipal agency to
any location in response to any type of alarm signal.
§ 80-2. Definitions; word usage.
As used in this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations
shall have the following meanings:
§ 74-5 WATERFORD CODE § 80-2
77:138
ALARM SYSTEM — Any mechanical, electrical or electronic device which is
designed or used for the detection of an unauthorized entry into a building,
structure or facility or for alerting others about the commission of an
unlawful act within a building structure or facility or for alerting others
about the existence of any other condition requiring response of police, fire
or ambulance personnel and which emits and/or transmits an audible and/
or usual signal or message when actuated. Alarm systems include, but are
not limited to, direct dial telephone devices, audible alarms and subscriber
alarms.
AUDIBLE ALARMS — A device that emits and sends an audible signal from
the premises that it is designated to protect.
CHIEF — For purpose of this chapter, wherever the term "Chief" appears by
itself, it shall be interpreted to mean the Police Chief and/or the Fire Chief
as the context and circumstances require.
DIAL ALARM OR DIRECT DIAL ALARM — Any type of alarm system using
telephone lines transmitting an alarm directly through the police
switchboard providing warning of intrusion, fire, smoke, flood or other
perils by way of recorded voice message.
DIGITAL ALARM — A microprocessor-controlled alarm switch designed to
connect to a console or central station.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm or signal of an alarm system actuated by
inadvertence, negligence, intentional or unintentional act of a person other
than an intruder and including, as well, alarms caused by mechanical
failure, malfunctioning or improper installation of the alarm system and
related equipment but not including alarms created by mechanical failure,
malfunctioning or improper installation of the alarm console. For purposes
of § 80-5, false alarms shall not include audible alarms affixed to
automobiles.
FIRE CHIEF — The Fire Chief or Acting Fire Chief of the Waterford
Township Fire Department or his/her designated representative. For
purposes of this chapter, the term "designated representative" shall mean
any person designated by the Fire Chief to perform a function required or
permitted by the provisions of this chapter.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Waterford Township Fire Department.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm system which, when actuated, produces a
signal not connected to the alarm console or the police switchboard, such as
store burglar alarm activating bell devices, providing warning of intrusion,
fire, smoke, flood or other perils. The term "local alarm" shall not include
an alarm system on a motor vehicle, provided that such alarm is not
interconnected with an alarm device, a dial alarm or a local alarm. The
term "local alarm" shall also not include any alarm equipment designated to
signal solely within the building (or series of buildings, if owned by the same
person) on which it is located and which is not designated to emit signals,
visible or audible, to persons outside each building (or series of buildings).
§ 80-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 80-2
80:139
MONITORED SYSTEM — An alarm system that, when activated, causes a
visual and/or audible signal to a private monitoring center by telephone or
other means that results in a telephone call being placed to the Waterford
Township Police Department communications center by the monitoring
service requesting emergency response to the location of the alarm.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, corporation or
association.
POLICE CHIEF — The Police Chief or Acting Police Chief of the Waterford
Township Police Department or his/her designated representative. For
purposes of this chapter, the term "designated representative" shall mean
any person designated by the Police Chief to perform a function required or
permitted by the provisions of this chapter.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Waterford Township Police Department.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any condition or occurrence which annoys, injures
or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of any person(s) of any
community or neighborhood.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Waterford.
VISUAL ALARMS — A rotating or flashing light that, when activated, is
intended to alert the observer that the premises on which it is affixed has
been illegally entered.
§ 80-3. Registration.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the singular tense, and words in the singular tense include the
plural tense. The word "shall" is always mandatory.
A. No person shall install, operate or maintain an alarm system on any
property within the Township unless such alarm system is registered
with the Police Department. Such registration shall include the
following information:
(1) The name and address of the property owner.
(2) The name and address of each tenant or occupant of the property if
other than the property owner.
(3) The type of alarm device.
(4) The name, address and telephone number of the alarm business(es)
selling, installing, monitoring, inspecting, servicing, responding to
and/or maintaining the alarm system.
(5) The name and telephone number of at least two persons who can be
reached at any time, day or night, and who are authorized to
respond to an alarm signal and who can open the premises in which
the system is installed.
§ 80-2 WATERFORD CODE § 80-3
80:140
§ 80-4. Alarm requirements.
(6) An indemnification statement signed by the property owner and
each occupant of the building utilizing an alarm system registered
pursuant to this chapter, where the registrant agrees, in writing, to
indemnify and hold the township harmless from and on account of
any and all damages arising out of the activities of the registrant or
its alarm system on the registrant's premises and arising out of the
operation or failure to operate the alarm console.
(7) Any other information deemed necessary for proper registration of
the alarm system/device.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to audible alarms affixed
to automobiles; provided, however, that the provisions of § 80-7 shall
apply to audible alarms affixed to automobiles.
C. All audible alarm systems in place on the effective date of this chapter
shall have a period of six months within which to register such system
in accordance with this chapter; provided, however, that if an audible
alarm is activated and the Police Department or the Fire Department
respond to such activation, whether or not such signal is for a true
emergency situation or a false alarm, the property owner must register
such system pursuant to this chapter within 14 days after such
activation.
D. Any property with an alarm system/device which has not registered
with the Police Department as required by this chapter shall be subject
to the following penalties:
(1) A written warning notice that the property owner or business
operator has 10 days to register with the Police Department.
(2) Failure to register within the ten-day grace period a one-hundreddollar
fine per day until the actual date of registration.
A. The alarm business or owner of any audible alarm system shall be
responsible for deactivating any alarm within 60 minutes after
notification or after reasonable efforts have been made to notify the
owner or alarm business that such alarm is sounding.
B. Every audible alarm installed after the effective date of this chapter
shall have a timing device which automatically shuts off the alarm
within 60 minutes after it is activated. An alarm that sounds for more
than 60 minutes may be considered a public nuisance as defined in this
chapter. All audible alarms installed prior to the effective date of this
section must either have a timing device which automatically shuts off
the alarm within 60 minutes after it is activated or the property owner
must have in place procedures whereby the alarm is manually or
automatically shut off within 60 minutes after it is activated.
§ 80-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 80-4
80:141
§ 80-5. False alarms.
C. In the event that an alarm system emitting or sending an audible, visual
or other similar response shall fail to be deactivated within the time
limitation specified above, the Township Police personnel shall have the
right to take such action as may be necessary in order to disconnect any
such alarm.
D. The obligation for the maintenance, repair, upkeep and continuing
operation of an alarm system shall be the sole responsibility of the
property owner and/or registrant or the person who had the system
installed. All components of alarm equipment must be maintained in
good repair, and when evidence exists that there has been failure to
comply with the operational requirements of this chapter, the Police or
Fire Chief is then authorized to require that such device be
disconnected until such time as compliance with the chapter
requirements is reestablished.
E. Upon written request from the Police or Fire Chief, an alarm company
shall provide a service history of a particular alarm system within five
business days after receiving the request.
F. Any person testing an alarm covered under the terms of this chapter
shall notify the Police Department immediately prior to and after the
testing is completed. Failure to do so shall subject such person to a
warning for a first offense and a one-hundred-dollar fine for each
subsequent offense.
G. The sensory mechanism of alarm devices and local alarms shall be
adjusted so as to suppress false indications and not to be actuated by
impulses due to pressure changes in water pipes, short flashes of light,
wind, noises, rattling or vibration at doors or windows or other forces
unrelated to general alarms.
H. In addition to any other information that may be required to be supplied
by the provisions of this chapter, the Police or Fire Chief may require
the alarm business to furnish him with certain statistical data which
may be reasonably available relative to specified periods of operation
after the effective date of this chapter.
I. In addition to the normal power supply, alarm devices and local alarms
shall have an independent battery, of equal voltage to the normal power
supply, which is kept fully charged and shall be capable of switching
from one power supply to the other automatically.
J. The Police Chief may, from time to time, promulgate rules and
regulations supplementing this chapter in order to provide for
recordkeeping, efficient management and administration of the
provisions of this chapter, provided, however, that the Mayor and
Township Committee must first approve these rules or any changes
thereto.
§ 80-4 WATERFORD CODE § 80-5
80:142
§ 80-6. Violations and penalties.
A. In the case of false alarms, the Police Department shall cause an
investigation to be made and keep a record of all such alarms on file.
Upon the occurrence of a false alarm, the Police Department shall cause
a form notice of false alarm to be forwarded to the property owner
indicating the date and time of the alarm response, comments with
respect to the incident and information with respect to the number of
false alarms during the given calendar year. The form shall be signed by
the Police or Fire Department personnel responding to the false alarm
and investigating the matter. For repeated false alarms generated at
the same property in any given calendar year, violations and penalties
for false alarms shall be based on the following schedule:
(1) Residential and nonresidential properties. For the first, second,
third and fourth false alarm in any given calendar year, a written
warning shall be issued. For the fifth through eighth false alarm in
any calendar year, a fine of $100 for each false alarm occurrence
shall be imposed. For the ninth through twelfth false alarm in any
calendar year, a fine of $200 for each occurrence shall be imposed.
For any false alarm over twelve through fifteen which occurs in any
calendar year, a fine of $300 for each occurrence shall be imposed.
(2) Where an alarm system for a specific property or location within a
property is the subject of false alarm incident reports of 16 or more
during any calendar year, a summons to appear before the
Municipal Court for each occurrence shall be issued to the property
owner and/or the business operator, and any and all fines and
penalties shall be determined by the Court pursuant to § 80-6 of
this chapter.
(3) All fines assessed pursuant to this chapter shall be by issuance of a
summons to the property owner stating the amount of fine to be
paid. Such fine shall be paid to the Municipal Court Clerk.
B. False alarms created by any act of God as determined by the Police
Chief or Fire Chief, shall not be included in the count of false alarm
incidents for purposes of calculating the applicable fine under this
chapter.
C. In the event that the Police Chief, Fire Chief or Municipal Court
determines that the false alarm(s) occurred as a direct result of an
interruption of electrical power, a telephone system malfunction, an
alarm equipment malfunction or other causes clearly beyond the
control of the owner, the imposition of the applicable false alarm fines
or administrative sanction may be waived and not counted as a false
alarm incident.
A. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty in the Municipal Court of
the Township for violation of the terms of this chapter other than for the
penalties already set forth herein shall be subject to a fine of a minimum
§ 80-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 80-6
80:143
§ 80-7. Public nuisance.
Any audible alarm, including, but not limited to, audible automobile or other
vehicular alarms, which continues to transmit an audible signal for more
than 60 minutes after the property owner, registrant, alarm business and/or
vehicle owner is notified, or all reasonable attempts to so notify such person
or persons are made, shall be cause to find such property owner, registrant,
alarm business or vehicle owner in violation of Chapter 306 of the Township
Code and subject to the penalties contained therein.
§ 80-8. Applicability.
The provisions contained herein shall apply equally to those alarms systems
that are placed in service prior to or subsequent to the effective date of this
chapter.
Chapter 82
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drug-free school zones — See Ch. 118.
Fees — See Ch. 124, Art. II.
Land development and zoning — See Ch. 176.
Loitering — See Ch. 184.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 201.
Pool and billiard parlors — See Ch. 214.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 239.
of $500 to the maximum allowed by law or imprisonment for a period
up to the maximum allowed by law.
§ 80-6 WATERFORD CODE § 80-8
82:144
ARTICLE I
Licensing
[Adopted 12-11-1974 as Ch. 51, Art. I, of the 1974 Code]
§ 82-1. Prohibited acts.
No person shall possess, sell, distribute or transport any alcoholic
beverages in the Township of Waterford in violation of Revised Statutes,
Title 33, Chapter 1, known as the "Alcoholic Beverage Law."29
§ 82-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Article, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
PERSON — A person of either sex, or a firm, corporation, club or association
to be licensed under the provisions of said Act.
§ 82-3. Applications for licenses.
All applications for such licenses shall be in the form required by law and
as prepared and furnished by the Clerk of the Township of Waterford, and
all licensees shall comply with the terms of said Act and be subject to the
terms and provisions thereof and of this Article.
§ 82-4. License fees. [Amended 4-13-1988 by Ord. No. 88-2;
5-10-1989 by Ord. No. 89-7; 5-23-1990 by Ord. No. 90-6; 5-22-1991
by Ord. No. 91-630]
License fees to be paid shall be as follows:
§ 82-5. Hours of sale. [Amended 7-23-1980 by Ord. No. 80-10]
A. The license fees for plenary retail consumption, plenary distribution
and club licenses shall be as set by the Township Fee Schedule
Ordinance.31
B. The license fee for each and every plenary distribution license shall be
as set by the Township Fee Schedule Ordinance.32
C. For each and every club license, a fee as set by the Township Fee
Schedule Ordinance.33 There shall not be more than two club licenses in
the Township.
A. No licensees hereunder shall serve any alcoholic beverage on a New
Year's Day between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. and on other
days between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
29.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
§ 82-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 82-5
82:145
§ 82-6. Sale to minors. [Amended 7-23-1980 by Ord. No. 80-1034]
No person shall sell or offer or expose for sale or barter or suffer to be sold
or offered for sale or barter or give or serve any alcoholic beverage to any
person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages.
§ 82-7. Premises exposed to public view.
Every license shall be exposed to public view in a conspicuous place in the
place licensed, and any omission so to do shall be presumptive evidence that
the place where alcoholic beverages are being sold, offered or exposed for
sale or barter is unlicensed.
§ 82-8. Violations and penalties.35
Any person who shall, in violation of the terms of this Article, use or
maintain any store, dwelling or other building for the sale or exposure for
sale of any alcoholic beverage or who shall sell or offer or expose for sale
or barter or suffer to be sold or offered to be sold or bartered any alcoholic
beverage in violation of this Article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
punished by a fine of not less than $50 and not more than $250 or
imprisonment for not less than 10 days and not more than 90 days, or both.
§ 82-9. Signing of licenses.
Every such license shall be signed by the Chairman of the Township
Committee and the Clerk of the Township.36
§ 82-10. Issuance of licenses: statutory authorization.
All applications for licenses under this Article and all licenses issued
hereunder and proceedings in connection herewith shall be subject to the
statute referred to in § 82-1 of this Article and the rules and regulations
enacted by the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control of
New Jersey, whether now in existence or those which may hereinafter be
enacted affecting the subject matters of this Article.37
B. No licensees hereunder shall operate or keep lighted up or open for
business any place so licensed on a New Year's Day between the hours
of 4:30 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. and on other days between the hours of 3:30
a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
See N.J.S.A. 33:1-51.
36.Editor's Note: Former § 51-10, Location of premises, was repealed 10-13-1993 by Ord. No.
93-14.
37.Editor's Note: Former Article II, Use by Minors, adopted 6-13-1956 as Ord. No. 78, was
deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 82-5 WATERFORD CODE § 82-10
82:146
ARTICLE II
Drinking in Public
[Adopted 6-11-1975 as Ord. No. 75-8 (Ch. 51, Art. III, of the 1974
Code)]
§ 82-11. Open containers with alcoholic beverages prohibited;
exceptions.
No person shall have in his possession any open bottle or other container
containing liquor, wine, beer or any other alcoholic beverage while on any
public highway, public street, public sidewalk, public parking area or lot,
playground, park or other property owned by, belonging to or over which
the Township of Waterford has control or in any vehicle or any public place
in the Township of Waterford except those premises duly licensed for the
sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises.
§ 82-12. Open containers in vehicles.
An open bottle or open container containing liquor, beer, wine or other
alcoholic beverage in any vehicle shall be presumptive evidence that the
same is in the possession of all of the occupants thereof in violation hereof.
§ 82-13. Permission required for public areas.
The Township Committee of the Township of Waterford, for good cause
shown, may permit the drinking of beer at public parks or in other public
areas by a resolution of the Township Committee, which resolution shall
be preceded by a written request of the organization or organizations
seeking such permission, addressed to the Township Committee, and which
resolution shall state the hours within which such permission is granted and
the exact location where such permission shall be in force.
§ 82-14. Violations and penalties.38
Any person or persons, firm or corporation who or which violates any
provision of this Article, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days
or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination
thereof.
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 82-11 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 82-14
82:147

ARTICLE III
Underage Possession and Consumption on Private Property
[Adopted 6-27-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-15]
§ 82-15. Underage possession and consumption prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age to knowingly possess
or knowingly consume an alcoholic beverage on private property without
legal authority.
§ 82-16. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punished by a
fine of $250 for a first offense and $350 for any subsequent offense.
B. In addition to the fine authorized for this offense, the court may
suspend or postpone for six months the driving privilege of a person
convicted of this offense. Upon the conviction of any person and the
suspension or the postponement of that person's driver's license, the
court shall forward a report to the Division of Motor Vehicles stating the
first and last day of the suspension or postponement period imposed by
the court. If a person at the time of the imposition of sentence is less
than 17 years of age, the period of license postponement, including a
suspension or postponement of the privilege of operating a motorized
bicycle, shall commence on the day the sentence is imposed and shall
run for a period of six months after the person reaches the age of 17
years.
C. If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a valid
driver's license issued by this state, the court shall immediately collect
the license and forward it to the Division of Motor Vehicles along with
the report. If for any reason the license can not be collected, the court
shall include in the report the complete name, address, date of birth,
eye color and sex of the person, as well as the first and last date of the
license suspension period imposed by the court.
D. The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that, if a person
is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of license
suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive
a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt of a
written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
E. If a person convicted under this article is not a New Jersey resident, the
court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresident
driving privilege of the person based on the age of the person and
submit it to the Division of Motor Vehicles on the required report. The
court shall not collect the license of a nonresident convicted under this
article. Upon receipt of a report for the court, the Division of Motor
§ 82-15 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 82-16
82:149
§ 82-17. Exceptions; definitions.
Vehicles shall notify the appropriate officials of the licensing
jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement.
A. Nothing contained in this article is intended, nor shall it be construed,
as prohibiting an underage person from consuming or possessing an
alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious observance, ceremony
or rite, or consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in the
presence of and with the permission of a parent, guardian or relative
who has attained the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic
beverages.
B. Definitions. As used in the preceding subsection, the following terms
shall have the meaning set forth:
GUARDIAN — A person who is qualified as a guardian of the underage
person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — The underage person's grandparent, aunt or uncle,
sibling, or any other person related by blood or affinity.
C. Nothing contained in this article is intended, nor shall it be construed,
as prohibiting possession of alcoholic beverages by any such person
while actually engaged in the performance of employment by a person
who is licensed under Title 33 of the Revised Statutes, or while actively
engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary arts or
hotel management program at a county vocational school or postsecondary
educational institution; provided, however, that this article
shall not be construed to preclude the imposition of a penalty under this
article, or N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, or any other section of law against the
person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on or at
premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 82-16 WATERFORD CODE § 82-17
82:150
Chapter 89
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 124, Art. II. Pool and billiard parlors — See Ch. 214.
§ 89-1. Definitions; purpose.
§ 89-2. License required.39
No person shall maintain, operate or possess in any store, building or
other place where individuals may enter or in any building or other place
wherein any club or organization meetings are held within the Township
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMUSEMENT PARLOR OR ARCADE — Any place or premises wherein
three or more coin-operated amusement machines or devices are
maintained for use and operation by the public.
AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine which upon
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, even though remotecontrolled,
may be operated by the public generally for use as a game,
entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score,
including but not limited to such devices as marble machines, pinball
machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines and all games,
operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they
may be indicated. It shall include coin-operated video machines or
games or similar devices that use a display screen for points, lines
and dots of light that can be manipulated to simulate games or other
types of entertainment. It shall also include video audio/visual adult
peep show machines. It shall not include nor shall this chapter apply to
music-playing devices.
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person who supplies any automatic amusement
device to another for use in his premises, whether under lease or any
similar arrangement.
OPERATOR — Any person in whose premises any automatic amusement
device is placed or kept for operation.
PERSON — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association.
B. Purpose and objective. The purpose of this chapter is to license,
regulate and control those automatic amusement devices or remotecontrol
devices which are operated for the purpose of making a profit.
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 82-17 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 89-2
89:151
of Waterford any automatic amusement device, and no person, firm or
corporation shall bring such devices into the township for placement in such
premises without first obtaining a license therefor.
§ 89-3. Term of license.
Licenses issued for individual coin-operated machines shall expire on
December 31 of the year following their issue unless suspended or revoked,
and the license fee cannot be prorated or transferred.
§ 89-4. Application for license.
§ 89-5. Limitations on number and locations.
A. All applications for a license under this chapter shall be made and
delivered to the Township Clerk on forms to be supplied for that
purpose and shall be subscribed and sworn to by the applicant.
B. The application for the license shall contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name under which the place is being operated and the location
of the same.
(3) The number and type of alcoholic beverage licenses, where
applicable.
(4) The number and type of machines sought to be licensed.
(5) The location where each automatic amusement game is to be
located.
(6) The name and address of the person from whom each device is to
be purchased, rented or otherwise obtained.
(7) A description of each automatic amusement game sought to be
licensed, including, for each device, the name of the manufacturer,
model number and serial number.
(8) The terms of the agreement governing the acquisition and
installation of said automatic amusement game (rates and dates).
(9) Information indicating whether the distributor, the applicant or any
person connected with the operation of the place wherein the game
or device is to be installed has ever been convicted of any crime or
found guilty of the violation of any ordinance on gaming.
(10) Any other information which the Township Police Chief may deem
reasonably necessary and proper for the full protection of the
interest of the patrons or the public in the application.
§ 89-2 WATERFORD CODE § 89-5
89:152
§ 89-6. Term of license; transferability.
§ 89-7. Gambling prohibited; supervision.
§ 89-8. Investigation of premises and applicant.
The Chief of Police or his designee may make an investigation of the
premises and the applicant to determine the truth of the facts set forth
A. The number of amusement devices that may be located in any one
location shall be governed by the physical space available in any
business location for the use of said devices.
B. The following rules shall govern the location within all business
premises of amusement devices:
(1) Each device shall be located at least 10 feet from the entranceway
to the premises in which located and placed so that it does not
obstruct or interfere with the free passage to and from the
premises of patrons or users of the premises.
(2) Each device shall have an unobstructed perimeter zone or distance
of three feet around the sides of the three linear borders of said
device wherein the users of said device may use, watch or wait to
use said device. The area which is required hereunder for each
such machine shall not be encroached upon by the area of any
other machine. It is the intent of this chapter to prevent
overcrowding and to assure safe passage of the general public, and
each machine shall have its own unobstructed perimeter zone.
C. No games subject to this chapter may be operated within 500 feet of a
school or house of worship. This section of the chapter shall not be
construed to require the removal of any automatic amusement devices
which are in place before the effective date of this chapter.
A. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be for a term of one year,
commencing on January 1 and expiring on December 31 of the year of
issuance.40
B. A license may be transferred from one machine to another by giving
notice to the Township Clerk to that effect and giving a description of
the new machine, including manufacturer, model number and serial
number.
A. No person shall, in his place of business, permit gambling in connection
with the playing of any mechanical amusement game.
B. An amusement device may only be used or operated during the hours of
operation of the premises in which located and when the operator or an
employee of the operator is present in the premises.
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 89-5 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 89-8
89:153
in the application. The Fire Chief may inspect the premises to determine
whether said premises comply with the existing fire regulations of the
township. The Chief of Police, the Fire Marshal and the Construction Code
Official may, upon completion of their inspection, attach to said application
their reports, in writing. Upon receipt of said application and inspection
reports, if any, the Township Clerk shall submit the same for either approval
or disapproval to the Township Committee. If the applicant is approved, the
Township Clerk issues the necessary license upon the receipt of the license
fees as herein provided.
§ 89-9. Fees.41
§ 89-10. Revocation and display of license.
A. The following fees shall be charged and collected under the provisions
of this chapter in the amounts set in the Township of Waterford Fee
Schedule Ordinance42:
(1) A fee for the initial application for a license to bring automatic
amusement devices into the township.
(2) An initial license fee for each machine placed in the township.
(3) An annual renewal fee for each machine.
B. Nonprofit or charitable organizations shall be exempt from the payment
of the aforementioned fees, but shall comply with all other provisions of
this chapter.
A. Anytime after the granting of said license, the Township Committee
may, in the reasonable exercise of its discretion, revoke the same, if
after a hearing it finds:
(1) Gambling on the premises.
(2) False or incorrect material on the application or information
furnished by the applicant.
(3) Failure to maintain good and safe conduct on the premises.
(4) Violation of the laws of the State of New Jersey, of this chapter or
other ordinances of the Township of Waterford.
(5) The presence of the machines result in gambling, obscene and loud
language disturbing to the public or to the other patrons of the
premises, creating of a nuisance, excessive noise, litter, traffic or
rowdyism by the patron.
B. Posting and displaying. Any operator's license granted pursuant to this
chapter shall:
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
§ 89-8 WATERFORD CODE § 89-10
89:154
§ 89-11. Violations and penalties.43
Any person or persons, firm or corporation who or which violates any
provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days
or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination
thereof. Each day that a violation occurs or is committed shall constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 94
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 124, Art. II.
Land development and zoning — See Ch. 176.
Swine — See Ch. 313.
(1) Be posted in a conspicuous place of the location for which said
license was granted.
(2) State the name and address of the licensee.
(3) State the manufacturer, model number and serial number for each
and every mechanical amusement game for which said license was
issued.
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 89-10 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 89-11
89:155

ARTICLE I
Dogs
[Adopted 12-11-1974 as Ch. 65 of the 1974 Code]
§ 94-1. Definitions.
§ 94-2. License required.
No person shall keep or harbor any dog within the Township of Waterford in
the County of Camden without first obtaining a license therefor, to be issued
A. Terms defined. The words hereinafter defined shall have the meanings
herein indicated for the purposes of this Article as follows:
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of
seven months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except
a pet shop.
LEASH — Any leash, rope, chain, strap or other such restraining device.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, every person
having a right of property in such dog and every person who has such
dog in his keeping.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association
of persons.
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not
part of a kennel, wherein dogs for sale are kept or displayed.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs seized either
under the provisions of this Article or otherwise.
SHELTER — Any establishment where dogs are received, housed and
distributed without charge.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Waterford in the County of Camden.
B. Word usage.
(1) The words "and" and "or" may be used interchangeably and either
of the two may be applicable, whichever is more conducive towards
the effectuating of this Article.
(2) Personal pronouns shall mean either the singular or the plural,
whichever is applicable and conducive towards the effectuating of
this Article.
(3) The masculine, feminine or the neuter gender shall be implied,
whichever is appropriate and conducive for the effectuating of this
Article.
§ 94-1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 94-2
89:157
by the Clerk of the Township upon application by the owner and payment
of the prescribed fee, and no person shall keep or harbor any dog in said
Township except in compliance with the provisions of this Article.
§ 94-3. Application for license and registration tag. [Amended
12-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-24]
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age shall
on the last day of January in each year, and annually thereafter, apply for
and procure from the Clerk of the Township a license and official metal
registration tag for each such dog so owned, kept or harbored, and shall
place upon each such dog a collar or harness with the registration tag
securely fastened thereto.
§ 94-4. Fees. [Amended 12-22-1976 by Ord. No. 76-7; 11-25-1981 by
Ord. No. 81-12; 12-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-24]
A. Every person who shall own, keep or harbor any dog or dogs, either
male or female, within the boundaries of the Township of Waterford,
shall, before the 31st day of January of each year, pay to the Township
Clerk for licensing each dog the sum as set forth in the Township Fee
Schedule Ordinance,44and, in addition thereto, shall also pay the sum
for a registration tag, plus a surcharge for the State of New Jersey
PILOT Clinic Fund for a total as set forth in the Township Fee Schedule
Ordinance. Additionally, for any dog of reproduction age which has not
had its reproductive capacity permanently altered through sterilization,
there shall be an additional surcharge as set forth in the Township Fee
Schedule Ordinance, to be paid to the State of New Jersey PILOT Clinic
Fund. All such fees shall be paid annually for the renewals of such
licenses and registration tags. Any person who is required to but fails to
obtain a renewal license on or before April 30 of each year shall pay, in
addition to the fees prescribed by this section for such licenses or
renewal, a late charge as set forth in the Township Fee Schedule
Ordinance. Upon payment of the appropriate fees, the Township Clerk
shall issue to the applicant a license tag for each such dog, the same to
be securely fastened to the licensed dog by means of a collar or
harness. Any person applying for the license and registration tag for a
dog determined to be potentially dangerous pursuant to N.J.S.A.
4:19-17 et. seq. of the laws of the State of New Jersey shall pay an
annual fee as set forth in the Township Fee Schedule Ordinance.45
[Amended 3-13-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-4]
B. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "Seeing
Eye dogs," dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly
known as "service dogs" or dogs used to assist deaf persons and
commonly known as "hearing ear dogs" shall be licensed and registered
as any other dog, except that the owner or keeper of such dog shall not
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
45.Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
§ 94-2 WATERFORD CODE § 94-4
89:158
§ 94-5. Application information.
License forms and uniform official metal registration tags designed by
the State Department of Health shall be issued and shall be numbered
serially and shall bear the year of issuance and the name of the Township
of Waterford. The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and
markings of the dog for which license and registration are sought, and
whether it is of a long-haired or short-haired variety; also the name, street
and post office address of the owner and the person who shall keep or
harbor such dog. The information on said application and the registration
number issued for the dog shall be preserved for a period of three years by
the Clerk of the Township. In addition, he shall forward similar information
to said Department of Health.
§ 94-6. Dogs attaining licensing age.
The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog
which attains the licensing age shall make application for a license and
registration tag for such dog within 10 days after such acquisition or age
attainment.
§ 94-7. Information forwarded to State Department of Health.
The Clerk of the Township of Waterford shall forward to the State
Department of Health each month, on forms furnished by the Department,
the information contained in said application.
§ 94-8. Dogs from other states.
§ 94-9. Removal of registration tags restricted.
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove a
registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of the owner,
be required to pay any fee therefor and shall be excluded from any
other provisions of this Article.
A. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township of
Waterford in the County of Camden any dog licensed in another state
for the current year and bearing a registration tag, and who shall keep
the same or permit the same to be kept within the township for a period
of more than 90 days, shall immediately apply for a license and
registration tag for each such dog, unless such dog is licensed under
§ 94-10 of this Article.
B. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the township
any unlicensed dog and shall keep the same or permit the same to be
kept within the township for a period of more than 10 days shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog,
unless such dog is licensed under § 94-10 of this Article.
§ 94-4 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 94-9
89:159
nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not
issued.
§ 94-10. Kennels and pet shops.
§ 94-11. Fees for kennels. [Amended 12-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-24;
3-13-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-4]
The annual license fee for a kennel for 10 dogs or less and for more than
10 dogs shall be as set forth in the Township Fee Schedule Ordinance.46 The
annual license fee for a pet shop shall be as set forth in the Township Fee
Schedule Ordinance.47 No fee shall be charged for a shelter or pound.
A. No new licenses for kennels, pet shops, shelters or pounds shall be
issued after the date of the adoption of this subsection. Those licenses
existing at the time of the adoption of this subsection may be renewed
in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
B. Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, pet
shop, shelter or pound shall apply to the Clerk of the township for a
license entitling him to keep or operate such establishment.
C. The application shall describe the premises where the establishment is
located or is proposed to be located and the purpose or purposes for
which it is to be maintained and shall be accompanied by the written
approval of the Health Officer of the Board of Health of the township,
showing compliance with the local and state rules and regulations
governing location of and sanitation at such establishments.
D. All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall state
the purpose for which the establishment is maintained, and all such
licenses shall expire on the last day of June of each year and be subject
to revocation by the Township Committee on recommendations of the
State Department of Health or the Board of Health of the township for
failure to comply with the rules and regulations of the State
Department of Health or the Board of Health of the township governing
the same after the owner has been afforded a hearing by either the
State Department of Health or the Board of Health of the Township.
[Amended 12-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-24]
E. Any person holding such license shall not be required to secure
individual licenses for dogs owned by such licensee and kept at such
establishments. Such licenses shall not be transferable to another
owner or different premises.
46.Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
47.Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
§ 94-9 WATERFORD CODE § 94-12
89:160
§ 94-12. Leash control.
No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be permitted off
such premises except on leash or in a crate or other safe control.
§ 94-13. Disposition of moneys collected; rabies.
§ 94-14. Lists of kennels, shelters, pet shops and pounds sent to
state.
The Clerk of the Township shall forward to the State Department of Health
a list of all kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds licensed within 30 days
after the licenses therefor are issued, which list shall include the name and
address of the licensee and the kind of license issued.
§ 94-15. Annual canvass. [Amended 12-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-24]
The official appointed by the Township Committee shall annually cause
a canvass to be made of all dogs owned, kept or harbored within the
township and shall report on or before September 1 of each year to the
Clerk of the township, the Board of Health of the township and to the State
Department of Health the results thereof, setting forth in separate columns
the names and addresses of persons owning, keeping or harboring such
dogs, the number of licensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each of said
persons, together with the registration numbers of each of said dogs, and
A. License fees and other moneys collected or received under the
provisions of this Article, except registration tag fees, shall be
forwarded to the Treasurer of the Township within 30 days after
collection or receipt and shall be placed in a special account separate
from any of the other accounts of the Township and which shall be used
for the following purposes only: for collecting, keeping and disposing of
dogs liable to seizure under this Article; for local prevention and control
of rabies, and providing antirabic treatment under the direction of the
Local Board of Health for any person known or suspected to have been
exposed to rabies; for all other purposes prescribed by the statutes of
New Jersey governing the subject; and for administering the provisions
of this Article.
B. Any unexpended balance remaining in such special account shall be
retained therein until the end of the third fiscal year following and may
be used for any of the purposes set forth in this section. At the end of
said third fiscal year following and at the end of each fiscal year
thereafter, there shall be transferred from such special account to the
general funds of the Township any amount then in such account which
is in excess of the total amount paid into said special account during the
last two fiscal years next preceding.
C. The registration tag fee for each dog shall be forwarded within 30 days
after collection by the Clerk to the State Department of Health.
[Amended 12-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-24]
§ 94-12 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 94-15
89:161
the number of unlicensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each of said
persons, together with a complete description of each of said unlicensed
dogs.
§ 94-16. Enforcement of provisions; animal control officers.48
The Chief of Police of the Township of Waterford shall cause the provisions
of this Article to be enforced as therein provided. If it so desires, the
Township Committee shall have the power to appoint one or more persons,
to be known as "animal control officers," who may impound unlicensed dogs
running at large in violation of the provisions of this Article.
§ 94-17. Impoundment; notices of impoundment; disposition.
A. The Chief of Police of the Township of Waterford, or any person
appointed for the purpose by the Township Committee of the Township
of Waterford, shall take into custody and impound or cause to be taken
into custody and impounded and thereafter destroyed or offered for
adoption, as provided in this section:49
(1) Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog, without a leash and not accompanied by the
owner or any person authorized by the owner, which said official or
his agent or agents have reason to believe is a stray dog.
(2) Any dog off the premises of the owner or the person keeping or
harboring said dog without a current registration tag on his collar.
(3) Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the
person keeping or harboring said dog.
B. If any dog so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed thereon
or attached thereto the name and address of any person on a
registration tag or the owner or the person keeping or harboring said
dog is known, the Chief of Police or any person authorized by him in
that behalf or the Poundmaster, if there is one, shall forthwith serve on
the person whose address is given on the collar or on the owner or the
person keeping or harboring said dog, if known, a notice, in writing,
stating that the dog has been seized and will be liable to be offered for
adoption or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after the service
of the notice.50
C. A notice under this section may be served either by delivering it to the
person on whom it is to be served or by leaving it at the person's usual
or last known place of abode or at the address given on the collar or by
forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter addressed to that person at his
usual or last known place of abode or to the address given on the collar.
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 94-15 WATERFORD CODE § 94-17
89:162
§ 94-18. Right to enter upon premises.
Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this article is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
impounding any dog or dogs which he may lawfully seize and impound when
such officer or agent is in immediate pursuit of such dog or dogs, except
upon the premises of the owner of the dog if said owner is present and
forbids the same.
§ 94-19. Interference with person performing official duties.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this article.
§ 94-20. Dogs at large.
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit it to
run at large upon the public streets or in any public park or in any public
building or in any other public place within the Township of Waterford in
the County of Camden.
§ 94-21. Dogs in public places controlled by leash.
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit it
to be upon the public streets or in any of the public places of the Township
of Waterford unless such dog is accompanied by a person and is securely
confined and controlled by an adequate leash not more than six feet long.
§ 94-22. Prohibited activities and treatment. [Amended 2-22-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-5]
D. When any dog so seized has been detained for seven days after notice,
when notice can be given as above set forth, or has been detained for
seven days after seizure, when notice has not been and cannot be given
as above set forth, and if the owner or person keeping or harboring said
dog has not claimed said dog and paid a redemption fee, plus a daily
maintenance fee, if any, per day, as set forth in the Township Fee
Schedule Ordinance,51 and if the dog is unlicensed at the time of seizure
and the owner or person keeping or harboring said dog has not
produced a license and registration tag for said dog, the Chief of Police
or the Poundmaster may cause the dog to be destroyed in a manner
causing as little pain as possible. [Amended 12-11-1996 by Ord. No.
96-24]
A. Muzzling. The Township Committee may designate any time during
which dogs outside the premises shall be muzzled, such designation to
be by publication at least three times in a newspaper in which legal
notices of the Township may be published, and after such publication no
person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall permit it upon a public
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
§ 94-17 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 94-22
89:163
§ 94-23. Damaging property.
No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall permit or suffer it to do
any injury or to do any damage or to commit any nuisance upon the property
of others.
§ 94-24. Vicious dogs.
A dog which has attacked or bitten any human being or which habitually
attacks other dogs or domestic animals is hereby defined to be vicious for
the purpose of this section, unless the facts indicate that such attack or dog
bite resulted from some act on the part of the person bitten or attacked
which provoked the incident. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police52 or
the Poundmaster to have a dog which has attacked or bitten a human being
impounded if the owner thereof is unknown (or to quarantine such dog at
the home of the owner, if known) for a period of 10 days. If the Chief of
Police or the Poundmaster deems a dog to be vicious, it shall be his duty to
prefer charges in the Municipal Court against the owner thereof, if known,
highway, public place or outside the premises occupied by the owner
during the period designated unless such dog wears a muzzle securely
fastened over its jaws in such a manner that it cannot bite.
B. Care of animals. No owner, caretaker, guardian or handler shall
withhold proper shelter, protection from weather, veterinary care and
immune care to any animal. No owner, caretaker, guardian or handler
shall fail to provide his or her animal with sufficient food and drinkable
water on a daily basis. Food and drinkable water must be in an animal
food consumption or water consumption type container, feeder or
waterer.
C. Unnecessary suffering and cruelty. No animal shall be subjected to
unnecessary suffering and cruelty such as subjecting the animal to
prolonged fear, injury, pain or physical abuse. Interaction with humans
and other animals shall not be unreasonably withheld. Any individual,
currently licensed by the State Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners
to practice veterinary medicine, who is acting within his or her scope of
practice to deliver acceptable and medically sound veterinary care to
an animal shall be exempt from this subsection.
D. Extreme weather. In extreme weather below 32° and above 95° and in
major storms where evacuation is recommended, all outdoor dogs and
indoor/outdoor cats (with the exception of feral cats) must be brought
indoors, whether tethered or kenneled, unless the kennel is a
conditioned space where the animal is protected from this type of
adverse weather. A conditioned space is an area that a person should
reasonably know would not pose an adverse risk to the health or safety
of the animal based on the animal's size, physical condition or thickness
of the animal's hair or fur.
52.Editor's Note: See Ch. 50, Police Department.
§ 94-22 WATERFORD CODE § 94-24
89:164
alleging the vicious nature of the dog. If the Municipal Court Judge finds
the evidence presented substantiates such charge, he shall order the dog
destroyed by the Chief of Police or the Poundmaster at the end of the tenday
quarantine or impounded for an additional ten-day period, at the end
of which the dog shall be examined by a licensed veterinarian who shall
ascertain whether the dog is rabid and shall issue a certificate as to its
condition to the Poundmaster.
§ 94-25. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-11-1996 by Ord. No.
96-24; 2-22-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
A. Any person who violates or who fails or refuses to comply with this
article or with the rules and regulations promulgated by the State
Department of Health governing the sanitary conduct and operation of
kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds to preserve sanitation therein
and to prevent the spreading of rabies and other diseases of dogs within
and from such establishments shall be liable to a penalty of not less
than $5 nor more than $50.
B. For any violation of this article other than a kennel, shelter or pet shop,
the penalty shall be assessed in accordance with § 1-15 of the Waterford
Township Code unless a penalty is specifically stated otherwise for a
particular violation.
C. Each and every violation of and nonconformance with this article or
each day that any provision of this article shall have been violated shall
be construed as a separate and distinct violation thereof.
§ 94-24 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 94-25
89:165

ARTICLE II
(Reserved)53
§ 94-26. through § 94-30 (Reserved)
53.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Horses, adopted 8-10-1983 by Ord. No. 83-9 (Ch. 75 of the
1974 Code), as amended, was repealed 9-26-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-29. See now § 176-48,
Animals.
§ 94-26 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 94-26
89:167

ARTICLE III
Dog Waste
[Adopted 10-25-1995 as Ord. No. 95-22]
§ 94-31. Soiling private property prohibited.
No person shall permit a dog owned by that person or under said person's
control or supervision to defecate upon private property not belonging to
such person, unless the person shall have the permission of the property
owner.
§ 94-32. Soiling public property prohibited.
No person shall permit a dog owned by that person or under that person's
control or supervision to defecate upon any public property.
§ 94-33. Immediate removal of waste.
It shall be a complete defense to violations of §§ 94-31 and 94-32 of this
Article that a person shall have immediately removed such defecation and
disposed of it in a sanitary manner.
§ 94-34. Sanitary disposal defined.
Disposition in a sanitary manner shall include taking the feces home for
disposition or wrapping the feces and placing it in a trash can owned by
the person or a trash can on public property. Disposition of the feces shall
not include burial, dispersal (unless such burial or dispersal is upon the
property of the person doing the burial or dispersal), placement in a storm
sewer drain or placing unwrapped feces in a trash can.
§ 94-35. Accumulation of waste on private property prohibited.
Defecation on own property. No person shall permit the accumulation of
animal feces upon that person's property or property occupied by that
person to the extent that the odor becomes noticeable or a nuisance to any
adjoining property owner or in such manner as will affect the health, safety
and welfare of the public.
§ 94-36. Complaints of violations.
In the event of a violation occurring on private property, a complaint may be
filed by the owner or lessee of said property. In the event of such a violation
occurring on public property, walkways or parks, a complaint may be filed
by a witness to such act.
§ 94-37. Exceptions for Seeing Eye dogs.
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to blind person who use their
dogs as guides.
§ 94-31 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 94-38
89:169
§ 94-38. Violations and penalties.
Any person found to be in violation of the provisions of this Article shall
be subject to a fine not to exceed $50 for the first offense. For a second or
subsequent offense the fine shall not exceed $100
§ 94-38 WATERFORD CODE § 94-38
89:170
ARTICLE IV
Pet Waste
[Adopted 4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3]
§ 94-39. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements for the proper
disposal of pet solid waste in the Township of Waterford, so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to
comply.
§ 94-40. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — The pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
§ 94-41. Requirement for disposal.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 94-39 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 94-42
89:171
§ 94-42. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this article while such animal is being
used for that purpose.
§ 94-43. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or other
municipal officials of the Township of Waterford.
§ 94-44. Violations and penalties.
Any person, entity or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, before the Municipal Court
of the Township of Waterford, be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both,
in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge before whom such defendant
shall be convicted. A separate offense may be deemed committed on each
day that a violation occurs or continues.
§ 94-42 WATERFORD CODE § 94-44
89:172
ARTICLE V
Wildlife Feeding
[Adopted 4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-7]
§ 94-45. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife
in any public park or on any other property owned or operated by the
Township of Waterford, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 94-46. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are not domesticated.
§ 94-47. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any public street or any other
property owned or operated by the Township of Waterford, any wildlife,
excluding confined wildlife, such as wildlife confined in rehabilitation
centers or environmental education centers.
§ 94-48. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or other
municipal officials of the Township of Waterford .
§ 94-49. Violations and penalties.
Any person, entity or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, before the Municipal Court
of the Township of Waterford, be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both,
in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge before whom such defendant
shall be convicted. A separate offense may be deemed committed on each
day that a violation occurs or continues.
§ 94-45 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 94-49
89:173

ARTICLE VI
Pet Shop Sales of Animals From Puppy and Kitten Mills
[Adopted 10-28-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-16]
§ 94-50. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CARE FACILITY — An animal control center or animal shelter
maintained by or under contract with any state, county, or municipality,
whose mission and practice is, in whole or significant part, the rescue and
placement of animals in permanent homes or rescue organizations.
ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION — Any not-for-profit organization which
has tax-exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal
Revenue Code, whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant
part, the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes.
CAT — A member of the species of domestic cat, Felis catus.
DOG — A member of the species of domestic dog, Canis familiaris.
OFFER FOR SALE — To sell, offer for sale or adoption, advertise for the sale
of, barter, auction, give away or otherwise dispose of a dog or cat.
PET SHOP — A retail establishment where dogs and cats are sold,
exchanged, bartered or offered for sale as pet animals to the general public
at retail. Such definition shall not include an animal care facility or animal
rescue organization, as defined.
§ 94-51. Restrictions on sale of animals.
§ 94-52. Enforcement authority.
Upon adoption of this article, enforcement authority is delegated to the
County of Camden which shall provide enforcement through the County
Department of Health and Human Services.
A. A pet shop may offer for sale only those dogs and cats that the pet shop
has obtained from or displays in cooperation with:
(1) An animal care facility; or
(2) An animal rescue organization.
B. A pet shop shall not offer for sale a dog or cat that is younger than eight
weeks old.
§ 94-50 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 94-52
89:175
Chapter 96
BACKGROUND CHECKS
§ 94-52 WATERFORD CODE § 94-52
89:176
ARTICLE I
Volunteer Sports Organizations
[Adopted 12-28-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-24]
§ 96-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD AND FINGERPRINT BACKGROUND CHECK
— A determination of whether a person has a criminal record by crossreferencing
that person's name and fingerprints with those on file with
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Identification Division, and/or the New
Jersey State Bureau of Identification in the Division of State Police.
NONSPONSORED YOUTH PROGRAMS — Any youth programs not
sponsored by the Township of Waterford but that utilize municipal facilities
or have affiliation with a Township-sponsored youth program and have
contact with persons under the age of 18 years.
TOWNSHIP-SPONSORED YOUTH PROGRAMS — Any programs sponsored
by the Township of Waterford, including the Waterford Township Athletic
Association and any and all leagues, boards and commissions falling within
the purview of or acting for or on behalf of the Township of Waterford and
having contact with persons under the age of 18 years.
YOUTH PROGRAMS — Any programs that allow for participation in
activities by those persons under 18 years of age. Activities may include, but
are not limited to, sporting activities, passive recreation groups, clubs or
camps and trips or other activities whereby some control and responsibility
for persons under 18 years of age is assigned to some person acting for or
on behalf of the Township of Waterford other than a parent or caregiver.
§ 96-2. Nonsponsored youth programs: criminal background checks
required for use of Waterford Township facilities.
A. Prior to any club or organization, not defined as a Township-sponsored
youth program, being authorized to use Township-owned facilities for
functions participated in by children, all adults (those persons 18 years
of age or older) in any way assisting in the function, including but not
limited to coaches, assistant coaches, or similar positions, shall submit
sufficient information on forms supplied by the Waterford Township
Police Department from the New Jersey State Police for the purpose of
obtaining a criminal history background check with the State Bureau of
Identification in the New Jersey State Police. Applications for
background check shall be processed by the Waterford Township Chief
of Police. The individual applying for the background check shall
authorize the Waterford Township Chief of Police to be the recipient of
the affirmative or negative response from the State Police based upon
the findings of the background check.
§ 96-1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 96-2
89:177
§ 96-3. Township-sponsored youth programs: background checks.
B. The submission of background check findings must be based upon a
check performed within two years of the start of use of the Townshipowned
facility. In the case of coaches performing duties as employees of
a school district, the policy of background checks adopted by the
individual school district shall be used to establish eligibility for use of
Township-owned facilities. In all cases, the background check must
comply with the provisions of any applicable laws regarding same, but
not less detailed that those performed by the Township for individuals
involved in administering Township-sponsored youth programs. The
cost of the background checks for individuals not administering a
Township-Sponsored youth program shall be borne by the individual or
program with which they are participating.
A. All adults, (those persons 18 years of age or older), including but not
limited to coaches, assistant coaches, or similar positions, involved in
educating, directing or supervising youth and in any way assisting in a
Waterford Township-sponsored function participated in by children
shall submit sufficient information on forms supplied by the Waterford
Township Police Department from the New Jersey State Police for the
purpose of obtaining a criminal history background check with the
State Bureau of Identification in the New Jersey State Police.
Applications for background checks shall be processed by the
Waterford Township Chief of Police. The individual applying for the
background check shall authorize the Waterford Township Chief of
Police to be the recipient of the affirmative or negative response from
the State Police based upon the findings of the background check.
Individuals involved in Waterford Township-sponsored youth functions,
and who are required to undergo background checks based upon this
article, shall not be responsible for the costs involved with obtaining the
criminal background check. The Township of Waterford shall bear the
costs for the background checks for individuals qualified under this
section.
B. All league officers and/or those individuals in charge of each recreation
program are required to ensure compliance with this article for that
league or program. The president or leader of each recreation program
shall file an annual roster of individuals that are required to participate
in the background check procedures of this article through the Chief of
Police to the Waterford Township Police Department Records Bureau in
order to properly maintain the system. The roster shall be on forms
supplied by the Township of Waterford and shall contain a certification
as to the accuracy and completeness of the roster and individual names.
Any person who knowingly certifies a background check roster that
excludes an individual required to be checked shall be in violation of
this article and laws regarding false swearing.
§ 96-2 WATERFORD CODE § 96-4
89:178
§ 96-4. Qualifications.
Individuals engaged in providing recreation opportunities for, or on behalf
of, the Township of Waterford shall be issued identification cards with
appropriate expirations based upon the date of their individual background
check. Individuals issued identification cards are required to display their
card while in performance of their duty involving youth programs.
§ 96-5. Disqualification.
A. Upon receipt of a completed background check conducted by the State
Bureau of Identification in the New Jersey State Police and/or the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Identification Division, the Waterford
Township Chief of Police shall notify the applicant and the president or
leader of the recreation program of affirmative or negative results. The
determination of the State Police and/or Federal Bureau of
Investigation shall be based upon § 96-5B of this article. Details in the
background check that result in a negative determination shall not be
disclosed to any other Township official or employee and are only
available to the applicant upon making a formal request to the State
Bureau of Investigation.
B. In the event the criminal background check reveals any prior
convictions for crimes or offenses which negatively impact the health,
safety and welfare of children, said person shall not be qualified to
participate in any capacity in any function for persons under the age of
18 years held at any Township-owned facilities. Such offenses shall
include, but not be limited to:
(1) In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
(a) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq.,
N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq., N.J.S.A.
2C:14-1 et seq. or N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq.;
(b) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those
crimes and disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A.
2C:24-1 et seq.;
(c) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey statues; or
(d) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
dangerous substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title
2C of the New Jersey statutes, except Paragraph (4) of
Subsection a of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10.
(2) In any other state jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in New
Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly persons
offenses described in Subsection B(1) of this section.
§ 96-4 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 96-5
89:179
§ 96-6. Frequency of background checks; interim approvals.
§ 96-7. Privacy.
Any and all criminal background checks obtained from the State Bureau
of Identification in the New Jersey State Police or the Federal Bureau
of Investigation shall be filed and maintained in a secured and locked
cabinet or room at the Waterford Police Department Records Bureau in the
Criminal Investigation Section, which shall take custody of and maintain
such records, which shall not be available to the public. The Waterford
Township Police Department personnel in the Records Bureau shall take
C. The list of crimes and violations contained in this section is for
illustrative purposes only and shall not be construed as a limitation on
those criminal activities or violations that would be grounds to
disqualify a person from assisting with youth-related activities as
indicated herein.
D. Refusal by individuals required to submit to background checks will
result in an immediate dismissal of the individual from any Townshipsponsored
activities requiring background checks. In addition, refusal
to comply with this article by any individual falling within the scope of
requirements for nonsponsored youth programs will forfeit that
individual's ability to participate with the respective program. Refusals
of a nonsponsored youth program to subscribe to the requirements of
this article shall forfeit that program's ability to use municipal facilities.
A. All nonsponsored youth programs that have individuals subject to this
article shall supply background checks for all of its participants prior to
the individual being able to participate at any function at a Townshipowned
facility to the extent covered by this article. Thereafter, every
two years a new background check procedure shall be required.
B. Township-sponsored youth programs.
(1) All Township-sponsored youth programs that have individuals
subject to this article shall direct those individuals to the Waterford
Township Police Department for the background check submission
forms, which shall be processed through the Chief of Police prior to
the individual being able to participate in any function sponsored
by the Township of Waterford. Thereafter, every two years a new
background check shall be required.
(2) Individuals involved in Township-sponsored youth programs who
are required to undergo background checks shall be given an
interim approval for participation only after submission to the
Division of State Police for a background check. Interim approvals
shall only be valid for the period of time that it takes to receive
background checks results. Such interim approval shall not be valid
for a period of time exceeding 45 days. Only one interim approval
may be granted per individual.
§ 96-5 WATERFORD CODE § 96-7
89:180
appropriate steps to safeguard such records. The records shall be exempt
from public disclosure under the common law, the Open Public Records
Act and the New Jersey Right to Know Law.54 In addition, the Waterford
Township Chief of Police shall not reveal the affirmative or negative
response from the State Police based upon the findings of the background
check except as provided in this article. No Waterford Township official
or employee shall have access to the criminal background checks other
than individuals in the Waterford Township Police Department Records
Bureau, whose only access shall be to take custody of and maintain the
files as provided for in this section. The records shall only be retained for
such period of time as is necessary to serve their intended and authorized
purpose. The Waterford Township Chief of Police shall be the contact person
for Waterford Township for the VRO Program of the State Police.
§ 96-8. Violations and penalties.55
Any person violating or failing to comply with the provisions of this article,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $500
or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge.
54.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
55.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 1, Art. II, General Penalty.
§ 96-7 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 96-8
89:181
Chapter 100
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development and zoning — See Ch. 176. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 239.
§ 100-1. Numbering required.
The owner or occupant of every dwelling house, store, office building or
other building or structure which now fronts or may hereafter front upon
any public street within the Township of Waterford shall cause the street
number assigned to the property upon which said dwelling house, store,
office building or other building or structure is erected to be placed in
digital figures only.
§ 100-2. Determination of numbers; definition of lot.
It shall be the duty of the Tax Assessor to determine such numbers and
to delineate them on the Tax Maps; a lot of land, for the purpose of this
chapter, shall be a unit of the minimum width required for building purposes
on the street upon which it fronts by the Building, Zoning or Planning
Ordinances56 of the Township of Waterford.
§ 100-3. Determination of even and odd numbers; continuation of
sequence.
Even numbers shall be on the southerly and easterly sides of said streets
and odd numbers on the northerly and westerly sides of said streets.
Numbers of streets which continue in any other municipality shall, so far
as may be possible, be designed to conform to numbers established in said
municipality or to provide for a continuation of the numbering in said other
municipality when established.
§ 100-4. Display of number required.
The owner or owners of every building fronting on said streets shall apply to
the Tax Assessor for the correct number of the lot upon which such building
stands and shall at his own expense place and display such number on the
front of such building.
§ 100-5. Visibility of numbers.
Said number shall be of such size and material and placed in such a
substantial manner on the dwelling, store or other improvement so as to be
56.Editor's Note: See Ch. 176, Land Development and Zoning.
§ 96-8 WATERFORD CODE § 100-5
100:182
conspicuous and visible from the street, road, avenue, lane or way on which
it fronts or from which access to it is had.
§ 100-6. Visibility where premises set back deeply.
If said dwelling, store or other improvement has such setback location
that the provisions of § 100-5 cannot be complied with, then the owner or
occupant shall provide a post, rod or other type of fixture of a substantial
nature with the number affixed thereon and located on the premises so that
the number shall be conspicuous and visible from the street, road, avenue,
lane or way on which the premises front or from which access to it is had.
§ 100-7. Size of numbers.
§ 100-8. Enforcement.
The enforcement of this chapter shall be vested in the Bureau of Fire
Prevention, the Police Department57 and the Construction Official of the
Township of Waterford.
§ 100-9. Violations and penalties.58
Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subjected to a fine, in the discretion of the Judge
of the Municipal Court, of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not to exceed 90
days, or any combination thereof.
A. Dwellings. The number shall be placed in digital figures of at least three
inches in height within two feet of the main entrance or on the door.
B. Commercial and industrial. The number shall be placed in digital
figures of at least six inches in height within two feet of the main
entrance or on the door.
C. More than one occupant. Where there is more than one occupant in the
same building, each street level occupant is to have an alphabetical
designation included in the street address.
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. 50, Police Department.
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 100-5 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 100-9
100:183
Chapter 103
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code Enforcement Officer — See Ch. 40, Art.
I.
Contractors — See Ch. 106.
Fees — See Ch. 124, Art. II.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 137.
Housing standards — See Ch. 162.
Land development and zoning — See Ch. 176.
§ 103-1. Establishment of local agency; subcode officials.
A. There is hereby established in the Township of Waterford a State
Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency, to be known as the
"Waterford Township Construction Code Agency," consisting of a
Construction Official, Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode
Official, Fire Subcode Official and Electrical Subcode Official and such
other subcode officials for such additional subcodes as the Construction
Commission of the Department of Community Affairs, State of New
Jersey, shall hereinafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction
Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief administrator of the
enforcing agency.
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et
seq. and the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, provided that,
in lieu of any particular subcode official, an on-site inspection agency
may be retained by contract pursuant to the aforementioned
regulations. More than one such official position may be held by the
same person, provided that such person is qualified pursuant to N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq. and the regulations promulgated thereunder to hold
each such position.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location, except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
D. The Township of Waterford shall enforce the Uniform Construction
Code as set forth in the applicable statutes and administrative
regulations, as amended, and the provisions of the BOCA Code as are
presently in effect on the date of the adoption of this section and as said
code may be subsequently amended. [Added 11-20-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-14]
§ 100-9 WATERFORD CODE § 103-2
103:184
§ 103-2. Board of Appeals.
The Waterford Township governing body establishes the Camden County
Board of Appeals to hear all appeals from decisions of the enforcing
agencies.
§ 103-3. Fees. [Amended 1-14-1987 by Ord. No. 86-14; 12-9-1987 by
Ord. No. 87-27; 3-14-1990 by Ord. No. 90-3; 3-27-1991 by Ord. No.
91-3; 2-12-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1; 3-9-1994 by Ord. No. 94-1;
5-10-1995 by Ord. No. 95-9; 12-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-24]
The Uniform Construction Code fees shall be as set forth in the Township
Fee Schedule Ordinance.59
§ 103-4. Report of Construction Official.
The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the governing body of the Township of Waterford,
biannually, a report recommending a fee schedule based on the operating
expenses of the agency and any other expenses of the municipality fairly
attributable to the enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code
Act.60
Chapter 106
CONTRACTORS, REGISTRATION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 103.
Fees — See Ch. 124, Art. II.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 137.
Housing standards — See Ch. 162.
Land development and zoning — See Ch. 176.
§ 106-1. Registration required; exception.
A. Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business, erecting,
altering, repairing, restoring, re-roofing, residing, moving or
demolishing the whole or any part of the buildings or structures, or
engaged in the construction and installation of swimming pools, or
engaged in the business of erecting or altering signs, for any of which a
construction permit is required by the applicable ordinances of the
Township of Waterford, New Jersey Statutes and the Uniform
Construction Code shall be required to register the name of such
person or firm or corporation with the Construction Office.
59.Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
60.Editor's Note: Former § 54-5, Violations and penalties, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 12-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-24. See now N.J.S.A. 52:27D-138.
§ 103-2 CONTRACTORS, REGISTRATION OF § 106-1
106:185
§ 106-2. Application procedures.
B. The resident property owner of a building or structure applying for a
construction permit required herein shall not be required to register,
provided that he does his own work without use of any contractor and
executes a sworn statement to this effect on forms supplied by the
Construction Office.
A. Applicants for the registration of General Contractors shall be
submitted to the Construction Office on forms supplied by the office and
shall include, in addition to any other pertinent information the office
may deem necessary:
(1) A statement giving the name or corporate or firm name of the
contractor.
(2) In the case of a firm, corporation or partnership, the name and
address of the principal office of said firm, corporation, the names
and addresses of all officers, directors, managerial employees and
stockholders owning, of record or beneficially, 5% or more of the
outstanding stock of any class of said corporation.
(3) In the case of a partnership, the names and addresses of all
partners, whether general, special or limited.
(4) Certification of liability insurance: One million dollars for a general
contractor and not less than $500,000 for a subcontractor.
[Amended 5-22-1996 by Ord. No. 96-13]
(5) Federal identification number and/or social security number.
B. Additional information.
(1) This application shall also contain the number of years such person,
firm or corporation has been in the contracting business at the
current location or any prior locations, including the address of any
prior location, if any.
(2) The application shall indicate, for both the current and prior
periods of time or locations at which a contracting business has
been conducted, all other former trade names, if any, by which any
such contracting business was conducted, or in which any of the
persons listed in answer to Subsection A(2) above for each such
prior business.
(3) The applicant shall state in which class he desires to be registered,
choosing one or more of the classes designated in § 106-5 of this
chapter.
(4) The applicant shall state the date of expiration of the license.
C. The application shall be approved or disapproved within 10 days after
filing or at the next regularly scheduled Township Committee meeting
§ 106-1 WATERFORD CODE § 106-2
106:186
§ 106-3. Fees.
§ 106-4. Work standards.
All work shall be done in accordance with the Construction Codes adopted
by the Township of Waterford and other Codes and Ordinances thereof
applicable to the construction activities described in § 106-1A hereof, and
must be done in a good and workmanlike manner in accordance with
applicable plans and specifications approved by the Construction Office.
§ 106-5. Classes of registration. [Amended 3-13-1996 by Ord. No.
96-6]
For the purposes of this chapter, there shall be the following classes of
registration:
in the case of a general contractor's license according to the following
criteria:
(1) General contractor: approval of the governing body.
(2) Subcontractor/contractor: approval of the Township Administrator
and Construction Code Official.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall be registered under this chapter, or
be re-registered after revocation of registration under § 106-7 of this
chapter unless and until there has been a determination by the
Construction Official that the applicant is capable of compliance with
the requirements hereof and has demonstrated sufficient capability and
proficiency in its past business history to justify a reasonable belief that
such compliance will occur, and unless and until there is paid to the
Construction Official, to the order of the Township of Waterford, a fee in
compliance with the Fee Schedule.61
B. After registration and for so long as the registration is not revoked
under § 106-7 of this chapter, each contractor defined in § 106-5 of this
chapter shall be required to re-register every third year fulfilling the
original requirements outlined in this chapter.
C. Any contractor who holds a valid contractor's license in the Township of
Waterford prior to adoption of this chapter shall apply for a new
contractor's license pursuant to this chapter by March 1, 1995. The
appropriate fee to be charged shall be reduced by the fee originally
charged the applicant for a contractor's license.
D. Any person, firm or corporation whose registration has been revoked
shall be presumed not capable or proficient in his trade and shall not be
permitted to re-register under this chapter.
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
§ 106-2 CONTRACTORS, REGISTRATION OF § 106-5
106:187
§ 106-6. Issuance of construction permits.
No building permit shall be issued by the Construction Office of the
Township of Waterford for the erection, construction, reconstruction,
structural alteration or removal of any building or structure to anyone
except a duly licensed contractor or his duly authorized agent, under the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 106-7. Grounds for revocation of registration.
The Construction Office of the Township of Waterford shall revoke the
registration of any contractor licensed hereunder who shall be guilty of any
one or more of the following acts or omissions:
A. General contractor -- A contractor who is proficient in the construction
of a building or structure from start to finish and the alteration, addition
to or repair of any building or structure. This class contractor shall be
equipped to handle such work either by and through his own
organization or appropriate subcontractors' work as if performed or to
be performed directly by the general contractor.
B. Subcontractor -- A contractor who is proficient in the construction of a
building or structure from start to finish and the alteration, addition to
or repair of any building or structure. This class of contractor shall be
equipped to handle such work by and through his own work or his own
organization of employees.
C. Roofing and siding contractor -- A contractor who is engaged in the
business of or who is proficient in applying roofing and siding materials
to existing or new buildings or structures.
D. Demolition contractor -- A Contractor who is engaged in the business of
and who is proficient in the demolishing of any building or structure in
the whole or in part.
E. Moving contractor -- A contractor who is engaged in the business of or
who is proficient in the moving of any building or structure.
F. Swimming pool contractor -- A contractor who is engaged in the
business of or who is proficient in the installation of swimming pools,
their equipment and appurtenances.
G. Sign or billboard contractor -- A contractor who is engaged in the
business of or who is proficient in the erection, alteration or
maintenance of signs or billboards.
H. Miscellaneous contractor -- A contractor who is proficient in work of a
special character as determined by the Construction Official.
A. Fraud or misrepresentation or concealment of a material fact in the
information given upon initial registration or upon re-registration after
revocation.
§ 106-5 WATERFORD CODE § 106-7
106:188
§ 106-8. Procedure for revocation.
B. Violation of the building, plumbing, electrical, fire prevention, health
codes or any other code adopted by the Township of Waterford or of any
other ordinance or statute that governs the activities or nature of work
performed by the contractor.
C. Material and substantial breach of contract with the owner or
purchaser.
D. Filing of a voluntary or involuntary petition in bankruptcy or insolvency
proceeding.
A. The Construction Official on this own initiative and on the forms to be
prescribed by the official, or any person, firm or corporation which has
entered into an agreement for work, either verbal or written, with any
contractor registered hereunder, may file a complaint against any
registered contractor by the filing of same with the Construction Office.
Such complaint shall be in writing and signed on the complaint form
provided by the Construction Office by the person filing the same. The
complaint shall contain a statement of facts setting forth the specific
facts relating to the violation of this chapter or of the Township of
Waterford, plumbing, electrical, fire prevention or health codes, or any
other township ordinance or statute pertaining to building,
construction or the registered contractor's activities.
B. Upon a complaint being filed in the manner and form herein prescribed,
the Construction Official shall forthwith issue a notice, in writing,
directing the contractor in question to file a written answer within 10
days after the service of notice, answering the charges or showing
cause, if any, why his registration should not be revoked. A copy of the
complaint shall be served with said notice.
C. Failure of the contractor in question to file a written answer within said
10 days may be deemed an admission by him of the commission of the
act or violations cited in the complaint, and his license thereupon may
be revoked forthwith by the Construction Official without further
evidence.
D. In the event that the contractor in question shall file a written answer
within the time period prescribed in the notice, a hearing shall be
scheduled, notice of which shall be served no less than 10 days prior to
the date fixed for the hearing. Said hearing shall be held by and before
the Construction Official of the Township of Waterford, who shall
thereafter make all decisions as to fact and law concerning revocation
of the registration. At the hearing, the Construction Official and
licensee shall appear personally, and the licensee shall have the right to
appear personally or be represented by counsel and cross-examine
witnesses and produce witnesses and evidence in his behalf. Counsel is
required if the licensee is a corporation. A certified court reporter shall
be present at the contractor's expense, and a complete transcript shall
§ 106-7 CONTRACTORS, REGISTRATION OF § 106-8
106:189
§ 106-9. Appeals.
Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by any action of the Construction
Official taken pursuant to this chapter shall have the right of appeal to
the Township Committee of the Township of Waterford. Such appeal shall
be taken by filing with the Township Clerk, within 10 days after notice of
revocation or other action complained of, a written statement setting forth
fully the grounds for appeal. The Township Committee shall thereafter set
a time and place for hearing the appeal upon at least 10 days prior written
notice to the appellant. The decision and order of the Township Committee
on such appeal shall be final and conclusive and shall be based on the
evidence presented at the hearing before the Construction Official, with no
further evidence to be permitted.
§ 106-10. Service of notices.
Whenever notice is required or permitted to be given by any section of this
chapter, such notice may be effected by personal service upon the licensee if
an individual, or any general partner if a partnership, or upon any corporate
officer if a corporation, or, alternatively, to any of the foregoing, by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the last address listed in the Construction
Official's office in conjunction with the registration information. It shall be
the duty of each registered contractor to keep the township advised of
any subsequent change of address. Upon failure of a contractor to comply
with this requirement, any notice returned with the notation "unknown,"
"moved" or "not claimed" shall be deemed proper service of all notices
required by this chapter.
§ 106-11. Violations and penalties.62
Any person, firm or corporation, or their respective agents, servants or
employees, who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon
conviction thereof in the Municipal Court of the Township of Waterford,
be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000, imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days, or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days,
or any combination thereof. Every day that such person, firm or corporation
or their respective agents, servants or employees shall fail to comply with
the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate and additional
offense against the provisions thereof.
§ 106-12. Re-registration after revocation.
Any person, firm or corporation whose registration has been revoked under
the provisions of § 106-7 of this chapter may apply to register and have
be presented to the Township Committee at no cost if an appeal is
taken.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 106-8 WATERFORD CODE § 106-12
106:190
his or her or its name re-entered upon the registration list upon filing the
following:
§ 106-13. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for
any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid such decision shall not
affect the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 106-14. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon final adoption after publication
according to law.
Chapter 112
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 184.
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 195.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 239.
§ 112-1. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business carried on for
profit, or any place of amusement or entertainment to which the public is
invited.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
operating, managing or conducting any establishment; and whenever used
in any clause prescribing a penalty, the term "operator," as applied to an
association or partnership, shall include the members or partners thereof
and, as applied to a corporation, shall include the officers thereof.
A. Certification by the Construction Official to the effect that all violations
with reference to which the revocation was secured have been
corrected.
B. Proof that all loss caused by the act or omissions for which the
registration was revoked has been fully satisfied and that all conditions
imposed by the decision of the revocation have been complied with.
C. Payment of a re-registration fee as per the Fee Schedule.63
63.Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
§ 106-12 CURFEW § 112-1
112:191
PARENT — Any natural parent of any minor, a guardian or any adult person
of the age of 21 years or over responsible for the care, custody and control
of any minor.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground,
wharf, dock, public building or vacant lot.
REMAIN — To loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon.
TIME — The prevailing time.
§ 112-2. Hours of curfew established.
§ 112-3. Responsibility of parents and guardians.
§ 112-4. Responsibility of business people.
A. It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to remain in
or upon any public place or establishment after the hour of 10:00 p.m.
on each and every Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday
until 6:00 a.m. of the following morning and after the hour of 11:00 p.m.
on each and every Friday and Saturday until 6:00 a.m. of the following
morning unless accompanied by the parent, guardian or other adult
person having the care, custody or control of such minor.
B. It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to remain in
or upon any public place or establishment after the hour of 8:00 p.m.
until 6:00 a.m. for a full seven days before and a full seven days after
the day celebrated as Halloween unless accompanied by the parent,
guardian or other adult person having the care, custody or control of
such minor.
A. It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or any person having the
care, custody and control of any minor under the age of 18 years to
permit such minor to remain in or upon any public place or
establishment after the hour of 10:00 p.m. on each and every Sunday,
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the
following morning and from 11:00 p.m. each and every Friday and
Saturday until 6:00 a.m. of the following morning unless accompanied
by such parent, guardian or other person having the care, custody and
control of such minor.
B. It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or any person having the
care, custody and control of any minor under the age of 18 years to
permit such minor to remain in or upon any public place or
establishment after the hour of 8:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. for a full seven
days before and a full seven days after the day celebrated as Halloween
unless accompanied by the parent, guardian or other adult person
having the care, custody or control of such minor.
A. No operator of any establishment or his agents or employees shall
knowingly permit any minor to remain upon the premises of said
§ 112-1 WATERFORD CODE § 112-4
112:192
§ 112-5. Violations and penalties.64
Any minor, operator or parent, as defined in § 112-1 hereof, who shall violate
any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to a fine not exceeding $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any
combination thereof.
§ 112-6. Procedure of police officers.
Any police officer who apprehends and charges a minor violating any
provisions of this chapter shall obtain from such minor information as to
his name, address, age and the name of his parents or parent. He shall,
thereupon, notify said parent or parents of said minor of said violation, and
said minor shall be turned over to the custody of his parent or parents
pending disposition of said charge by the proper juvenile authorities.
Chapter 118
DRUG-FREE ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 82.
Curfews — See Ch. 112.
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 195.
establishment after the hour of 10:00 p.m. on every Sunday, Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the following
morning, and from 11:00 p.m. on each and every Friday and Saturday
until 6:00 a.m. of the following morning unless such minor is
accompanied by his parent, as defined in § 112-1 of this chapter.
B. No operator of any establishment or his agents or employees shall
knowingly permit any minor to remain upon the premises of said
establishment after the hour of 8:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. unless such
minor is accompanied by his/her parent, as defined in § 112-1 of this
chapter, seven full days before and seven full days after the day
celebrated as Halloween.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 112-4 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 112-6
118:193

ARTICLE I
Drug-Free School Zones
§ 118-1. Approval and adoption of map.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1988, c. 44 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7), the Drug-Free Zone Map produced on or about November 26,
2001, by the Municipal Engineer is hereby approved and adopted as an
official finding and record of the location and areas within the municipality
of property which is used for school purposes and which is owned by or
leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board and of the
areas on or within 1,000 feet of such property.
§ 118-2. Official finding; amendments.
The Drug-Free Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 118-1 of this
article shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as to the
location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property owned
by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board which
is used for school purposes until such time, if any, that this article shall be
amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the location
and boundaries of school property and Drug-Free School Zones.
§ 118-3. Notification of changes to boundaries; locations.
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal
Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and
boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 118-4. Filing; copies.
The Clerk of the municipality is hereby directed to receive and to keep on
file the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 118-1 of
this article and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any
person, agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy,
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true
copy of such map and of this article shall be provided without cost to the
County Clerk and to the office of the Camden County Prosecutor.
§ 118-5. Additional provisions.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 118-1
of this article was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state, and that
§ 118-1 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 118-5
118:195
pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of
the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board.
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
B. Except as is otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved and
adopted map, all of the property depicted on the map approved and
adopted herein as school property was owned by or leased to a school
or school board and was being used for school purposes as of July 9,
1987, being the effective date of P.L. 1987, c. 101 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7).
C. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1988, c. 44,65 a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to § 118-1 of this article. The failure of the map
approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property
which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned by or
leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board, whether
the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or
the result of any changes in the location and boundaries of such
property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised approved
map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record that such
property is not owned by or leased to a school or school board, or that
such property is not used for school purposes.
D. All of the requirements set forth in P.L. 1988, c. 44,66 concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free Zone Map have been
complied with.
65.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7 et seq.
66.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2C:35-4 et. seq.
§ 118-5 WATERFORD CODE § 118-5
118:196
ARTICLE II
Drug-Free Public Area Zones
§ 118-6. Approval and adoption of map.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1997, c. 327
(N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1), the Drug-Free Zone Map produced on or about
November 26, 2001, by the Municipal Engineer is hereby approved and
adopted as an official finding and record of the location and areas within the
municipality of property which is utilized as public housing facilities, public
parks and public buildings, and which is owned, leased or controlled by the
Township of Waterford or the County of Camden or the State of New Jersey,
and of the areas on or within 500 feet of said properties.
§ 118-7. Map to continue in effect.
The Drug-Free Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 118-6 of
this article shall continue to constitute an official finding and record of the
location and boundaries of areas on or within 500 feet of the real estate
comprising public housing facilities, public parks and public buildings
owned, leased or controlled by the Township of Waterford or the County
of Camden or the State of New Jersey until such time, if any, that this
article shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect
to the location and boundaries of the public housing facilities, public parks
and/or public buildings and drug-free public areas within the Township of
Waterford or the County of Camden or State of New Jersey.
§ 118-8. Copies of map on file.
The Clerk of the municipality is directed to receive and to keep on file
the original of the Drug-Free Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to
§ 118-6 of this article and to provide at reasonable cost a true copy thereof
to any person, agency or court that may from time to time request such a
copy, along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map
approved and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed
that a true copy of such map and of this article shall be provided without
cost to the County Clerk and the office of the Camden County Prosecutor.
§ 118-9. Additional provisions.
The following matters are hereby determined, declared, recited and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 118-6
of this article was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of the State of New Jersey
and that pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the following:
(1) The location of public housing facilities, public parks and public
buildings owned, leased or controlled by the Township of Waterford
or the County of Camden or the State of New Jersey.
§ 118-6 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 118-9
118:197
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is utilized in connection
with public housing facilities, public parks and public buildings
owned, leased or controlled by the Township of Waterford or the
County of Camden or State of New Jersey.
(3) That such property continues to be used as public housing
facilities, public parks and/or public buildings.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 500
feet of such public housing facilities, public parks and public
buildings.
B. Except as is otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved map,
all of the property depicted on the map as drug-free public area was
owned, leased or controlled by the Township of Waterford or the County
of Camden or the State of New Jersey and was being used for public
housing facilities, public parks arid/or public buildings as of January 9,
1998, that being the effective date of P.L. 1997, c. 327 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7.1).
C. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1997, c. 327 § N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1), a
prosecutor is not precluded from introducing or relying upon any other
evidence or testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in
that statute, including use of a map or diagram other than the one
approved and adopted pursuant to § 118-6 of this article. The failure of
the map approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any
property which is, in fact, used for public housing facilities, public parks
and/or public buildings and which is owned, leased or controlled by the
Township of Waterford or the County of Camden or the State of New
Jersey, whether the absence of such depiction is the result of
inadvertent omission or the result of any change in the location and
boundaries of such property which has not yet been incorporated into a
revised approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and
record that such property is not owned or leased by the Township of
Waterford or the County of Camden or the State of New Jersey or that
such property is not used for public housing facilities, public parks or
buildings.
D. All of the requirements of P.L. 1997, c. 327 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1),
concerning the preparation, approval and adoption of a drug-free public
area map have been complied with.
§ 118-9 WATERFORD CODE § 118-9
118:198
Chapter 124
FEES
§ 118-9 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 118-9
118:199

ARTICLE I
Returned Checks
[Adopted 5-25-1988 by Ord. No. 88-8]
§ 124-1. Surcharge established.
§ 124-2. Determination of amount.
It is hereby determined that the amount of such surcharge is equal to the
approximate amount of the Township's administrative or other related costs
where a check or draft has been returned unpaid.
A. A surcharge in the amount of $25 shall be imposed on any taxes, fees or
other charges due the Township of Waterford where a check or draft
has been submitted to the Township toward the payment of such taxes,
fees or other charges and such check or draft is returned, whether by
stop payment, insufficient funds, uncollected funds or any other reason.
B. The Township Treasurer be and is hereby authorized and directed to
collect said surcharge from any payee whose check or draft to the
Township of Waterford has been returned unpaid.
§ 124-1 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 124-2
118:201

ARTICLE II
Fee Schedule
[Adopted 12-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-25]
§ 124-3. Policy. [Amended 12-15-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-25]
It is hereby declared to be the public policy of this Township to recognize
the public's general right to know pursuant to the Open Public Records Act
(N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.). All records kept in the course of official duties
by any Township officer or employee shall be deemed to be "government
records," as that term is defined in N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1, and such records
shall be subject to inspection by the public unless exempt under the statute
or other regulation, common law practice, executive order of the Governor,
rules of court, federal law or judicial decision.
§ 124-3.1. Custodian of records: records request form. [Added
12-15-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-25]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1, the Township Clerk is designated
as the custodian of records. The forms to request government and police
records adopted by the custodian of government records for the Township
of Waterford pursuant to N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5(f), and approved by resolution of
the Township Committee of the Township of Waterford, must be completed
in full and submitted to the custodian of government records as required
by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5(g) in order to obtain copies of government records as
provided by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
§ 124-3.2. Inspection and copying of public records. [Added
12-15-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-25]
A. Any person seeking to inspect, examine or copy a public record of this
municipality shall make application in writing to the Township Clerk,
during regular business hours, on the form provided. All requests for
public records shall be as specific as possible, including the type of
record and date created, if known.
B. The Township Clerk shall promptly comply with a request, examine,
copy or provide a copy of a government record. If the Clerk is unable to
comply with a request for access, he or she shall indicate on the request
form the specific basis for such inability to comply and shall promptly
return it to the requestor. The Clerk shall sign and date the form and
provide the requestor with a copy thereof.
C. In those instances where the nature of the request or the record itself
leads the Township Clerk to doubt whether or not the record is a
"government record" as defined by law or is a record exempt from
disclosure, the Clerk shall request an opinion from the Municipal
Attorney. A copy of the request form shall be forwarded to the Attorney,
who, after review and investigation, shall issue an opinion and note
§ 124-3 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 124-3.2
118:203
§ 124-3.3. Time limits for compliance. [Added 12-15-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-25]
Unless a shorter time period is otherwise provided by statute, regulation
or executive order, the Clerk shall grant access to a government record or
deny a request for access to a record as soon as possible, but not later than
seven business days after receiving the request, provided that the record
is currently available and not in storage or archived. In the event that the
Clerk fails to respond within seven business days after receiving a request,
the failure to respond shall be deemed a denial of the request, unless the
requestor has elected not to provide a name, address or telephone number,
or other means of contacting the requestor, the Clerk shall not be required
to respond until the requestor reappears before the custodian seeking a
response to the original request. If the government record is in storage or
archived, the requestor shall be so advised within seven business days after
the Clerk receives the request. The requestor shall be advised by the Clerk
when the record can be made available. If the record is not made available
by that time, access shall be deemed denied.
§ 124-3.4. Posting of appeals procedure. [Added 12-15-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-25]
The Clerk shall post prominently in public view, in or adjacent to the Clerk's
office, a statement that sets forth in clear, concise and specific terms the
right to appeal a denial of or failure to provide access to a government
record and the procedure by which an appeal may be filed.
§ 124-3.5. Viewing of government records; removal prohibited.
[Added 12-15-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-25]
such opinion on the request form and promptly return it to the
Township Clerk.
D. If any part of a particular record is exempt from public access pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 at seq., the Clerk shall delete, redact or excise from
a copy of the record that portion which is exempt from access and shall
promptly permit access to the remainder of the record.
E. If the record requested is temporarily unavailable because it is in use or
in storage, the Clerk shall so advise the requestor and shall make
arrangements to make a copy of the record available.
F. If a request for access to a government record would substantially
disrupt municipal operations, the Clerk may deny access to the record
after attempting to reach a reasonable solution with the requestor that
accommodates the interests of the requestor and the municipality.
G. As required by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5(e), immediate access shall be granted
for access to budgets, bills, vouchers, contracts (including collective
negotiations agreements and individual employment contracts), and
public salary and overtime information.
§ 124-3.2 WATERFORD CODE § 124-3.5
118:204
§ 124-3.6. Procedures and fees for purchasing copies of public
records. [Added 12-15-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-25]
Copies of records may be purchased for the fee prescribed by law or
regulation. If a fee is not prescribed by law or regulation, the fee shall be
the actual cost of duplicating the record; provided, however, that where the
actual cost for duplication of a record exceeds the rates below, the actual
cost shall be imposed:
A. Upon the approval of a request to view, inspect, examine or copy a
record, the record and the requestor shall remain in the presence of the
Township Clerk or his or her authorized representative at all times.
Under no circumstances shall any government record be removed from
the office where it is normally kept unless accompanied by the
custodian or his or her authorized representative.
B. In the event that the nature of a request to view records requires that
the Clerk or other municipal employee observe or monitor such viewing
for a period of time exceeding 15 minutes, the requestor shall be
responsible for reimbursing the municipality for time spent by the Clerk
or other employee at the rate of $35 per hour.
A. Paper documents: [Amended 12-15-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-9]
(1) Letter-size paper and smaller: $0.05 per page.
(2) Legal-size paper and larger: $0.07 per page.
(3) Records sent via e-mail or fax: no charge.
B. Large-sized paper documents and maps, certificates, applications and
permits. [Amended 3-28-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-2]
(1) Street map: $2.50.
(2) Drug-Free School Zone Map: $2.50.
(3) Soils survey map: $10.
(4) Site plan, per page: $5.
(5) Subdivision plat, per page: $5.
(6) Tax map page: $5.
(7) Tax bill duplicates: $5 ($15 for duplicate copy of same tax bill in
same tax year).
(8) Engineering plans, per page: $5.
(9) Copy of computer screen: $0.75.
(10) Film developing: $15 (24 or 36 exposures).
(11) Enlargements: $15.
§ 124-3.5 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 124-3.6
118:205
(12) Vital statistics.
(a) Certified copies (set by Township): [Amended 11-21-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-1767]
[1] Birth certificate: $25 for the first copy; $2 for each
additional copy.
[2] Death certificate: $25 for the first copy; $2 for each
additional copy.
[3] Marriage certificate: $25 for the first copy; $2 for each
additional copy.
[4] Domestic partnership certificate: $25 for the first copy; $2
for each additional copy.
[5] Civil union certificate: $$25 for the first copy; $2 for each
additional copy.
(b) Applications (set by state statute):
[1] Marriage license application: $28.
[2] Domestic partnership application: $28.
[3] Civil union application: $28.
(c) Burial permit (set by state statute). [Amended 12-15-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-9]
(13) Permit for firearms.
(a) Firearms identification card: $5.
(b) Firearms handgun permit: $2.
(14) Fingerprints: $5.
(15) Subdivision approval certificates, per copy: $2.
(16) Certification of any public document: $2.
C. Preprinted documents.
(1) Zoning Ordinance: $50.
(2) Zoning Map: $5.
(3) Land Use Ordinance: $50.
(4) Master Plan: $45.
D. Police reports and photographs.
67.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would not take effect until January 1, 2012.
§ 124-3.6 WATERFORD CODE § 124-3.6
118:206
(1) All requests for discovery in matters pending in the Waterford
Township Court shall be submitted through the Municipal
Prosecutor.
(2) The following fees shall be payable by the requestor to the
Township of Waterford for the discovery provided:
(a) For each of the first 10 pages photocopied: $0.75 per page.
(b) For each of the next 10 pages photocopied: $0.50 per page.
(c) For each of the pages photocopied thereafter: $0.25 per page.
(d) Actual postage for any discovery sent by mail.
(e) For the envelope for any discovery sent by mail: $0.25.
(f) Photographs will be photocopied at the rates established
herein. If requests are made for duplicate photographs, the
actual cost of making the photographs shall be charged.
(g) On any item that cannot be photocopied on the Township copy
machine or not otherwise provided for in this schedule, the
actual cost incurred in making the copy shall be charged.
(3) Request for disposition of cases: $5.
(4) In the event discovery must be obtained from an entity other than
the Township of Waterford, the actual cost paid to the other entity
shall be paid by the requestor.
E. Photographs, videotape and audiotape.
(1) Photographs. Reproductions from negatives:
(a) Five inch by seven inch: $3 per photo.
(b) Four inch by six inch: $2 per photo.
(2) Copy of videotape.
(a) Tape supplied by requestor: $5.
(b) Tape supplied by municipality: $7.50.
(3) Copy of audiotape.
(a) Tape supplied by requestor: $5.
(b) Tape supplied by municipality: $7.50.
F. Electronic records. Copy of electronic document or database. The
following fees cover the cost of copying existing files to a floppy disk or
CD. Any requests for software conversions shall be subject to the
special service charge described below. For security reasons, the use of
a floppy disk or CD provided by the requestor is prohibited.
§ 124-3.6 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 124-3.6
118:207
§ 124-4. Fees for photocopies - per page.
(1) Computer disk, CD-rom, DVD: $0.50. [Amended 12-15-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-9]
(2) CD: $10, plus cost of CD ($3 each).
G. Miscellaneous medium.
(1) Mailing labels: $10 per sheet.
H. Postage and surcharges.
(1) Postage and handling costs will be added to all requests for public
records required to be mailed and will be determined at the time of
request.
(2) A surcharge of $0.50 per page will be applied to all records sent by
fax.
(3) Extraordinary service charges shall be applied for any extensive
use of information, technology, or for the labor costs of personnel
providing the service that is actually incurred by the Township for
programming, clerical and supervisory assistance required to
provide a government record(s) in the medium requested if it is not
a medium routinely used by the Township, not routinely developed
or maintained by the Township or requiring a substantial amount of
manipulation or programming of information. This rate shall be:
(a) For programming and supervisory assistance: $45 per hour.
(b) For clerical assistance: $35 per hour.
I. A special service charge shall be imposed, in addition to the actual cost
of duplicating the record, where the nature, format, manner of collation
or volume of printed matter is such that it cannot be reproduced by
ordinary document-copying equipment in ordinary business size or
where such record involves an extraordinary expenditure of time and
effort to accommodate the request at the rate of $45 per hour for
programming and supervisory assistance and $35 per hour for clerical
assistance. The requestor shall have the opportunity to review and
object to the special service charge prior to it being incurred.
J. Conversion of records from one medium to another. Cost of duplication
plus $45 per hour for supervisory assistance and $35 per hour for
clerical assistance.
K. A deposit shall be paid prior to filling any anonymous request where it is
estimated that the information requested will cost in excess of $5 to
reproduce. The amount of the deposit shall equal the total estimated
cost of filling the request.
§ 124-3.6 WATERFORD CODE § 124-4
118:208
§ 124-5. Uniform Construction Codes fees. [Amended 11-12-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-19; 4-14-1999 by Ord. No. 99-4; 9-13-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-13; 6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-4]
A. The following fees will be charged for photocopies: [Amended
7-10-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10]
Pages Fee
1 to 10 $0.75
11 to 20 $0.50
Over 20 $0.25
B. A maximum of 10 free copies will be given to senior citizens.
A. General.
(1) The fee for plan review, computed as a percentage of the fee for a
construction permit, shall be paid at the time of application for a
permit. The amount of this fee shall then be deducted from the
amount of the fee due for a construction permit, when the permit is
issued. Plan review fees are not refundable. All amounts paid are to
be rounded to the nearest dollar.
(2) The fee to be charged for a construction permit will be the sum of
the basic construction fee plus all applicable special fees, such as
elevator or sign fees. The fee shall be paid before a permit is issued.
(3) The fee to be charged for a certificate of occupancy shall be paid
before a certificate is issued. This fee shall be in addition to the
construction permit fee.
B. Departmental plan review fee. The fees listed in Subsection C below
shall be in addition to a Departmental plan review surcharge in the
amount of 40% of each listed fee. Where the Department performs plan
review only, the plan review fee shall be in the amount of 25% of the
new construction permit fee which would be charged by the
Department pursuant to these rules.
C. Departmental (enforcing agency) fees shall be as follows: [Amended
9-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-23]
(1) Plan review fee: The fee for plan review shall be 20% of the amount
to be charged for a new construction permit.
(2) The fee for plan review for elevator devices shall be determined by
the Department of Community Affairs, State of New Jersey.
(3) The basic construction fee shall be the sum of the parts computed
on the basis of the volume or cost of construction, the number of
plumbing fixtures and pieces of equipment, the number of
electrical fixtures and devices and the number of sprinklers,
§ 124-4 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 124-5
118:209
standpipes and detectors (smoke and heat) at the unit rates
provided herein plus any special fees. The minimum fee for a
basic construction permit covering any or all of building, plumbing,
electrical or fire protection work shall be $85.
(a) Building volume or cost. The fees for new construction or
alteration are as follows:
[1] Fees for new construction shall be based upon the volume
of the structure. Volume shall be computed in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The new construction fee shall be
in the amount of $0.047 per cubic foot of volume for
buildings and structures of all use groups and types of
construction as classified and defined in Articles 3 and 4 of
the Building Subcode; except that the fee shall be $0.030
per cubic foot of volume for use groups A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4,
A-5, F-1, F-2, S-1 and S-2, and the fee shall be $0.011 per
cubic foot for structures on farms, including commercial
farm building under N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d), with the
maximum fee for such structures on farms not to exceed
$1,602.
[2] Fees for renovations, alterations and repairs or site
construction associated with preengineered systems of
commercial farm buildings, premanufactured
construction, and the external utility connection for
premanufactured construction shall be based upon the
estimated cost of work. The fee shall be in the amount of
$35 per $1,000. From $50,001 to and including $100,000,
the additional fee shall be in the amount of $28 per $1,000
of estimated cost above $50,000. Above $100,000, the
additional fee shall be in the amount of $24 per $1,000 of
estimated cost above $100,000. For the purpose of
determining estimated cost, the applicant shall submit to
the Department such cost data as may be available
produced by the architect or engineer of record, or by a
recognized estimating firm, or by the contractor. A bona
fide contractor's bid, if available, shall be submitted. The
Department shall make the final decision regarding
estimated cost.
[3] Fees for additions shall be computed on the same basis as
for new construction for the added portion.
[4] Fees for combination renovations and additions shall be
computed as the sum of the fees computed separately in
accordance with Subsection C(3)(a)[1] and [2] above.
[5] The fee for tents, in excess of 900 square feet or more than
30 feet in any dimension, shall be $130.
§ 124-5 WATERFORD CODE § 124-5
118:210
[6] The fee for roofing and siding work completed on structure
in use group R-5 shall be $100, and all other use groups
shall be computed as renovation.
[7] The fee for an aboveground swimming pool shall be $150
for a pool with a surface area greater than 550 square feet;
the fee in all other cases shall be $75. The fee for an inground
swimming pool shall be $250 for a pool with a
surface area greater than 550 square feet; the fee in all
other cases shall be $200.
[8] The fee for residential fences six feet and over, or used as a
pool barrier, shall be priced as alteration.
[9] The fee for tank removal under 2,000 gallons shall be $100
and any tank over 2,000 shall be $125.
[10] The fee for complete masonry fireplaces shall be priced as
alteration.
[11] The fee for wood-burning stoves and similar devices shall
be $85 each.
[12] The minimum Building Subcode fee shall be $85.
[13] In addition to the fees set forth in Subsection C(3)(a)[1]
through [12] above, there shall be added a fee in the
amount of $0.00371 per cubic foot of volume of new
buildings and additions and a fee in the amount of $1.40
per $1,000 of value of consideration for all other
construction in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19(b),
known as the "state training fee." All volume shall be
computed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28.
[14] Residential or commercial solar array: roof-mounted
system, $160; ground-mounted system, $210.
(b) Plumbing fixtures and equipment: The fees shall be as follows:
[1] The fee shall be in the amount of $20 per fixture, piece of
equipment or appliance connected to the plumbing
system, and for each appliance connected to the gas piping
or oil piping system, except as indicated in Subsection
C(3)(b)[2] below.
[2] The fee shall be $96 per special device for the following:
grease traps, oil separators, refrigeration units, utility
service connections, backflow preventers equipped with
test ports (double check valve assembly, reduced pressure
zone and pressure vacuum breaker backflow preventers),
steam boilers, hot water boilers (excluding those for
domestic water heating), active solar systems, sewer
pumps and interceptors, L.P. gas cylinder, sump pump,
§ 124-5 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 124-5
118:211
pressure booster pump. There shall be no inspection fee
charged for gas service entrance.
[3] The fee for a lawn sprinkler shall be $85.
[4] The minimum fee for Plumbing Subcode shall be $85.
(c) Electrical fixtures and devices: The fees shall be as follows:
[1] For the first block consisting of one to 50 receptacles,
fixtures or devices, the fee shall be $55; for each additional
block consisting of up to 25 receptacles, fixtures or
devices, the fee shall be $12. For the purpose of computing
this fee, receptacles, fixtures or devices shall include
lighting fixtures, wall switches, convenience receptacles,
sensors, dimmers, alarm devices, smoke and heat
detectors, communication outlets, light-standards eight
feet or less in height including luminaries, emergency
lights, electric signs, exit lights or similar electric fixtures
and devices rated 20 amperes or less including motors or
equipment rated less than one horsepower (hp) or one
kilowatt (kw).
[2] For each motor or electrical device rated from one hp or
one kw to 10 hp or 10 kw; for each transformer or
generator rated from one kw or one kva to 10 kw or 10
kva; for each replacement of wiring involving one branch
circuit or part thereof; for each storable pool or
hydromassage bath tub; for each underwater lighting
fixture; for household electric cooking equipment rated up
to 16kw; for each fire, security or burglar alarm control
unit; for each receptacle rated from 30 amperes to 50
amperes; for each light-standard greater than eight feet in
height including luminaries; and for each communications
closet, the fee shall be $22.
[3] For each motor or electrical device rated from greater
than 10 hp or 10 kw to 50 hp or 50 kw; for each service
equipment, panel board, switch board, switch gear, motor
control center, or disconnecting means rated 225 amperes
or less; for each transformer or generator rated from
greater than 10 kw or 10 kva to 45 kw or 45 kva; for each
electric sign rated from greater than 20 amperes to 225
amperes including associated disconnecting means; for
each receptacle rated greater than 50 amperes; and for
each utility load management device, the fee shall be $75.
[4] For each motor or electrical device rated from greater
than 50 hp or 50 kw to 100 hp or 100 kw; for each service
equipment, panel board, switch board, switch gear, motor
control center or disconnecting means rated from greater
than 225 amperes to 1,000 amperes; and for each
§ 124-5 WATERFORD CODE § 124-5
118:212
transformer or generator rated from greater than 45 kw or
45 kva to 112.5 kw or 112.5 kva, the fee shall be $139.
[5] For each motor or electrical device rated greater than 100
hp or 100 kw; for each service equipment, panel board,
switch board, switch gear, motor control center or
disconnecting means rated greater than 1,000 amperes;
and for each transformer or generator rated greater than
112.5 kw or 112.5 kva, the fee shall be $665.
[6] The fee charged for electrical work for each permanently
installed private aboveground swimming pool as defined in
the building subcode, spa, hot tub or fountain shall be a
flat fee of $85, and $160 for an in-ground swimming pool,
which shall include any required bonding, and associated
equipment such as filter pumps, motors, disconnecting
means, switches, required receptacles, and heaters, etc.,
excepting panelboards and underwater lighting fixtures.
For public swimming pools, the fee shall be charged on the
basis of number of electrical fixtures and rating of
electrical devices involved in accordance with Subsection
C(3)(c)[1] through [5] above.
[7] The fee charged for the installation of single and multiple
station smoke or heat detectors and fire, burglar or
security alarm systems in any one- or two-family dwelling
shall be a flat fee of $45 per dwelling unit. For fire, burglar
and security alarm systems and detectors in buildings
other than one- or two-family dwellings, the fee shall be
charged in accordance with Subsection C(3)(c)[1] and [2]
above.
[8] For installations consisting of multimeter stacks, the fee
shall be based on the ampere rating of the main bus and
not upon the number of meters or rating of disconnects on
the meter stack. Individual loadside panel boards shall be
charged in accordance with Subsection C(3)(c)[3], [4] or
[5] above. There shall be no additional fee charged for the
concurrent installation of individual feeder conductors.
[9] For motors or similar devices requiring concurrent
installation of individual controls, relays and switches, the
fee shall be based only upon the rating of the motor or
device. There shall be no additional fee charged for the
concurrent installation of individual circuit components;
for example, controllers, starters, and disconnecting
means.
[10] For electrical work requiring replacement of service
entrance conductors or feeder conductors only, the fee
shall be based on the designated ampere rating of the
§ 124-5 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 124-5
118:213
overcurrent device of the service or feeder as follows: 225
amps or less, $85; 226 amps to 1,000 amps, $139; greater
than 1,000 amps, $600.
[11] The fee charged for process equipment shall be based on
the ampere rating of the overcurrent device protecting the
conductor feeding the process equipment or the cutoff
device.
[12] For the purpose of computing these fees, all electrical and
communication devices, utilization equipment and motors
which are part of premises wiring, except those which are
portable plug-in type, shall be counted.
[13] The fee for a rain sensor for a sprinkler system shall be
$25.
[14] The minimum fee for Electrical Subcode shall be $85.
[15] Solar energy systems.
[a] Residential and commercial, roof-mounted: up to
10kw, $150; 11kw to 20kw, $200; over 20kw, $300.
[b] Residential and commercial, ground-mounted: up to
10kw, $200; 11kw to 20kw, $250; over 20kw, $350.
(d) For fire protection and hazardous equipment, sprinklers,
standpipes, detectors (smoke and heat), preengineered
suppression systems, gas- and oil-fired appliances not
connected to the plumbing system, kitchen exhaust systems,
incinerators and crematoriums, the fee shall be as follows:
[1] The fee for 20 or fewer heads shall be $95; for 21 to and
including 100 heads, the fee shall be $170; for 101 to and
including 200 heads, the fee shall be $330; for 201 to and
including 400 heads, the fee shall be $841; for 401 to and
including 1,000 heads, the fee shall be $1,160; for over
1,000 heads, the fee shall be $1,479.
[2] The fee for one to 12 detectors shall be $55; for each 25
detectors in addition to this, the fee shall be in the amount
of $25. In computing fees for heads and detectors, the
number of each shall be counted separately and two fees,
one for heads and one for detectors, shall be charged.
[3] The fee for each standpipe shall be $331.
[4] The fee for each independent preengineered system shall
be $139.
[5] The fee for each gas- or oil-fired appliance that is not
connected to the plumbing system shall be $75.
§ 124-5 WATERFORD CODE § 124-5
118:214
[6] The fee for fireplace venting/metal chimney shall be $75.
[7] The fee for each kitchen exhaust system shall be $75.
[8] The fee for each incinerator shall be $521.
[9] The fee for each crematorium shall be $521.
[10] For single and multiple station smoke or heat detectors
and fire alarm systems in any one- or two-family dwellings,
there shall be a flat rate of $40 per dwelling unit. For
detectors and fire alarm systems in buildings other than
one- or two-family dwellings, the fee shall be in
accordance with Subsection C(3)(d)[2] above.
[11] The fee for a fire pump shall be $130.
[12] The fee for the installation of an aboveground oil tank shall
be $75.
[13] The minimum fee for Fire Subcode shall be $85.
(e) Fees for certificates and other permits are as follows:
[1] The fee for a demolition or removal permit shall be $175
for a structure of less than 5,000 square feet in area and
less than 30 feet in height, for one- or two-family
residences (use group R-5 of the building code), and
structures on farms, including commercial farm buildings
under N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d), and $200 for all other use
groups.
[2] The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be in the
amount of $6 per square foot surface area of the sign,
computed on one side only for double-faced signs. The
minimum fee shall be $85.
[3] The fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be $60.
[4] The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to
a change of use group shall be $168.
[5] The fee for a certificate of continued occupancy issued
under N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.23(c) shall be $168.
[6] The fee for the first issuance and the renewal of a
temporary certificate of occupancy shall be $50.
[a] Exception: There shall be no fee for the first issuance
of the temporary certificate of occupancy provided the
certificate of occupancy fee is paid at that time.
[b] Exception: Where a written request for a temporary
certificate of occupancy is made for reasons other
§ 124-5 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 124-5
118:215
than uncompleted work covered by the permit (such
as uncompleted work required by prior approvals
from state or municipal agencies), no renewal fee shall
be charged.
[7] The fee for plan review of a building for compliance under
the alternate systems and nondepletable energy source
provisions of the energy subcode shall be $383 for oneand
two-family homes (use group R-5 of the Building
Subcode) and for light commercial structures having the
indoor temperature controlled from a single point, and
$1,915 for all other structures.
[8] The fee for an application for a variation in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10 shall be $821 for Class I structures
and $168 for Class II and Class III structures. The fee for
resubmission of an application for a variation shall be $321
for Class I structures and $91 for Class II and Class III
structures.
[9] The fee for a permit for lead hazard abatement work shall
be $196. The fee for a lead abatement clearance certificate
shall be $39.
[10] For cross connections and backflow preventers that are
subject to testing, requiring reinspection annually, the fee
shall be $65 for each device when they are tested.
(f) Annual permit requirements are as follows: The fee to be
charged for an annual construction permit shall be charged
annually. This fee shall be a flat fee based upon the number of
maintenance workers who are employed by the facility, and
who are primarily engaged in work that is governed by a
Subcode. Managers, engineers and clericals shall not be
considered maintenance workers for the purpose of
establishing the annual construction permit fee. Annual
permits may be issued for building/fire protection, electrical
and plumbing.
[1] Fees for annual permits shall be as follows:
[a] One to 25 workers (including foreman) $933/worker;
each worker over 25, $329/worker.
[b] Prior to the issuance of the annual permit, a training
registration fee of $196 per Subcode and a list of not
more than three individuals to be trained per Subcode
shall be submitted by the applicant to the Department
of Community Affairs, Bureau of Code Services,
Training Section along with a copy of the construction
permit (Form F170). Checks shall be made payable to
"Treasurer, State of New Jersey." The Department
§ 124-5 WATERFORD CODE § 124-5
118:216
§ 124-6. Land development and zoning fees.
The fees and charges for land development and zoning matters shall be as
set forth in Chapter 176, Land Use, Development and Zoning.
§ 124-6.1. Tax certificate redemption fees and tax sale notice
mailing fee. [Added 10-27-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-8]
shall register these individuals and notify them of the
courses being offered.
[c] The fees for elevator device inspections and tests shall
be as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.
[d] The fee for the annual electrical inspection of
swimming pools, spas, or hot tubs shall be $65.
[2] The fee for an application by a manufacturer, distributor,
owner or any other person for approval of any fixture,
appurtenance, material or method, pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:23-3.8, shall be an amount equal to the cost incurred, or
to be incurred, by the Department for such tests as the
Department may require, plus an administrative surcharge
in the amount of 10% of such cost.
[3] For those construction permit fees not specifically
designated by this article or established by rules and
regulations of the Construction Code Official in the
manner hereinafter established for the adoption of other
fee schedules, each such fee is established in the
regulations of the Department of Community Affairs (Title
5, Chapter 23, of the New Jersey Administrative Code,
presently or as hereafter amended), and those fees set
forth within regulations shall be applied in determining
the construction permit fee. For any item not listed in this
fee schedule, the fee shall be set by the Construction
Official and appropriate Subcode Official.
(g) The fee for a mechanical inspection in a structure of group R-3
or R-5 by a mechanical inspector shall be $85 for the first
device and $28 for each additional device. No separate fee
shall be charged for gas, fuel oil or water piping connection
associated with the mechanical equipment inspected.
A. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:5-54, the Tax Collector shall provide to
any party entitled to redeem a certificate pursuant to the section
(N.J.S.A. 54:5-54) two calculations of the amount required for
redemption within a calendar year at no cost. For each subsequent
calculation requested from the Tax Collector there shall be a fee of $50.
A request for a redemption calculation shall be made in writing to the
Tax Collector.
§ 124-5 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 124-6.1
118:217
§ 124-7. Other fees and charges. [Amended 5-13-1998 by Ord. No.
98-3; 5-13-1998 by Ord. No. 98-4; 12-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-18;
4-11-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-6]
B. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 54.5-97.1, the Tax Collector may charge a
lien-holder of a tax lien $50 for the calculation of the amount due to
redeem the lien as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-97.1. Any request
for a redemption calculation shall specify the date to be used for the
calculation, which shall be the date of the notice. Neither the Tax
Collector nor the municipality shall be liable for an incorrect
calculation. The fee paid to the municipality shall not become part of
the lien and shall not be passed on to any party entitled to redeem
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-54.
C. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:5-26, the Tax Collector may charge an
amount not to exceed $25 per notice for the cost of mailing a notice of
tax sale, by either regular or certified mail, to each interested party. The
cost of mailing shall be set at $25 and shall be added to the cost of the
tax sale in addition to those costs provided in N.J.S.A. 54:5-38.
A. The following fees are hereby established for the activities and services
referenced in the Code of the Township of Waterford:
Chapter Title/
Section Type or Purpose Fee
Municipal Court
Public
Defender
§ 13-10 Public Defender application $200
Alcoholic
Beverages
[Amended
7-10-2002 by
Ord. No.
2002-10]
§ 82-4 Plenary retail consumption license $1,000 per
year
Plenary distribution license $700 per year
Club license $150 per year
Amusement
Devices
§ 89-9 Initial application to bring
automatic amusement devices into
Township
$100
Annual renewal fee $100
§ 124-6.1 WATERFORD CODE § 124-7
118:218
Chapter Title/
Section Type or Purpose Fee
Animals
[Amended
7-10-2002 by
Ord. No.
2002-10]
§ 94-4 (Dogs)
[Amended
5-25-2011 by
Ord. No.
2011-368;
3-13-2013 by
Ord. No.
2013-469]
Every person who shall own, keep or harbor any
dog or dogs, either male or female, within the
boundaries of the Township of Waterford, shall,
before January 31 each year, pay to the Township
Clerk for licensing each dog the sum of $16.80
and, in addition thereto, shall also pay the sum of
$1 for a registration tag, plus a sum of $ 0.20 as a
surcharge for the State of New Jersey PILOT
Clinic Fund for a total of $18. Additionally, for any
dog of reproduction age which has not had its
reproductive capacity permanently altered
through sterilization, there shall be an additional
surcharge of $3 to be paid to the State of New
Jersey PILOT Clinic Fund. All such fees shall be
paid annually for the renewals of such licenses
and registration tags. Any person who is required
to but fails to obtain a renewal license on or
before April 30 of each year shall pay, in addition
to the fees prescribed by this section for such
licenses or renewal, a late charge of $25. Upon
payment of the appropriate fees, the Township
Clerk shall issue to the applicant a license tag for
each such dog, the same to be securely fastened
to the licensed dog by means of a collar or
harness.
Any person applying for the license and
registration tag for a dog determined to be
potentially dangerous pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-17
et. seq. of the laws of the State of New Jersey
shall pay an annual fee of $500.
§ 94-11
[Amended
3-13-2013 by
Ord. No.
2013-470]
Annual license for kennels:
68.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it would take effect 5-1-2012.
69.Editor's Note: Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it would take effect
1-1-2014.
70.Editor's Note: Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it would take effect
1-1-2014.
§ 124-7 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 124-7
118:219
Chapter Title/
Section Type or Purpose Fee
10 dogs or less $10
More than 10 dogs $25
Pet shop $10
Daily maintenance fee As determined
Shelter or pound No fee
§ 313-6 (swine) Annual license Up to $25
Registration of
Contractors
§ 106-3; § 106-12C General contractor's three-year
permit
$50
Subcontractor's three-year permit $25
NOTE: All contractors with mercantile licenses are exempt from the
fee for a contractor's license.
Fire Prevention, Art.
I
(1) Section 137-11
Code Type Annual Fee
Required
Inspections
Business Use Group
B-1 Under 2,500
square feet
$15.00 per
registration
Once every 12
months
B-2 Over 2,500
square feet and
under 5,000 square
feet
$25.00 per
registration
Once every 12
months
B-3 Over 5,000
square feet and
under 10,000 square
feet
$50.00 per
registration
Once every 12
months
B-4 Over 10,000
square feet
$100.00 per
registration
Once every 12
months
Factory Use Group
F-1 Under 5,000
square feet
$75.00 per
registration
Once every 12
months
§ 124-7 WATERFORD CODE § 124-7
118:220
Code Type Annual Fee
Required
Inspections
F-2 Over 5,000
square feet
$100.00 per
registration
Once every 12
months
Mercantile Use Group
M-1 Under 6,000
square feet
$25.00 per
registration
Once every 12
months
M-2 Over 6,000
square feet and
under 12,000 square
feet
$50.00 per
registration
Once every 12
months
Storage Use Group
S-1 Under 2,500
square feet per bid
$25.00 per
registration
Once every 12
months
S-2 2,500 square
feet and over
$50.00 per
registration
Once every 12
months
Public Areas Only Use Group
R-1, R-2, 3 to 6 units $25.00 per
registration
Once every 12
months
R-2, R-2, 7 to 12
units
$50.00 per
registration
Once every 12
months
R-3, R-2, 13 to 20
units
$175.00 per
registration
Once every 12
months
R-4, R-2, over 20
units
$350.00 per
registration
Once every 12
months
Utilities Use Group
U-1 Under 2,500
square feet
$25.00 per
registration
Once every 12
months
U-2 Over 2,500
square feet
$50.00 per
registration
Once every 12
months
(2) Tax-exempt status. Any building that is tax exempt, according to
the official tax records of Waterford Township on file with the Tax
Assessor's office, will be exempt from any registration fee.
However, these buildings will be inspected as required by the State
of New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
(3) Vacant buildings. All vacant buildings will be charged and
inspected according to the previous use of the building.
(4) Incidental use. Any other incidental use not classified above would
be classified under the Business section.
§ 124-7 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 124-7
118:221
(5) Non-Life-Hazard/Life Insurance. Inspection Fee Schedule. [Added
7-10-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10]
(a) Residential Use Group: includes buildings with dwelling units
not listed as "life hazard" by the New Jersey Bureau of Fire
Safety, except one- or two-family owner-occupied units.
Unit Size Fee
1 to 3 $40
4 to 10 $86
11 to 20 $115
21 to 40 $144
Each additional 20 units or less $29
(b) Commercial or Industrial Use Group. Commercial or industrial
use group includes all buildings not listed as "life hazard" by
the New Jersey Bureau of Fire Safety. (Note: Each floor or story
shall be calculated as separate areas for total building
calculation.)
Building Type Fee
Building with or without attached dwelling
unit, not in excess of 1,000 square feet
$35
Building with or without attached dwelling
units, in excess of 1,000 square feet not
exceeding 3,000 square feet
$58
Buildings in excess of 3,000 square feet not
exceeding 9,000 square feet
$86
Buildings in excess of 9,000 square feet not
exceeding 15,000 square feet
$144
Buildings in excess of 15,000 square feet not
exceeding 50,000 square feet
$200
Buildings in excess of 50,000 square feet not
exceeding 100,000 square feet
$260
Buildings in excess of 100,000 square feet not
exceeding 200,000 square feet
$460
Buildings in excess of 200,000 square feet not
exceeding 300,000 square feet
$690
Additional 100,000 square feet or part thereof $230
(6) Certificate of Fire Code Status. [Added 7-10-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-10]
§ 124-7 WATERFORD CODE § 124-7
118:222
(a) Any structure requiring inspection not covered under either
the Life Hazard Fee Schedule or the Non-Life-Hazard Fee
Schedule: $25.
(b) The following building or structure, if classified as "Non-Life
Hazard," although not exempt from registration or inspection,
will be exempt from paying an inspection fee as pursuant to the
Act:
[1] Municipal-owned buildings.
[2] Fire stations.
[3] EMS stations.
[4] House of worship (excluding rooms for public assembly;
i.e., meeting halls, social halls, rental halls).
(7) Smoke detector inspections. Smoke detector inspections to be
conducted on all one- and two-family residential dwellings for
resale being sold within local L.E.A: $50. If the property does not
pass the initial inspection, an additional fee of $25 is to be charged
with the third inspection and each inspection thereafter.
[Amended 4-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-7]
(a) Structure inspections pursuant to a certificate of occupancy
required.
(8) Fire and safety permits. [Added 7-10-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-10]
Permit Type Fee
I $30
II $115
III $230
IV $345
V $1,150
(9) Fire reports. Fee established for copies of Fire Marshal
investigation reports to insurance companies/owners or occupants:
$35. [Added 7-10-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10]
Chapter/
Section Type of Application Fee
Grading [Added 3-23-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-2]
§ 155-10 Application fee $25
Grading plan review $150
Foundation location plan review $50
§ 124-7 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 124-7
118:223
Chapter/
Section Type of Application Fee
As-built review/final inspection fee $150
Revised grading plan fee $100
Reinspection fee $100
Land Use, Zoning and Development
[Amended 4-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-7]
Ch. 176
[Amended
8-10-2011
by Ord.
No.
2011-9]
Zoning permit $35
Parks, Playgrounds and Recreation Areas
[Added 4-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-6]
Ch. 201 Field usage fee for Waterford
Township residents
$25 per day
Field usage fee for nonresidents $75per day
Summer camp registration $25 per camper
Summer camp camper tuition $105 per camper
per week
Summer camp counselor-intraining
tuition
$65 per camper
per week
Summer camp early dropoff/late
pickup
$20 per camper
per week
Peddling and Soliciting [Amended
4-26-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-14]
§ 208-10A Registration fee $50
§ 208-10B Peddler, hawker, vendor, solicitor
or canvasser license fee
$175
Seasonal sales vendor license fee $300
§ 208-10C Identification badge $300
Pool and Billiard Tables [Amended
7-10-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10]
§ 214-4 Annual license, fee Up to $25
§ 124-7 WATERFORD CODE § 124-7
118:224
Chapter/
Section
Type of Application Fee
Property Maintenance [Amended
9-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-13]
Art. I, Standards and Administration
§ 220-12 Maintenance code certificate $25
§ 220-18 Grass and weed cutting $350
Art. II, Vacant and Abandoned Properties
§ 220-23 Vacant property registration
[Added 10-28-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-18; amended 6-14-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-17]
Initial registration and each
subsequent renewal
$500
Art. III,
Registration
of
defaulted
mortgage
properties
[Added
3-8-2017
by Ord.
No.
2017-10]
§ 220-29G Semi-annual registration fee
(nonrefundable)
$850
Rental Properties [Added 2-25-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-3;
amended 2-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-3]
Art. I, Registration and Licensing
§ 223-11 Registration and inspection fees
Annual registration fee, per
rental unit
$50
Amended registration fee, per
unit
$25
Reinspection fee, per unit $25
Late fee $20
Recreational Motor Vehicles [Added
8-8-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-15]
§ 233-4.1 Registration fee $25
§ 124-7 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 124-7
118:225
Chapter/
Section Type of Application Fee
Streets and Sidewalks
Art. I, Street Openings and Excavations
§ 239-6 Utility/commercial application fee
Access $100
Private closing $50
Structure relocation $50
Utility pole, beacon and lights $50
Residence and business
combination
$150
Monitoring wells (each
curbline opening)
$200
Commercial access $500
Commercial development with
widening
$1,250
Soil borings:
1 to 5 $100
6 to 10 $200
Each additional over 10 $25
Road openings within right-of-way
(sidewalk, grass area, shoulder or
travelway
Single: not to exceed 16
square fee
$125
Multiple: over 16 square feet,
but not to exceed 200 square
feet
$250
Each additional 200 square
feet or part thereof
$75
Manhole, vault, metering pit,
inlet
$125
Test pit under 16 square feet $125
Test pit over 16 square feet $200
Direct burial cable (fiber optic
additional application
$750
Up to 1,500 feet $250
From 1,501 feet to 2,000 feet $325
§ 124-7 WATERFORD CODE § 124-7
118:226
Chapter/
Section Type of Application Fee
For every 1,000 feet thereafter $60
Handicap ramp with curb and
8 linear feet of sidewalk
Jack/boring up to 100 feet $200
Each additional 50 feet $50
Curb/gutter installation (feet)
0 to 100 $80
101 to 500 $200
501 to 1,000 $300
For every 500 thereafter $30
Sidewalk installation
Nonresidential, every 16 linear
feet
$75
Single-family residential (not
developer), per foot
$1
All fees for ADA pedestrian
ramps in Township right-ofway
are waived. A permit is
still required. All other
handicap ramps:
Each five ramps $100
Each ramp thereafter $80
§ 239-12.1Per diem inspector, per hour $100
Tattooing and Body Piercing
§ 243-2C(1)Operating a tattooing and/or body
piercing establishment
$50 per year
Towing [Amended 9-23-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-10; 12-9-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-21]
§ 257-8G Release of vehicle $25
Annual renewal fee $100
§ 257-9 Removal of illegally parked cars,
including storage for 24 hours
$135
Charge for each additional 24
hours’ storage
$35
Removal of abandoned vehicles as
directed by Chief of Police (no
charge to the Township)
$135
§ 124-7 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 124-7
118:227
§ 124-8. Emergency services personnel and equipment.
Chapter/
Section Type of Application Fee
Emergency towing service from
accident scenes including storage
for a period of up to 24 hours
$135
Upright overturned vehicle $125
Additional service charge for
additional equipment needed
$85 per hour
Cleanup fee [Cleanup of site of
accident or incident as required by
N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.8b]
$35
Gate fee (between the times
indicated, but after normal business
hours)
$90
Inside building storage $45
Outside secured storage $35
Charitable
Clothing
Bins
[Added
2-22-2017
by Ord.
No.
2017-8]
§ 302-4 Annual permit fee, per bin $25
B. Municipal Building Use: Non-affiliated Township organizations. [Added
11-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-26]
(1) A fee shall be charged by the Township of Waterford for use of the
Township Municipal Building by nonaffiliated Township
organizations as follows:
(a) For up to three hours of use, $50.
(b) For any additional hourly use over three hours, $25 per hour.
(2) These fees will not apply to Township-affiliated organizations
seeking to utilize the Township Municipal Building.
A. Hiring police officers for off-duty employment. [Last amended
6-14-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-16]
§ 124-7 WATERFORD CODE § 124-8
118:228
(1) Traffic control: $70 per hour for a full-time police officer or Police
Class II Reserve Officer on any traffic control sites requirement
work zone safety certifications.
(2) Other traffic control: $60 per hour for a full-time police officer or
Police Class II Reserve Officer.
(3) Other police services: $50 per hour for a full-time police officer or
Police Class II Reserve Officer.
(4) Police vehicle fee: $10 per hour.
(5) Administrative fee: $5 per hour.
B. Fire Company personnel and equipment. [Added 10-14-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-15]
(1) A fee shall be charged by the Township of Waterford for the use of
Fire Company personnel and/or equipment as follows:
(a) Personnel: $25 per member.
(b) Equipment: $50 for use of equipment.
(2) These fees will not be applied to nonprofit groups and/or nonprofit
events.
§ 124-8 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 124-8
118:229

ARTICLE III
Waiver of Fees for Handicapped Accessibility Construction
[Adopted 12-8-1999 by Ord. No. 99-16]
§ 124-9. Definitions.
As used in this article the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISABLED PERSON — A person who has the total and permanent inability
to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically
determinable physical or mental impairment, including blindness, and shall
include, but not be limited to, any resident of this state who is disabled
pursuant to the Federal Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. § 416) or the Federal
Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 (45 U.S.C. § 231 et seq.) or is rated as
having a sixty-percent disability or higher pursuant to any federal law
administered by the United States Veteran's Act. For purposes of this
definition, "blindness" means central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the
better eye with the use of a correcting lens. An eye which is accompanied by
a limitation in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual
field subtends an angle no greater than 20° shall be considered as having a
central visual acuity of 20/200 or less.
§ 124-10. Waiver of uniform construction code fees and land
development and zoning fees.
A. No person shall be charged a construction permit fee or enforcing
agency fee for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement designed and undertaken solely to promote accessibility
by disabled persons to an existing private structure or any of the
facilities contained therein.
B. The Planning Board or Zoning Board shall waive application fees as the
same relate to construction, reconstruction, alteration or improvements
designed and undertaken solely to promote accessibility by disabled
persons to an existing private structure or any of the facilities contained
therein. In the discretion of the planning staff, escrows for professional
fees also may be waived for this purpose.
C. A disabled person, or a parent or sibling of a disabled person, shall not
be charged for a permit for any reasonable and necessary construction,
reconstruction, alteration or improvement which promotes accessibility
to his or her own living unit for such disabled person.
§ 124-9 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 124-10
118:231

ARTICLE IV
Development Fees
[Adopted 1-28-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
§ 124-11. Purpose.
§ 124-12. Basic requirements.
§ 124-13. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this article, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to,
an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a onehundred-
percent affordable development.
COAH or the COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the Act which has primary jurisdiction for the
A. In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (the
Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq.; and the State Constitution, subject to
the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption of rules.
B. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46 § 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1
through 40:55D-8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and promulgate
regulations necessary for the establishment, implementation, review,
monitoring and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust
funds and corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under
the jurisdiction of the Council or court of competent jurisdiction and
have a COAH-approved spending plan may retain fees collected from
nonresidential development.
C. This article establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's regulations and in
accordance P.L. 2008, c. 46, §§ 8 and 32 to 38. Fees collected pursuant
to this article shall be used for the sole purpose of providing low- and
moderate-income housing. This article shall be interpreted within the
framework of COAH's rules on development fees, codified at N.J.A.C.
5:97-8.
A. This article shall not be effective until approved by COAH pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.1.
B. The Township shall not spend development fees until COAH has
approved a plan for spending such fees in conformance with N.J.A.C.
5:97-8.10 and 5:96-5.3.
§ 124-11 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 124-13
118:233
administration of housing obligations in accordance with sound regional
planning considerations in the state.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the improvement of
property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property divided
by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality
in which the property is situated, as determined in accordance with §§ 1, 5,
and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a through 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment, and enhance the health, safety
and well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of existing
infrastructure and community services.
§ 124-14. Residential development fees.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all zoning districts, residential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted
below, shall pay a fee of 1.5% of the equalized assessed value for
residential development, provided no increased density is
permitted.
(2) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of the
equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application,
the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus
development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right
during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential
development.
(1) Affordable housing developments and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
§ 124-13 WATERFORD CODE § 124-14
118:234
§ 124-15. Nonresidential development fees.
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a site
plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building permit shall
be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for this
purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that the
building permit is issued.
(3) Expansion of a residential building, where no new unit is
constructed, shall be exempt from development fees.
(4) Development fees shall not be imposed on public school or
municipal facilities.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted, shall
pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized assessed value of the land
and improvements for all nonresidential construction.
(2) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to
2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting from any
additions to existing structures to be used for nonresidential
purposes.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the preexisting land and improvement and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e., land
and improvement, at the time final certificate of occupancy is
issued. If the calculation required under this section results in a
negative number, the nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions, and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(1) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or marketrate
development shall be subject to the two-and-a-half-percent
development fee, unless otherwise exempted below.
(2) The two-and-a-half-percent fee shall not apply to an increase in
equalized assessed value resulting from alterations, change in use
within existing footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(3) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as specified in the
Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Nonresidential Development
§ 124-14 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 124-15
118:235
§ 124-16. Collection procedures.
Certification/Exemption Form." Any exemption claimed by a
developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
(4) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, shall
be subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer
applies, and shall make the payment of the nonresidential
development fee, in that event, within three years after that event
or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of the
nonresidential development, whichever is later.
(5) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the
fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential
development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable
by the Township as a lien against the real property of the owner.
A. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval
for a development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its
staff to notify the construction official responsible for the issuance of a
building permit. For nonresidential developments, the developer shall
also be provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption" and complete as
per the instructions provided.
B. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption" to be completed
as per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The construction official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
C. The construction official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local tax assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a development
fee.
D. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Municipal Tax Assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
E. The construction official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local assessor of any and all
§ 124-15 WATERFORD CODE § 124-16
118:236
§ 124-17. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is
subject to a development fee.
F. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Municipal Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development to calculate the development fee, and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
G. Should the Township fail to determine or notify the developer of the
amount of the development fee within 10 business days of the request
for final inspection, the developer may estimate the amount due and
pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute process set forth
in subsection b of § 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
H. Fifty percent of the development fee shall be collected at the time of
issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall be
collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer
shall be responsible for paying the difference between the fee
calculated at building permit and that determined at issuance of
certificate of occupancy.
I. Appeal of development fees.
(1) A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, the collected fee shall be
placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by the Township.
Appeals from a determination of the Board may be made to the tax
court in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the
date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed
shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(2) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account
by the Township. Appeals from a determination of the Director may
be made to the tax court in accordance with the provisions of the
State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within
90 days after the date of such determination. Interest earned on
amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
A. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust fund
to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer for the purpose of
depositing development fees collected from residential and
§ 124-16 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 124-17
118:237
§ 124-18. Use of funds.
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
B. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
(1) Payment in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
(2) Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
(3) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(4) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(5) Recapture funds;
(6) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(7) Any other funds collected in connection with the Township's
affordable housing program.
C. Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account, the
Township shall provide COAH with written authorization, in the form of
a three-party escrow agreement between the municipality, the bank,
and COAH, to permit COAH to direct the disbursement of the funds as
provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.13(b).
D. All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
A. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by COAH. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may be used for
any activity approved by COAH to address the Township's fair share
obligation and may be set up as a grant or revolving loan program. Such
activities include, but are not limited to, preservation or purchase of
housing for the purpose of maintaining or implementing affordability
controls, rehabilitation, new construction of affordable housing units
and related costs, accessory apartments, market-to-affordable, or
regional housing partnership programs, conversion of existing
nonresidential buildings to create new affordable units, green building
strategies designed to be cost saving and in accordance with accepted
national or state standards, purchase of land for affordable housing,
improvement of land to be used for affordable housing, extensions or
improvements of roads and infrastructure to affordable housing sites,
financial assistance designed to increase affordability, administration
necessary for implementation of the Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan, or any other activity as permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7
through 5:97-8.9 and specified in the approved spending plan.
§ 124-17 WATERFORD CODE § 124-18
118:238
§ 124-19. Monitoring.
The Township shall complete and return to COAH all monitoring forms
included in monitoring requirements related to the collection of
development fees from residential and nonresidential developers, payments
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Township for past
housing activities.
C. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income
households in affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share
Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development
fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those
households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income. The use of development fees in this manner shall entitle
the Township to bonus credits pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.7.
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
D. The Township may contract with a private or public entity to administer
any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, including the
requirement for affordability assistance in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:96-18.
E. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees may
be expended on administration, including, but not limited to, salaries
and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees necessary to
develop or implement a new construction program, a Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing program. In the
case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of the revenues
collected from development fees shall be expended for such
administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for income
qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental
units, and compliance with COAH's monitoring requirements. Legal or
other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or
objecting to the Council's regulations and/or action are not eligible uses
of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
§ 124-18 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 124-19
118:239
in lieu of constructing affordable units on site, funds from the sale of
units with extinguished controls, barrier-free escrow funds, rental income,
repayments from affordable housing program loans, and any other funds
collected in connection with the Township's housing program, as well as
to the expenditure of revenues and implementation of the plan certified
by COAH. All monitoring reports shall be completed on forms designed by
COAH.
§ 124-20. Ongoing collection of fees.
A. The ability for the Township to impose, collect and expend development
fees shall expire with its substantive certification or judgment of
compliance and repose unless the Township has filed an adopted
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan with COAH or the court, has
petitioned for substantive certification or a judgment of compliance and
repose, and has received COAH's approval of its development fee
ordinance. If the Township fails to renew its ability to impose and
collect development fees prior to the expiration of substantive
certification or a judgment of compliance and repose, it may be subject
to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining within its municipal trust
fund. Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited into the New Jersey
Affordable Housing Trust Fund established pursuant to § 20 of P.L.
1985; c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320).
B. The Township shall not impose a residential development fee on a
development that receives preliminary or final site plan approval after
the expiration of its substantive certification or judgment of
compliance, nor shall the Township retroactively impose a development
fee on such a development. The Township shall not expend development
fees after the expiration of its substantive certification or judgment of
compliance.
§ 124-19 WATERFORD CODE § 124-20
118:240
Chapter 131
FENCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 94.
Fees — See Ch. 124, Art. II.
Land development and zoning — See Ch. 176.
§ 131-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FENCE — Any structure, except living fences, that is erected or maintained
for the purpose of enclosing a piece of land and or structure or to divide a
piece of land into distinct portions or to provide a level of safety.
FRONT YARD — Applies to that portion of the yard which is forward of
the front building line of any building. With regard to corner properties,
those yards which are adjacent to a public street, alley or highway shall be
considered as "front yards" for purposes of this chapter. This definition shall
not apply for purposes of swimming pool protection.
HEIGHT — The distance measured from the existing grade to the top of
the fence measured at a ninety-degree angle at any point along the fence;
highest reading should prevail.
LIVING FENCE — Any fence or hedge composed of live materials.
§ 131-2. Approval required.
No fence, wall or other type of construction shall be erected without first
being approved by the Zoning Official.
§ 131-3. Issuance of permit.
A. Those intending to erect a fence shall, prior to the commencement of
any work, apply to the Construction Office on forms provided by the
Construction Official. The application shall be accompanied by a plan or
sketch showing the proposed location of the fence and the materials
that should be used therefor. The application must be accompanied by a
permit fee as hereinafter set forth, and the application shall be in
accordance with this chapter and any other relevant ordinance, rule or
regulation which applies to construction within the municipality.
B. Upon approval by the Construction Office, a permit shall be issued
which shall be effective for a period of one year. The construction must
be commenced and completed within that time or the permit shall
lapse. The permit shall be available on the job during the progress of
the work so that it may be inspected by the appropriate officials.
§ 124-20 FENCES § 131-3
131:241
§ 131-4. Living fence exceptions.
Living fences are subject to all of the provisions of this chapter except they
shall be exempt from the permit provisions of this chapter. In addition,
no living fence shall be placed nearer than two feet to any sidewalk in
existence, any prospective sidewalk or party line. Living fences must be
maintained in a neatly trimmed condition and shall not interfere with street
visibility on corner lots.
§ 131-5. Applicability.
The permit provisions of this chapter shall apply to fences in the residential
and nonresidential zones in the Township of Waterford and shall also
include multiple dwellings. No fence shall be erected in the applicable zones
of the Township of Waterford in excess of the height limitations as set forth
herein.
§ 131-6. Height limitations.
§ 131-7. Location restrictions. [Amended 4-10-1991 by Ord. No.
91-2]
Any fence erected under this chapter shall be placed at least six inches back
from any property line. Any fence erected in a front yard shall be placed at
least one foot back from the property line. Living fences shall be placed in
accordance with § 131-4 of this chapter.
§ 131-8. Materials and composition.
C. A zoning permit shall be issued by the Township Planning and Zoning
Official in accordance with the requirements of § 131-2. This permit is
required for both new fences and replacement of existing fences.
[Added 4-11-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-5; amended 6-13-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-13]
A. Rear yards. No fence shall be more than six feet in height at the rear of
homes and buildings and shall not extend forward of the front building
line of any existing or proposed dwelling.
B. Front yards. No fence shall be higher than 48 inches in any front yard.
C. Swimming pool fences shall comply with BOCA Article 616.971 or any
subsequent revision.
D. Horse fence. Fence for horses shall not extend beyond the rear wall of
any residence on a public street and shall be no more than six feet in
height.
71.Editor's Note: For current provisions see Section 421.0, Swimming Pools, of the 1993
BOCA National Building Code.
§ 131-3 WATERFORD CODE § 131-8
131:242
§ 131-9. Powers and duties of Construction Official; appeals.
The Township Construction Official shall have the authority to direct, in
writing, the removal, trimming or modification of any shrubs, bushes,
plants, trees, flowers or other vegetation, fence, wall, hedge or other
structure on private or public property wherever the same shall interfere
with adequate visibility for operators of motor vehicles at street
intersections or curbs. Any person who shall refuse or neglect to comply
with the written direction of the Township Construction Official shall be
guilty of violation of this chapter and shall be subject to its penalties. If
the property owner feels aggrieved by any decision of the Construction
Official, he shall have the right of appeal to the Township Zoning Board,
A. Any fence, wall or similar structure as well as shrubbery which unduly
cuts off light or air or which may cause a nuisance, a fire hazard or a
dangerous condition is hereby expressly prohibited. Further, no fence
shall be erected in a front yard in a residential zone or along a public
right-of-way unless the fence is uniformly less than 50% solid.
B. The following fences and fencing materials are specifically prohibited:
(1) Barbed wire.
(2) Short pointed fences.
(3) Canvas fences.
(4) Cloth fences.
(5) Electricity charged fences (except livestock containment).
(6) Poultry fences.
(7) Turkey wire.
(8) Temporary fences such as snow fences (except in emergency).
(9) Expandable fences and collapsible fences, except during
construction of a building.
(10) Tires, rope or chain, etc.
C. All chain link fences shall be erected with the closed loop at the top of
the fence.
D. No fence shall be multicolored.
E. All entrances or gates shall open onto the property.
F. All fences or walls must be erected within the property line and none
shall be erected so as to encroach upon a public right-of-way or to
interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic or to interfere with
visibility on corner lots.
G. The finished side of a fence shall face the adjacent property.
§ 131-8 FENCES § 131-9
131:243
provided that said appeal is made, in writing, within 14 days of the written
notification from the Construction Official. Said appeal shall be filed with
the Township Clerk.
§ 131-10. Fees. [Amended 4-11-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-5; 6-13-2001
by Ord. No. 2001-13]
§ 131-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-11-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-24]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, before the
Municipal Court of the Township, be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000
or imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days or a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the discretion of
the Municipal Judge before whom such defendant shall be convicted. A
separate offense may be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 137
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 26.
Fees — See Ch. 124, Art. II.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 103.
Housing standards — See Ch. 162.
Land development and zoning — See Ch. 176.
A. Any fees to be charged by the Construction Office for permits issued
under this chapter shall be in accordance with the Township Fee
Schedule Ordinance72 in existence at the time of the application.
B. A zoning permit fee shall be charged in accordance with the Township
Fee Schedule Ordinance73 in existence at the time of the application. If
an existing fence is to be replaced at the same location and a permit
was previously issued by the Township for that fence, a fee will not be
charged.
72.Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
73.Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
§ 131-9 WATERFORD CODE § 131-11
131:244
ARTICLE I
Uniform Fire Code Enforcement
[Adopted 8-14-1985 by Ord. No. 85-7]
§ 137-1. Local enforcement.
The Uniform Fire Safety Act74 shall be locally enforced in Waterford
Township.
§ 137-2. Fire Department jurisdiction. [Amended 10-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-23]
All geographical areas as defined by the boundaries of the Township of
Waterford shall be under the jurisdiction of the Waterford Township Fire
Department.
§ 137-3. Duties.
The local enforcement agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures and
premises within the established boundaries of the Township of Waterford,
other than owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings, and shall
faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 137-4. Life-hazard uses.
The local enforcing agency established by § 137-2 of this article shall carry
out the periodic inspections of life-hazard uses required by the Uniform
Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of the Department of Community
Affairs.
§ 137-5. Organization.
The local enforcing agency established by § 137-2 of this article shall be
a part of the Department of Public Safety and shall be under the direct
supervision and control of the elected official appointed by the Mayor of
Waterford Township to supervise the activities of the Department of Public
Safety.
§ 137-6. Appointment of Fire Official.
The local enforcing agency established pursuant to § 137-2 of this article
shall be under the supervision of a Fire Official,75 who shall be appointed
by the governing body of Waterford Township. In making this appointment,
the governing body shall make the appointment from among a list of three
recommendations provided by the Fire Chief of the enforcing agency.
74.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
75.Editor's Note: See Ch. 26, Fire Department.
§ 137-1 FENCES § 137-7
131:245
§ 137-7. Term of office; removal.
The Fire Official shall serve for a term of one year. Any vacancy shall be
filled for the unexpired term. The Fire Official shall be removed from office
during the term of appointment only for good cause shown and only after
having been offered a hearing upon any charges before the governing body.
§ 137-8. Inspectors and employees.
Such inspectors and other employees as may be necessary in the local
enforcing agency shall be appointed by the governing body upon the
recommendation of the Fire Official.
§ 137-9. Removal from office.
Inspectors and other employees of the enforcing agency shall be subject to
removal by the Fire Official for inefficiency or misconduct. Each inspector
or employee to be so removed shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard
by the governing body or a designated hearing officer. The governing body
or designated hearing officer shall have the authority to modify, in whole or
in part, the decision of the Fire Official.
§ 137-10. Board of appeals.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and 52:27D-208 of the Uniform Fire Safety
Act, any person aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement agency
shall have the right to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of
Camden County.
§ 137-11. Additional required inspections and fees. [Amended
5-24-1989 by Ord. No. 89-5; 12-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-24]
A. In addition to the inspection and fees required pursuant to the Act and
regulations of the Department of Community Affairs, fees as set forth in
the Township Fee Schedule Ordinance76 shall be required.
B. Required inspections shall be once every 12 months.
76.Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
§ 137-7 WATERFORD CODE § 137-11
131:246
ARTICLE II
Smoke Detectors
[Adopted 5-25-1977 by Ord. No. 77-6 (Ch. 50, Art. I, of the 1974
Code)]
§ 137-12. Requirements for residential dwellings.
§ 137-13. Conformance with certain code standards.
The aforesaid systems shall conform to the requirements of the most recent
editions of National Fire Code Standard No. 101 relative to life safety and
of National Fire Code Standard No. 74 relative to household fire warning
equipment, adopted by the National Fire Protection Association. Said
devices must meet with the approval of the Underwriters' Laboratories,
Inc., or Factory Neutral Research Corporation.
§ 137-14. Testing and inspection. [Amended 2-14-1996 by Ord. No.
96-3]
Automatic detection devices should be tested periodically as specified by
the Life Safety Code, National Fire Protection Association No. 101, and
Household Fire Warning Equipment, National Fire Protection Association
No. 74, as periodically revised. As relate to multifamily units, all detection
devices shall be periodically inspected by the Code Enforcement Official
during reasonable hours and promulgated by said Code Enforcement
Official or Officials.
§ 137-15. Requirements for multifamily buildings.
For all multifamily buildings, the automatic fire warning system shall be
installed as described above, and such system shall also initiate the
sounding of an audible alarm capable of being heard in all occupied areas
of the building or structure and shall register the location of the alarm at a
specified location within the building. The sounding of this system shall also
be tied into fire headquarters for receipt of fire alarms.
A. Every building or structure not exceeding 35 feet in height above the
mean grade, erected or substantially altered to be occupied for
residential purposes, shall be protected with an automatic fire warning
system equipped with automatic smoke and/or gas detection devices
primarily intended for the protection of life by indicating abnormal
conditions as hereinafter provided.
B. Placement of the aforesaid system shall be in the area or areas as
suggested in Section 74-13 et seq. of the below-cited Fire Code
standards.
§ 137-12 FENCES § 137-16
131:247
§ 137-16. Requirements for new construction. [Amended 2-14-1996
by Ord. No. 96-3]
As concerns all new construction of multifamily units, applicants for
building permits shall include in their construction plans the type, number
and location of detection devices. The Fire Subcode Official shall review
plans and may recommend modifications as per standards set forth in the
latest revisions of the Life Safety Code, National Fire Protection Association
No. 101, and Household Fire Warning Equipment, National Fire Protection
Association No. 74.
§ 137-17. Application of provisions to various structures.
This article shall apply to all structures requiring certificates of occupancy
and constructed, under construction or altered after the effective date
hereof and shall apply to all structures hereafter sold, transferred or in
which there has been a change of occupants.
§ 137-18. Number and placement of detectors. [Amended 2-14-1996
by Ord. No. 96-3]
The number and placement of detectors shall be under the direct control
and enforcement of the Fire Subcode Official and new construction of
multifamily units and the Code Enforcement Official for all other uses
referenced in this Article. Standards for the aforementioned parties are set
forth in the latest revisions of the National Fire Code, Section 74-3, No. 4,
of Table 23.3.
§ 137-19. Responsibility for installation; violations and penalties.
The transferor of any dwelling unit is responsible for installation of said
detection devices. Failure to install necessary devices shall be punishable
by a fine of $25 per day for each day of violation, the Municipal Court of
the Township of Waterford having the right to suspend fines as said Court
deems applicable.
§ 137-20. Interpretation of provisions.
The provisions of this article shall apply without regard to the regulations of
lenders or funding agencies and shall be in addition to any control exercised
by such agencies concerning construction and fire protection requirements
related to such construction.
§ 137-16 WATERFORD CODE § 137-20
131:248
ARTICLE III
Rapid Entry Systems
[Adopted 2-22-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-9]
§ 137-21. Facilities required to have systems.
§ 137-22. Approval of system; keys.
A. The Department of Public Safety and Fire Prevention of the Waterford
Township Fire Department have determined that the owner, tenant and/
or occupants of the following types of building(s) or structure(s) are to
have installed on their building(s) or structure(s) a rapid-entry key box
to be located in an accessible location as determined by the Township
Fire Official.
(1) All hotels, motels, or multiple dwellings that are occupied
throughout the day or night and have common corridors to living
units or spaces.
(2) Any property that utilizes a locked gate to control vehicle access to
the property.
(3) All structures protected by an automatic alarm system or automatic
fire-suppression system.
(4) Any building equipped with an elevator.
(5) Any structure deemed by the Township Fire Official to be difficult
to access because of secured openings.
B. Exceptions: any property protected by on-site twenty-four-hour, seven
days a week security guard service, maintenance or nursing staff,
owner-occupied facilities and one- and two-family dwellings.
A. The type of rapid-entry key-box system to be installed shall be approved
by the Fire Official prior to the purchase of same.
B. The Fire Official may request, and the owner of the building or
structure concerned shall provide, two sets of keys, access cards or fobs
for the following areas within the building or structure:
(1) Pass or master keys as may be available.
(2) Boiler rooms.
(3) Sprinkler rooms and control valves.
(4) Fire alarm control panels.
(5) Electrical rooms.
(6) Elevators and elevator control rooms.
§ 137-21 FENCES § 137-22
131:249
§ 137-23. Additional materials to be in box.
In addition to keys, combinations and access codes for locks for doors
shall be stored within the rapid-entry key box system. Material safety data
sheets, emergency contact numbers and other pertinent information as may
be necessary to deal with emergencies at the site may be required to be
within the rapid-entry key box system as well, as determined by the Fire
Official.
§ 137-24. Time frame for compliance; applications.
§ 137-25. Privacy protection.
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other section of this article, no
official, employee or member of the Township Fire Department or any of its
divisions shall request, nor shall an owner be required to provide, a key to
any self-contained individual living space area, unit or room.
§ 137-26. Keys and information to be kept current.
The owner/operator of any building or structure that requires a rapid-entry
key box system shall be required to have placed therein updated keys and
documents for all locks and structures as required at all times.
§ 137-27. Emergency contact information.
All business and multiple-family buildings and complexes must provide to
the Fire Official and Township Fire Chief and post in a conspicuous location
the emergency contacts and service companies for use by all Township
emergency personnel.
§ 137-28. Response to emergency by responsible party.
Upon response to fire alarm activation or an emergency condition involving
a multiple-tenant residential property or a property that is closed for
business or otherwise unoccupied, the Waterford Township Fire
Department will require the response of an identified responsible party to
assume control of the involved property. Failure of a responsible party to
(7) Such other room(s) [or door(s)] requested by the Fire Official
where entry may be required.
A. All new buildings meeting the criteria of § 137-21 constructed after the
effective date of this article shall have a rapid-entry key box installed
and operational prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and all
existing buildings, within 90 days of the effective date of this article,
shall provide a rapid-entry key box.
B. The applications for providing the information for the rapid-entry key
box are available at the Township Clerk's office and are required to be
signed by the Township Fire Chief.
§ 137-22 WATERFORD CODE § 137-28
131:250
immediately respond to the request may result in a penalty assessment for
violation of this provision in an amount not to exceed $150 per occurrence
as determined by the Waterford Township Municipal Court.
§ 137-29. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any other penalties or remedies authorized by laws of this
state, any person, firm or corporation who or which violates any provision of
this article shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 for each violation,
or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days, in the discretion of the Municipal Court
Judge.
§ 137-28 FENCES § 137-29
131:251
Chapter 143
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 103.
Grading — See Ch. 155.
Land use, development and zoning — See Ch.
176.
Soil removal — See Ch. 232.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 237.
Water — See Ch. 278.
§ 137-29 WATERFORD CODE § 137-29
131:252
ARTICLE I
Purpose; Methods; Definitions
§ 143-1. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
§ 143-2. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their action.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
§ 143-1 FENCES § 143-2
131:253
§ 143-3. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Zoning Official's interpretation of
any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
APPEAL BOARD — The Planning Board of the Township of Waterford.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, or VO Zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one-percent
annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one foot to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the elevated
floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts
and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of special flood
hazard, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill
or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 143-2 WATERFORD CODE § 143-3
131:254
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland
or tidal waters and/or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, useable solely for
the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than
a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either
by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
D.
§ 143-3 FENCES § 143-3
131:255
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348), includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
“actual start of construction” means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 143-3 WATERFORD CODE § 143-3
131:256
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Means any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 143-3 FENCES § 143-3
131:257

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 143-4. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Waterford, County of Camden, State of New
Jersey.
§ 143-5. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Waterford, Community
No. 340147, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
§ 143-6. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than $2,000 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township of Waterford
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 143-7. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and any other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 143-8. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be
considered as minimum requirements; liberally construed in favor of the
A. Flood Insurance Rate Map for Camden County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions), as shown on Index and Panel Numbers 0141, 0145, 0165,
0170, 0207, 0228, 0229, 0230, 0235, 0240, 0245, and 0255, the
effective date of which is September 28, 2007.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at 2131
Auburn Avenue, Atco, New Jersey 08004.
§ 143-4 FENCES § 143-8
131:259
governing body; and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers
granted under state statutes.
§ 143-9. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of
Waterford, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 143-8 WATERFORD CODE § 143-9
131:260
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 143-10. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in § 143-5.
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by
the Zoning Official and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate
drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations
of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically,
the following information is required:
§ 143-11. Designation of the local administrator.
The Zoning Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement this
chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions, subject to review and approval of the
Township Engineer. All engineering review costs shall be the sole
responsibility of the applicant.
§ 143-12. Duties and responsibilities of the administrator.
Duties of the Zoning Official shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed; and
C. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review. The Zoning Official shall:
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 143-5,
the Zoning Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or
other source.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained. The Zoning Official shall:
§ 143-10 FENCES § 143-12
131:261
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses. The Zoning Official shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section,
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. The Zoning Official shall: make
interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual
field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in § 143-13.
§ 143-12 WATERFORD CODE § 143-12
131:262
ARTICLE IV
Variance Procedure
§ 143-13. Appeal Board.
A. The Appeal Board as established by the Township of Waterford shall
hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
B. The Appeal Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there
is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the
Zoning Official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board, or any taxpayer,
may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of New Jersey.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Appeal Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area.
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
(10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
(11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
§ 143-13 FENCES § 143-13
131:263
§ 143-14. Conditions for variances.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of § 143-13D and the purposes of this
chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
F. The Zoning Official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal
Insurance Administration upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing the items in
§ 143-13D(1) through (11) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required
for issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
D. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public as identified in § 143-13D, or conflict
with existing local laws or ordinances.
E. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built and that the cost
of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 143-13 WATERFORD CODE § 143-14
131:264
ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
§ 143-15. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
§ 143-16. Subdivision proposals.
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and
local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(4) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
A. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage.
B. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
§ 143-15 FENCES § 143-16
131:265
§ 143-17. Manufactured homes.
Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with § 143-15A. All
manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within an area
of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such
that the top of the lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation.
C. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage.
D. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development which contain at least 50 lots or five
acres, whichever is less.
§ 143-16 WATERFORD CODE § 143-17
131:266
Chapter 149
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 89. Pool and billiard parlors — See Ch. 214.
§ 149-1. Statutory authorization.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 5:8-31, entitled "Sunday; conduct of games on,"
games of chance shall be conducted under any license issued pursuant to
the provisions of Chapter 6 of the Public Laws of 1954 for the State of
New Jersey on the first day of the week, commonly known and designated
as "Sunday," the conduct of which is hereby authorized and permitted to
be held on the first day of the week, commonly known and designated as
"Sunday," limited to one Sunday per month.
Chapter 155
GRADING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 103.
Fees — See Ch. 124.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 143.
Land use, development and zoning — See Ch.
176.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 220.
Soil removal — See Ch. 232.
Street openings and excavations — See Ch.
239, Art. I.
§ 143-17 GAMES OF CHANCE § 149-1
149:267

ARTICLE I
Grading and Drainage of Residential Lots
[Adopted 3-23-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-2]
§ 155-1. Applicability.
The requirements set forth herein shall apply to the development of all
lots within the Township of Waterford for residential purposes. For
developments where an overall grading plan has already been reviewed and
approved by either the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
the review and approval of an individual lot grading plan prior to the
issuance of a building permit is required. Any lot greater than one acre shall
not be subject to the requirement to submit an individual lot grading plan,
unless in the opinion of the Zoning Officer or Township Engineer there are
special circumstances to require an individual lot grading plan.
§ 155-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEVELOPMENT — The construction, reconstruction or relocation of any
residential structure; the enlargement of a residential structure, the
construction or placement of an accessory structure including in-ground
swimming pools on a residential lot resulting in a land disturbance of 500
square feet or more on a 1/4 acre or less lot or 1,000 square feet or more on
a lot over 1/4 acre.
§ 155-3. Review and approval.
Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the Township Engineer from
requiring a new, overall grading plan for review and approval. The applicant
shall be entitled to administrative review, if the plan meets the performance
standards contained herein, provided that the proposed changes do not
violate or create a conflict with the prior approvals granted by the
approving authority. If in the opinion of the Township Engineer the revised
grading plan substantially deviates from the prior approval, the applicant
shall be required to seek the approval of the applicable board.
§ 155-4. Foundation location plan.
A. The State of New Jersey, through the Uniform Construction Code,77
requires that a foundation location survey be submitted to the Township
Construction Official as soon as possible after the installation of the
foundation wall. Further, the final verification of such a prior approval
rests with the Construction Official. This plan shall be prepared by a
land surveyor licensed by the State of New Jersey and show all building
corners of the foundation. To confirm that the top-of-block elevation
conforms to the approved plan, the permittee shall also submit a
77.Editor's Note: See Ch. 103, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 155-1 GAMES OF CHANCE § 155-4
149:269
§ 155-5. Final survey (as-built plan).
Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the permittee shall
submit two copies of an accurate final survey (as-built plan) to the Zoning
Officer and the Township Engineer for approval. The final survey (as-built
plan) shall be prepared by a New Jersey licensed professional land surveyor.
The purpose of the final survey (as-built plan) is to ensure that the lot
grading is in substantial conformance to the approved plan and that the lot
will adequately drain and have no adverse impact on adjoining properties.
The final survey (as-built plan) shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer
and determined to comply with the above standards.
§ 155-6. Performance standards.
foundation location plan to the Township Engineer for review. The
foundation plan shall contain the top of block.
B. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a permittee from commencing
with framing prior to the submission of the foundation location plan to
the Engineer but will instead be a matter to be resolved by the
contractor prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
However, since the permittee shall demonstrate conformance to the
performance standards listed below in § 155-5 prior to the issuance of
the certificate of occupancy, it is recommended that the foundation
location plan be submitted to the Engineer as soon after the installation
of the foundation walls as possible.
A. All grading shall be done in a manner that will result in no adverse
impact to adjacent properties. Adjacent properties with natural swales
and/or wetlands must be evaluated to insure that adequate capacity is
available to accept the runoff from the site being developed and graded.
Whenever possible, the land shall be graded in one of the following
methods:
(1) The rear yard shall drain overland to the street through side yard
swales on either side of the house, located on the common property
lines with adjoining lots, and the front yard shall drain directly to
the street;
(2) The rear yard shall drain and be collected in a system of interior
yard inlets and piping designed in accordance with accepted
standards, connected to the development's overall stormwater
drainage system, and the front yard shall drain directly to the
street; or
(3) The rear yard shall drain overland onto adjoining properties as
permitted by right, i.e., no net increase in rate of runoff or manner
of flow or via an acceptable easement, and the front yard shall
drain directly to the street.
§ 155-4 WATERFORD CODE § 155-6
149:270
(4) Groundwater collected by sump pumps must be discharged to the
ground surface, outside of the building, a storm drain or a sump
pump collection system. Sump pump discharge to Township streets
creates a nuisance problem with algae buildup in the warm months.
In the winter months, serious icing is created on the streets. Water
from sump pumps which flows across the homeowner's property
line can create a nuisance for neighbors. Extending the sump pump
hose across the public sidewalk is also prohibited since it creates
an obstruction along a walking path. Any discharge of water onto a
public street is strictly forbidden and is the responsibility of the
property owner to abate. Any stormwater or groundwater directed
to the outside of the property by a mechanical means shall drain
onto the private property as to not cause a hazard or other type of
condition that would affect pedestrians, sidewalks, Township rightof-
way or streets. No sump pump outlet shall drain or be pumped
directly or indirectly onto the sidewalk or public street. A sump
pump outlet shall be terminated within the area of the lot on which
it is located and shall not discharge onto adjoining properties. A
sump pump shall not discharge water, either directly or indirectly,
into the sanitary sewer system. [Added 8-8-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-21]
B. No more than three lots in a row shall be allowed to drain through a
swale unless protected by an acceptable easement.
C. The minimum slope for swales, lawns, and disturbed areas shall be 2%
and for smooth, hard surfaces, i.e., driveways, 0.5%. If slopes of 2%
cannot be maintained for swales, a grade of 1.5% may be acceptable,
under special circumstances and with justification, if the Township
Engineer accepts the justification.
D. The maximum grade for driveways shall be 10% unless waived by the
Township Engineer under special circumstances.
E. The top-of-block elevation shall be a minimum of eight inches above the
highest adjacent grade and shall be provided on all grading plans. The
notation of the finished floor alone is not acceptable.
F. Grading within eight feet of the dwelling shall be in accordance with
local building codes.
G. Retaining walls over three feet in height must be designed and then
reviewed and approved by the Township Engineer.
H. Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed
so as to provide at least five inches of spread cover to all seeded and
planted areas of the development and shall be stabilized by seeding or
planting. Topsoil shall be reasonably free of stone and contain no stones
larger than two inches in any dimension. In the event that the quantity
of topsoil at the site is insufficient to provide five inches of cover for all
seeded and planted areas, the permittee shall provide and distribute a
§ 155-6 GAMES OF CHANCE § 155-6
149:271
§ 155-7. Performance bond and inspection escrow.
Where a performance bond and inspection escrow have already been or will
be established, the requirements for the posting of fees may be waived,
unless the permittee elects to proceed with the fixed fee schedule. In
those instances where a permittee elects not to proceed with the fixed
fee schedule, a separate line item for lot grading shall be included in
the performance bond estimate and inspection escrow deposit shall be
calculated pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law (Chapter 291, Laws
of N.J. 1975, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.). The bond amount for grading,
stabilization and yard drainage for nonmunicipal property shall be $2,000
per acre actually disturbed. Separate items are to be listed for municipal
and nonmunicipal property. The item for nonmunicipal property shall not
convert over to any subsequent maintenance bond. Dollar amounts shall be
updated as the need arises.
§ 155-8. Compliance with Pinelands stormwater management
standards.
All conditions and requirements herein shall be consistent with the
Pinelands stormwater management standards as set forth in the Pinelands
Comprehensive Management Plan and any standard adopted hereto.
§ 155-9. Checklist and application.
All of the requirements for the control of grading and drainage of residential
lots shall be required to adhere to the checklist and application which is
attached hereto and considered a requirement of this chapter.78
§ 155-10. Fees.
Fees shall be as set forth in § 124-7.
sufficient quantity of topsoil to provide such cover. The composition
of any borrowed topsoil shall be in accordance with New Jersey
Department of Transportation (NJDOT) standards and suitable for use
in a residential setting.
I. The permittee may request a waiver of a particular performance
standard upon presentation of a reasonable justification. The Township
Engineer shall have the authority to review the request and issue an
administrative change, provided it is not inconsistent with the intent of
this article.
78.Editor's Note: The checklist and application are on file in the Township offices.
§ 155-6 WATERFORD CODE § 155-10
149:272
Chapter 159
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 180.
Sewers — See Ch. 226.
Solid waste — See Ch. 235.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 306.
§ 159-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLEANUP AND REMOVAL COSTS — All costs associated with a discharge,
as defined herein, within the boundaries of the Township of Waterford,
which shall include labor and material for the removal of hazardous
substances or taking of reasonable measures to prevent or mitigate
damages to the public health, safety or welfare of the residents of the
Township of Waterford, including real property, both private and public.
DISCHARGE — Any intentional or unintentional act or omission resulting
in the release, spill, leak, emission, dumping or disposal of hazardous
substances into the waters or lands within the Township of Waterford, or
outside the township when damage may result to the waters or lands within
the township.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — All elements and compounds, including
petroleum products, as set forth in N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11b, as amended,
except that sewage and sewage sludge shall be considered hazardous
substances for the purpose of this chapter.
PERSON — Any individual, public or private corporation, companies,
association, societies, firms, partnerships or joint-stock companies.
§ 159-2. Assignment of liability.
After due investigation by the Township of Waterford, any person who shall
be found to have discharged hazardous substances within the township
shall be held strictly liable for all cleanup and removal costs incurred by the
Township of Waterford and its agents, servants and employees. Said person
shall receive written notification of the amount due. Payment is required to
be made to the township within 30 days of the date of notice.
§ 159-3. Hearing upon reasonableness of assessment.
Upon assessment of cleanup and removal costs, the person assessed may,
within 10 days of receipt of such notice of assessment, make a written
request for a hearing before the Township Committee. The hearing shall
§ 155-10 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES § 159-3
159:273
deal exclusively with the reasonableness of the amount assessed. Liability
will not be an issue.
§ 159-4. Liability for attorney's fees and collection costs.
The person responsible for the discharge shall be liable for all reasonable
attorney's fees and costs incurred in the collection of cleanup and removal
cost due to failure of the responsible person to remit payment as required
herein.
Chapter 162
(RESERVED)
Chapter 168
INSURANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 137.
§ 168-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to P.L. 1978, c. 184,79 a municipality may adopt an ordinance
regulating the payment of an insurance claim in excess of $2,500.
§ 168-2. Conditions for payment of claims.80
No insurance company authorized to issue fire insurance policies in this
state shall pay any claim in excess of $2,500 on any real property located
within the Township of Waterford pursuant to any fire insurance policy
issued or renewed after the adoption of this Article and after the filing of
said Article with the State Commissioner of Insurance, unless or until the
insured person submits an official certificate of search for municipal liens
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-12 certifying that all taxes, assessments or other
municipal liens or charges levied and assessed and due and payable against
said property have been paid and that demolition is not required or that
costs of demolition have been paid.
§ 168-3. Payment of delinquent taxes and liens in installments.
The governing body may enter into an agreement with the owner of any firedamaged
property to permit said owner to pay in full all delinquent taxes or
municipal liens by installments if said governing body is satisfied that the
79.Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq.
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 159-3 WATERFORD CODE § 168-3
162:274
claim for fire damage is to be used to restore or improve the fire-damaged
property.
Chapter 175
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sex offenders — See Ch. 228.
§ 175-1. Legislative intent.
It is the Legislative intent of the Township Committee of the Township
of Waterford to repeal Ordinance 81-981 of the Township of Waterford in
order to authorize and comtemporize the regulation of sexually oriented
businesses within the borders of the Township of Waterford, County of
Camden, State of New Jersey.
§ 175-2. Statutory authorization; findings of fact; purposes and
objectives.
A. Statutory authorization. It is the responsibility of the local government
to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare. Such power has been delegated to the municipalities
from the legislature of the State of New Jersey. The Township
Committee of the Township of Waterford, in order to better promote the
public health, safety and general welfare of its citizens, does ordain as
follows.
B. Findings of fact.
(1) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:34-2b, the Legislature of the State of New
Jersey has determined that it is a fourth-degree crime to sell,
distribute, rent or exhibit material which is obscene. Consequently,
the State of New Jersey has preempted the Township of Waterford
from prohibiting the sale of material which the Township believes
to be obscene. However, in order to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare of its citizens, the Township of
Waterford may promulgate reasonable time, place and manner
regulations with respect to the sale, distribution, rental or
exhibition of various items by sexually oriented businesses.
(2) The Township of Waterford has determined that sexually oriented
businesses have a deleterious effect on both the existing businesses
adjacent to such establishments as well as the surrounding
residential areas; cause increased crime, especially prostitution;
81.Editor's Note: This ordinance comprised former Ch. 77, Adult Establishments, adopted
9-9-1981.
§ 168-3 INSURANCE § 175-2
168:275
§ 175-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still or image-producing devices are maintained to
show images to one person per machine at any one time and where the
images displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or
describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE — A commercial
establishment which as its principal business conspicuously offers for sale
or for rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or other commercial
establishment, whether or not same is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages
for on-premises consumption, which regularly features:
adversely affect property value; create an atmosphere which is
inimical to the values of a significant segment of the Township's
population; and encourage residents and businesses to move
elsewhere and that such sexually oriented businesses, when
located in close proximity to each other, contribute to urban blight
and downgrade the quality of life in the adjacent areas.
C. Purposes and objectives. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate
sexually oriented businesses so as to minimize and control the adverse
effects recognized in the preceding section and to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the Township of
Waterford. The Township Committee of the Township of Waterford finds
that the secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments, as
established through the reports and studies of other cities and
municipalities with the appropriate resources to conduct the same, is
deleterious and inimical to health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of the municipality. It is not the purpose of this chapter to
restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented material protected
by the First Amendment nor will this chapter have the effect of
restricting or denying such access.
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed material or
photographs, films, motion pictures and videocassette or video
reproductions, slides or other visual representations which depict or
describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
A.
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities.
B.
A. Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or
§ 175-2 WATERFORD CODE § 175-3
168:276
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which
offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and
which:
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes,
slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas. Adult motion-picture theaters shall meet the
seating criteria established for all adult theaters.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
Seating shall be provided in a design consistent with traditional movie
theaters. All sitting areas shall be visible and unobstructed.
ADULT SEX TOY OR EQUIPMENT SHOP — A commercial establishment
which sells retail, in whole or in part, as defined in the popular culture,
sex toys and/or equipment utilized by some as part of the sex act. This is a
propriety; these types of items shall be called sexual paraphernalia.
NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY — The appearance of a human bare
buttocks, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breasts.
OBSCENE MATERIALS — The definition of obscene materials set forth
in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-2, as the same shall be from time to time amended or
supplemented, as well as in accordance with and not more strictly than
judicial interpretations thereof pursuant to the Constitution of the United
States and of the State of New Jersey finally concluded in courts of
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by sexual conduct or by specified sexual activities;
or
B.
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, compact disks, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities, sexual activities, sexual
conduct or specified anatomical areas.
C.
Provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and has a
sign visible from a public right-of-way which advertises the availability
of this adult-type of photographic reproductions;
A.
Offers a sleeping room for a tenant for rent for a period of time that is
less than 10 hours; or
B.
Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for
a period of time that is less than 10 hours.
C.
§ 175-3 INSURANCE § 175-3
168:277
jurisdiction sufficient to render decisions on constitutional questions of
general application.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult carbaret, adult motel, adult motion-picture theater or adult theater.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Includes any of the following:
§ 175-4. Location; general requirements.
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breasts below the point immediately above
the top of the areola; or
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
B.
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breasts;
A.
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
B.
C. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in Subsections A through C.
D.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter if a person operates or causes to
operate or allows to operate a sexually oriented business as defined in
§ 175-3.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter if a person operates or causes to
operate or allows to be operated a sexually oriented business:
(1) Within 1,000 feet of a place of worship.
(2) Within 1,000 feet of a school, whether public or private, or within
1,000 feet of any school bus stop.
(3) Within 1,000 feet of any other sexually oriented business.
(4) Within 1,000 feet of any residential use or zone.
(5) Within 1,000 feet of any public park or playground.
C. Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point of the building
or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented
business is conducted to the nearest property line of the premises of a
§ 175-3 WATERFORD CODE § 175-4
168:278
§ 175-5. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 176
LAND USE, DEVELOPMENT AND ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Planning and Zoning — See
Ch. 47.
Animals — See Ch. 94.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 103.
Development fees — See Ch. 124, Art. IV.
Fences — See Ch. 131.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 143.
Grading — See Ch. 155.
Sexually oriented businesses — See Ch. 175.
Soil removal — See Ch. 232.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 237.
place of worship, a school, a boundary of a residential district, a public
park or playground, a lot devoted to residential use or a school bus stop.
D. A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is
not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the
establishment of the sexually oriented business, of a place of worship,
school, public area, residential district or residential lot within 1,000
feet of the sexually oriented business.
E. Sexually oriented businesses shall conform to design standards and
development requirements established through the ordinances of the
Township of Waterford.
F. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted on the premises
of a sexually oriented business for any purpose.
G. No display visible from the exterior of the sexually oriented business
shall contain material of a sexually oriented nature.
A. Any person in violation of any provision of this chapter, upon conviction,
is punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000, or a term of imprisonment
not to exceed 90 days, or by community service of not more than 90
days, or any combination of fine, imprisonment and community service,
as determined in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge. In no
event shall any person violating this chapter, upon conviction, receive a
final fine below the amount of $100.
B. Each day a sexually oriented business is in operation in violation of
§ 175-4 of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense under this
chapter.
§ 175-4 INSURANCE § 175-5
168:279

ARTICLE I
Title, Purpose and Definitions
§ 176-1. Title.
Ordinance No. 97-14, entitled "Waterford Township Land Use, Development
and Zoning Ordinance," adopted by the governing body of Waterford
Township on August 13, 1997, amends Chapter 176 of the Municipal Code
in its entirety. It is a comprehensive ordinance regulating and limiting the
uses of land; uses and locations of buildings and structures; regulating and
restricting the height and bulk of buildings and structures; determining
the area of yards and other open spaces; regulating and restricting the
density of populations; creating zoning districts for such purposes; adopting
a map of the Township showing the boundaries and the classification of
zoning districts; establishing rules, regulations and standards governing the
subdivision and development of land; establishing a Planning Board; and
setting penalties for violation of its provisions.
§ 176-2. Short title.
This chapter may be cited and called "Chapter 176, Regulations for Land
Use, Development and Zoning."
§ 176-3. Purpose.
The regulations in Chapter 176 are adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. to promote and protect the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare, and in furtherance of the following related and more specific
objectives:
A. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic, and other natural and manmade
disasters;
B. To provide adequate light, air and open space;
C. To ensure that the development of the Township of Waterford does not
conflict with the development and general welfare of neighboring
municipalities, the county and state as a whole;
D. To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons,
neighborhoods, and preservation of the environment;
E. To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds
by the coordination of public development with land use policies;
F. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
agricultural, residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses
and open space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements to meet the needs of all New Jersey
citizens;
§ 176-1 INSURANCE § 176-3
168:281
§ 176-4. Interpretation of standards.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum standards. Where the provisions of this chapter
are more restrictive than those of any other statute, ordinance or
regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Where the provisions
of any other statute, ordinance or regulation require greater restrictions
than are imposed by this chapter, the provisions of such statute, ordinance
or regulation shall prevail.
§ 176-5. Prohibited uses.
All uses not expressly permitted in this chapter are prohibited.
G. To encourage the location and design of transportation routes that will
allow the free flow of traffic while discouraging location of such
facilities and routes that result in congestion or blight;
H. To promote a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangements;
I. To promote the conservation of historic sites and districts, open space,
energy resources and valuable natural resources in the state and to
prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the environment through
improper use of land;
J. To encourage planned unit developments that incorporate the best
features of design and relate the type, design and layout of residential,
commercial, industrial and recreational development of the particular
site;
K. To encourage senior citizen community housing construction;
L. To encourage coordination of the various public and private procedures
and activities shaping land development with a view of lessening the
cost of development and the more efficient use of land;
M. To promote utilization of renewable energy sources;
N. To promote the maximum practicable recovery and recycling of
recyclable materials from municipal solid waste through planning
practices designed to incorporate the State Recycling Plan goals and to
complement municipal recycling programs;
O. To further the goals and policies of the Master Plan of the Township of
Waterford, as latest revised;
P. To further the goals and objectives of the Pinelands Protection Act
(N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 et seq.) as latest revised; and
Q. To further the goals and objectives of residential site improvement
standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21 et seq.) as latest revised.
§ 176-3 WATERFORD CODE § 176-6
168:282
§ 176-6. Compliance.
§ 176-7. Word usage.
§ 176-8. Compliance with other definitions.
A. No parcel of land shall be disturbed or used unless the disturbance or
use meets all requirements of this chapter and the CMP.
B. All applicable requirements shall be met at the time of construction,
enlargement, alteration, moving, or change in the use of any structure
or parcel of land, and shall apply to the entire structure and/or parcel of
land, whether or not the entire structure or parcel of land was involved
in the construction, enlargement, alteration, moving or change in use.
C. In all instances, the Planning Board shall exercise the application of the
requirements of this chapter in a reasonable manner, considering both
the existing and proposed development of the subject parcel of land.
A. For the interpretation of this chapter, certain words and phrases are
herein defined as follows:
(1) Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other
tenses and derivative forms;
(2) Words in the singular shall include the plural and words in the
plural shall include the singular;
(3) The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the feminine
gender shall include the masculine;
(4) The word "used" shall include arranged, designed, constructed,
altered, converted, rented, leased or intended to be used;
(5) The word "building" includes the words "structure," "dwelling" or
"residence";
(6) The word "lot" includes the word "plot," "premises" and "parcel";
(7) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory and not discretionary;
(8) The words "should" and "may" are discretionary and not
mandatory.
B. Any word or term not defined or referenced in § 176-9 shall be used
with a meaning of standard usage as defined in Webster's New
International Dictionary of the English Language, unabridged and
latest edition.
A. Whenever a term is used in this chapter that is not defined in § 176-9
nor in the CMP (N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 et seq.) but is defined in the MLUL
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), such term is intended to have the meaning
as defined in the MLUL. Any definitions and abbreviations contained in
§ 176-6 INSURANCE § 176-8
168:283
§ 176-9. Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall be
used in the interpretation and construction of this chapter:
ABANDONMENT — Constitutes the discontinuance of a nonconforming use
of land or structures.
ACCESSORY USE, STRUCTURE OR BUILDING — A use, structure or
building which is subordinate to and serves a principal building or a
principal use; is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal
structure or principal building or use served; contributes primarily to the
comfort, convenience or necessity of the occupants, business or industry
of the principal structure or principal use served; and is located on the
same parcel as the principal structure or principal use served, except
as otherwise expressly authorized by the provisions of the CMP and this
chapter. In the case of an accessory structure or building, it shall be
detached from the principal building.
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW COMMITTEE — Municipal Engineer,
Construction Official, Zoning Official, Public Works Manager, Public Safety
Officer, and, in the case of subdivisions, Tax Assessor.
ADVERSE EFFECTS — Conditions or situations created by a proposed
development that impose, aggravate or lead to impractical, unsafe or
unsatisfactory conditions on surrounding properties, including, but not
residential site improvement standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21 et seq.) not
defined in this chapter are incorporated herein by reference.
B. Whenever a term is used in this chapter that is not defined in the MLUL
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) but is defined in the CMP (N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1
et seq.) and/or in this chapter, such term is intended to have the
meaning as defined in the CMP and/or this chapter.
C. Abbreviations used in this chapter:
CMP Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
MLUL Municipal Land Use Law
NJDEP New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
N.J.S.A. New Jersey Statutes Annotated
N.J.A.C. New Jersey Administrative Code
NJDOT New Jersey Department of Transportation
PDC Pinelands development credit
USDA United States Department of Agriculture
USDOT United States Department of Transportation
D. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of
this chapter and any caption, the text shall control.
§ 176-8 WATERFORD CODE § 176-9
168:284
limited to, inadequate drainage facilities, inadequate public utilities,
unsuitable street grades, street locations that fail to compose a convenient
system, and failure to provide or make future allowance for access to the
interior portion of adjoining lots or for other facilities required herein.
AGRICULTURAL COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — A retail sales
establishment primarily intended to sell agricultural products produced in
the Pinelands. An agricultural commercial establishment may be seasonal
or year round and may or may not be associated directly with an
agricultural/horticultural use; however, it does not include supermarkets,
convenience stores, restaurants and other establishments that
coincidentally sell agricultural products, nor does it include agricultural
production facilities such as a farm itself, nor facilities that are solely
processing facilities.
AGRICULTURAL EMPLOYEE HOUSING — Residential dwellings, for the
seasonal use of employees of an agricultural or horticultural use, which
because of their character or location are not to be used for permanent
housekeeping units and which are otherwise accessory to a principal use of
the lot for agriculture.
AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL PURPOSE OR USE —
AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL PRODUCTS PROCESSING
FACILITY — A facility, constructed and operated for the express purpose
of processing agricultural or horticultural products grown in the Pinelands,
including washing, grading and packaging of those products.
AGRICULTURAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment, the
primary purpose of which is the sale of goods, commodities or services that
support active farm operations.
ALTERATIONS or ADDITIONS (STRUCTURAL) — Any change in either the
supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams
and girders, or in the dimensions or configuration of the roof or exterior
walls.
PRINCIPAL USES — Any production of plants or animals useful to
man, including, but not limited to: forage or sod crops; grains and
feed crops; dairy animals and dairy productions; poultry and poultry
products; livestock, including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies,
mules or goats, and including the breeding and grazing of any or
all of such animals; bees and apiary products; fur animals; trees and
forest products; fruits of all kinds, including grapes, nuts and berries;
vegetables; nursery, floral, ornamental and greenhouse products; or
any land devoted to and meeting the requirements and qualifications
for payment or other compensation pursuant to a soil conservation
program under an agency of the federal government.
A.
ACCESSORY USES — Any structure, excluding residential dwellings,
used for storing agricultural equipment or farm produce, housing
livestock or poultry or processing dairy products.
B.
§ 176-9 INSURANCE § 176-9
168:285
ALTERNATE DESIGN PILOT PROGRAM TREATMENT SYSTEM — An
individual or community on-site wastewater treatment system that has the
capability of providing a high level of treatment, including a significant
reduction in the level of total nitrogen in the wastewater, limited to the
following systems authorized for use for residential development by the
pilot program established in N.J.A.C. 7:50-10, Part IV:
AMENDMENT — A means for making changes to this chapter as expressly
authorized by law or any change to the Master Plan.
ANCILLARY — A structure or use which:
ANIMALS, THREATENED OR ENDANGERED — Those animals designated
by the NJDEP pursuant to N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Any application filed with any
permitting agency for any approval, authorization or permit that is
prerequisite to initiating development in the Pinelands Area, except as
provided in § 176-14A
APPROVING AUTHORITY OR AGENCY — Approval board, body or other
authority within the Township with authority to approve or disapprove
subdivisions, site plans, construction permits, zoning permits, or other
applications for development approval.
APPROVAL, FINAL — The official action of the Planning Board taken on
a preliminary approved major subdivision or site plan after all conditions,
engineering plans, and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled
and the required improvements have been installed, or guarantees properly
posted for their completion, or approval conditioned upon the posting of
such guarantees.
APPROVAL, PRELIMINARY — The conferral of certain rights pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46, 40:55D-48, and 40:55D-49 prior to final approval after
specific elements of a development plan have been agreed upon by the
Planning Board and the applicant.
ARTIFICIAL REGENERATION — The establishment of tree cover through
direct or supplemental seeding or planting.[Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-15]
A. Ashco RFS III;
B. FAST;
C. Cromaglass;
D. Bioclere; and
E. Amphidrome
Is located on the same parcel but is not necessarily related to a
principal structure or use; and
A.
Is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal structure or
principal building.
B.
§ 176-9 WATERFORD CODE § 176-9
168:286
AUTO BODY REPAIR SHOP — Any parcel of land with a building used
for the purposes of automobile body and chassis repair, restoration, and
painting.
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR CENTER — Any parcel of land with a building used
for major automobile repair. Such work includes but is not limited to engine,
transmission, brake, and exhaust system repair. Automotive repair centers
do not include automotive body and painting services.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION — Any building, land area, or other
premises, or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for the retail
sale of vehicular fuels and automotive accessories, and providing, as an
accessory use, minor automotive services such as oil change, lubrication,
tune-up, and tire and battery sales and installation.
BARN — A building used for housing, storage or preparation for marketing
of plants or animals, provided that a barn is permitted only where the use
of the plants or animals to be housed, stored or prepared for marketing is
an otherwise permitted use according to the provisions of this chapter.
BEDDING — A silvicultural practice involving the preparation of land before
planting in the form of small mounds so as to concentrate topsoil and
elevate the root zone of seedlings above temporary standing water.[Added
9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
BROADCAST SCARIFICATION — A silvicultural practice involving the
dragging of cut trees or other objects across a parcel to remove or reduce
aboveground shrub cover, debris, leaf litter and humus without disturbance
to mineral soil horizons and associated roots.[Added 9-12-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-15]
BUFFER — An area within a property or site, generally adjacent to and
parallel with the property line, either consisting of natural existing
vegetation or created by the use of trees, shrubs, fences, and/or berms,
designed to continuously limit view of and/or sound from the site to adjacent
sites.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
permanent, temporary, or continuous occupancy and having a roof and used
for sheltering or protection of persons, animals, chattel, or property of any
kind.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from grade to the
highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line for mansard roofs,
and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel
roofs. Structures other than buildings, such as antennae, are measured
similarly from the ground, but extend to the highest point of the structure.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A structure in which is conducted the principal
use of the site on which it is situated. In a residential district any dwelling
shall be the principal building of the lot on which it is located.
CAMPER/TRAILER — A portable structure, which is self-propelled or
mounted on or towed by a noncommercial vehicle, and which is designated
and used as shelter for travel, recreation, vacation or other short-term uses.
§ 176-9 INSURANCE § 176-9
168:287
CAMPSITE — A place used or suitable for camping on which a temporary
shelter such as a tent or camper/trailer may be placed and occupied on a
temporary and seasonal basis.
CELLAR — A story having more than 1/2 of its floor-to-ceiling height below
average finished grade of the adjoining ground within 20 feet of the
structure. No cellar or part thereof shall be used as a separate dwelling unit
or as part of the minimum required floor area for a residence.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — See N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.156.
CERTIFICATE OF FILING — A certificate issued by the Pinelands
Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34 that a complete application for
development has been filed.
CERTIFIED COUNTY MASTER PLAN OR LAND USE ORDINANCE — Any
county master plan or ordinance certified by the Pinelands Commission
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-3, Part II, as being in conformance with the
minimum standards of same.
CERTIFIED MUNICIPAL MASTER PLAN OR LAND USE ORDINANCE —
Any municipal master plan or land use ordinance certified by the Pinelands
Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-3, Part IV, as being in conformance
with the minimum standards of same.
CLEARCUTTING — A silvicultural practice involving removal of an entire
forest stand in one cutting for purposes of regeneration either obtained
artificially, by natural seed or from advanced regeneration. Clearcutting
typically results in the removal of all woody vegetation from a parcel in
preparation for the establishment of new trees; however, some trees may be
left on the parcel.[Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
COLLECTION FACILITY — A facility where source-separated or
commingled waste is dropped off in a container and temporarily stored
before transportation to another waste management facility.
COMMISSION — The Pinelands Commission created pursuant to Section 5
of the Pinelands Protection Act, as latest revised.82
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An area within or related to a site designated
as a development, and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment
of residents and owners of the development. Common open space may
contain such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary
and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the
development.
COMPOSTING FACILITY — A waste management facility that utilizes a
controlled biological process of degrading nonhazardous solid waste or
sewage sludge. For purposes of this definition, composting facility shall
include co-composting facility that utilizes a controlled biological process of
degrading mixtures of nonhazardous solid waste, including sewage sludge.
82.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:18A-5.
§ 176-9 WATERFORD CODE § 176-9
168:288
COMPREHENSIVE MANAGEMENT PLAN (CMP) — The plan adopted by
the Pinelands Commission pursuant to Section 7 of the Pinelands Protection
Act, as latest revised.83
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED —
Any community residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L. 1977, c. 448
(N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq.), providing food, shelter and personal guidance,
under such supervision as required, to not more than 15 developmentally
disabled or mentally ill persons, who require assistance, temporarily or
permanently, in order to live in the community, and shall include, but not
be limited to: group homes, halfway houses, intermediate care facilities,
supervised apartment living arrangements, and hostels. Such a residence
shall not be considered a health care facility, within the meaning of the
"Health Care Facilities Planning Act," P.L. 1971, c. 136 (N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et
seq.). In the case of a community residence housing mentally ill persons,
such residence shall have been approved for a purchase of service contract
or an affiliate agreement pursuant to such procedures as shall be
established by regulation of the Division of Mental Health and Hospitals
of the Department of Human Services. "Developmentally disabled person"
means a person who is developmentally disabled as defined in Section 2 of
P.L. 1977, c. 488 (N.J.S.A. 30:11B-2). "Mentally ill person" means a person
who is afflicted with a mental illness as defined in N.J.S.A. 30:4-27.2, but
shall not include a person who has been committed after having been found
guilty of a criminal offense by reason of insanity or having been found unfit
to be tried on a criminal charge.84
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE — Any
shelter approved for a purchase of service contract and certified pursuant
to standards and procedures established by regulation of the Department
of Human Services pursuant to P.L. 1979, c. 337 (N.J.S.A. 30:14-1 et seq.),
providing food, shelter, medical care, legal assistance, personal guidance,
and other services to not more than 15 persons who have been victims of
domestic violence, including any children of such victims, who temporarily
require shelter and assistance in order to protect their physical or
psychological welfare.
COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION — Actual construction on a parcel
of land in accordance with a permit issued by the applicable jurisdiction if
the cost of the physical improvements completed constitutes at least 25% of
the projected total cost of the development or the completion of all required
foundations, of a form and character such that the foundations are not
usable for any other form of development except that authorized by the
issued permit.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Vehicles registered with the State of New
Jersey, or other states, as commercial vehicles displaying commercial
license plates. Passenger cars, mini/conversion vans, pickup trucks with a
load capacity of no more than one ton (2,000 pounds), and station wagons
83.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:18A-8.
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-9 INSURANCE § 176-9
168:289
displaying commercial plates are not considered "commercial vehicles" for
the purpose of this chapter.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with this
chapter. The Planning Board shall review applications for conditional use
and approve by resolution before the use shall be established.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, erection, reconstruction, alteration,
conversion, demolition, removal or equipping of buildings or structures.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS — Nonhazardous solid waste building material
and refuse resulting from construction, remodeling, and repair operations
on residences, commercial buildings, pavements and other structures.
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — An individual designated by the Township
of Waterford and duly licensed by the New Jersey State Department of
Community Affairs to serve as the "Construction Official."
CONTIGUOUS LANDS — Land connected or adjacent to other land so as to
permit the land to be used as a functional unit, provided that separation by
lot line, streams, dedicated public roads that are not paved, rights-of-ways
and easements shall not affect the contiguity of land unless a substantial
physical barrier is created which prevents the land from being used as a
functional unit.
COPPICING — A silvicultural practice involving the production of forest
stands from vegetative sprouting by the trees that are harvested (stump
sprouts, root suckers, and naturally rooted layers). Coppicing typically
involves short rotations with dense stands of short trees.[Added 9-12-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-15]
COUNTY MASTER PLAN — A composite of the master plan for the physical
development of a New Jersey county with the accompanying maps, plats,
charts and descriptive and explanatory matter adopted by the County
Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-2 or their successor statutes.
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD — The governing authority responsible for
county planning and organized pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.1 and defined
therein.
DAY — A calendar day. Should the last day of a specified time limit be a
Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, said limit shall extend to the next working day.
DAY CARE — A licensed, principal use for providing custodial care of
persons, for a period not to exceed 18 hours within a single day, in return for
payment of tuition, fees, or other compensation. Day care may include care
of either children or adults who are unable to care for themselves because
of diminished capabilities.
DEDICATION — Appropriation of land to some public use made by the
owner and accepted for such use by or on behalf of the public.
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross area of land
to be developed.
§ 176-9 WATERFORD CODE § 176-9
168:290
DEVELOPABLE LAND AREA — That portion of a tract of land that is suitable
for development or construction of a building. The developable land area
of a tract excludes the area of floodplains, wetlands, wetland buffer areas,
open water areas, slopes in excess of 20% and the rights-of-way of existing
and proposed public streets.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a development, including the holder of
an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable
proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The creation, change or enlargement of any use or
disturbance of land, the performance of any building or mining operation,
the division of land into two or more parcels, and the creation or
termination of rights of access or riparian rights, including, but not limited
to:
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL — Any approval granted by an approval
agency, including appeals to the governing body, except certificates of
occupancy and variances, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70, which do not
otherwise include issuance of a construction permit, subdivision or site plan
approval.
DEVELOPMENT, MAJOR — Any division of land into five or more lots;
any construction or expansion of any housing development of five or more
dwelling units; any construction or expansion of any commercial or
industrial use or structure on a site of more than three acres; or any
grading, clearing or disturbance of an area in excess of 5,000 square feet.
DEVELOPMENT, MINOR — Any development other than major
development.
DEVELOPMENT, PUBLIC — Any development by a public agency.
A. A change in type of use of a structure or land;
A reconstruction, alteration of the size, or significant change in the
external appearance of a structure;
B.
A material increase in the intensity of use of land, including, but not
limited to, an increase in the number of businesses, manufacturing
establishments, offices or dwelling units in a structure or on land;
C.
Commencement of forestry activities, resource extraction, drilling, or
excavation on a parcel of land;
D.
E. Demolition of a structure or removal of trees;
F. Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid wastes or fill on a parcel of land;
In connection with the use of land, the making of any material change
in noise levels, thermal conditions, or emissions of waste material; and
G.
Alteration, either physically or chemically of a shore, bank or floodplain,
seacoast, river, stream, lake pond, wetlands or artificial body of water:
H.
§ 176-9 INSURANCE § 176-9
168:291
DISKING — A silvicultural practice involving the drawing of one or more
heavy, round, concave, sharpened, freely rotating steel disks across a site
for the purposes of cutting through soil and roots or cutting and turning a
furrow over an area.[Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
DISTRICT — Any portion of Waterford Township that certain uniform
regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under
the provisions of this chapter.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Dogs, cats, hamsters, rabbits, small birds, and
other animals commonly considered pets housed in the owner's residence
or appropriate kennel, cage, hutch, or pen in the yard area. The term
"domestic animal" shall not include those typically found in zoos or farm
animals.
DOMESTIC TREATMENT WORKS — A public or privately owned treatment
works that processes primarily domestic wastewater and pollutants.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER — Wastewater which results from the discharge
of household, commercial, or other wastes from bathrooms, toilet facilities,
home laundries and kitchens.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land
by drains, grading or other means, including control of runoff during and
after construction or development to minimize erosion and sedimentation,
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges, to
induce water recharge into the ground where practical, to lessen nonpoint
pollution, to maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions as well as for drainage, and the means necessary for water supply
preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGE OR UTILITY COVENANT — A signed, written agreement by a
property owner which states that responsibility for maintaining a drainage
easement will remain with the landowner and pass to any successive owner.
DRAINAGE OR UTILITY EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted, but not
dedicated, for limited use of private land for a public or quasi-public
purpose and within which the owner of the property shall not erect any
permanent structures or plant any vegetation that will impede access.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Lands required for the installation of
stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, or along a natural stream or
watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water
therein to safeguard the public against flood damage according to Chapter
1 of Title 58 of the Revised Statutes.85
DRUM CHOPPING — A silvicultural practice involving the drawing of a
large cylindrical drum with cutting blades mounted parallel to its axis
across a site to break up slash, crush scrubby vegetation prior to burning or
planting or to chop up and disturb the organic turf and roots in the upper
foot of soil.[Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
85.Editor's Note: Chapter 1 of Title 58 of the Revised Statutes was repealed. See now N.J.S.A.
58:1A-1 et seq.
§ 176-9 WATERFORD CODE § 176-9
168:292
DWELLING — Any building or portion thereof designed or used primarily as
the residence or sleeping place of one or more persons. A "dwelling" is not a
mobile home, hotel, motel, hospital, nursing home, dormitory, fraternity or
sorority house, rooming house, boarding house or similar structure under
the terms of this chapter.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms, including full cooking and sanitary
facilities, in a structure, designed as a unit for occupancy by not more than
one family for living and sleeping purposes.
EDUCATIONAL USE — Public, parochial and private elementary and
secondary schools duly licensed by the State of New Jersey, attendance at
which is sufficient compliance with the compulsory education requirements
of the state. Summer day camps shall not be considered "educational uses"
or accessories to such uses.
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION LINES — All electric lines other than electric
transmission lines.
ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION LINES — Electric lines which are part of an
electric company's transmission and subtransmission system, which provide
a direct connection between a generating station or substation of the utility
company and:
ENLARGEMENT (EXPANSION) — An addition to the floor area of an
existing building, an increase in the size of any other existing structure or
an increase in intensity of use of a tract of land occupied by an existing use.
A. SINGLE-FAMILY — A single structure designed with one dwelling unit.
DUPLEX — A single structure designed with two distinct dwelling units
situated on a single lot with yard areas on four sides.
B.
TWIN — A structure designed with two distinct dwelling units,
separated by an approved party wall, which shall be constructed on a
common lot line.
C.
D. MULTIPLE — Three or more dwelling units in a single structure.
TOWNHOUSE — A structure containing multiple dwelling units
separated by approved party walls, constructed along common lot lines
or on a single lot.
E.
IN-LAW SUITE — One or more rooms designed as an integral part
of a dwelling unit that shall not have separate utilities, full cooking
facilities, or separate entrances and exits other than those required by
law for fire safety.
F.
A. Another substation of the utility company;
A substation of or interconnection point with another interconnecting
utility company;
B.
C. A substation of a high-load customer of the utility.
§ 176-9 INSURANCE § 176-9
168:293
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
ESCROW — A deed, bond, money, or piece of property delivered to a third
person, to be delivered by him to the grantee only upon fulfillment of a
condition.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water
transmission or distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains,
sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic
signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in
connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate
service by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies
or for the public health or safety or general welfare. Essential services
shall include firehouses, first aid and emergency aid squads and community
antenna television whether provided by a municipal or nonprofit agency.
FAIR MARKET VALUE — The value of a parcel based on what a willing
buyer will pay a willing seller in an arm's length transaction for the parcel
if no waiver of strict compliance is approved by the Pinelands Commission.
For undersized lots, the determination of fair market value shall include
consideration of the extent to which the parcel would contribute to the value
of a developable parcel if combined with one or more parcels.
FAMILY — Two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or
guardianship, or any number of persons not so related occupying a dwelling
unit and living as a single housekeeping unit.
FARM ANIMALS — Horses, cattle, sheep, goats, chickens, turkeys, geese,
ducks, swine and other animals, which may or may not be pets, housed in a
barn, coop, pen, or other suitable shelter for such animals.
FARM SETTING — An area of land consisting of at least one acre (43,560
square feet), exclusive of wetlands and any required buffer to such
wetlands, where farm animals may be kept, and that may or may not be
eligible for farm land assessment.
FEDERAL ACT — Section 502 of the National Parks and Recreation Act of
1978 (P.L. 95-625).
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire,
metal, or any other manufactured material or combination of materials.
FENCE, LIVING — Any barrier or hedge composed of live materials.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or part of the subdivision presented to
the Planning Board for final approval according to these regulations that, if
approved, shall be filed with the proper county recording officer.
FIRST ORDER STREAM — That portion of a stream, as identifiable on
the USGS 7 1/2 foot quadrangle maps, from the point of upstream origin,
downstream to the first portion of intersection with another branch, stream
or tributary.
§ 176-9 WATERFORD CODE § 176-9
168:294
FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT — The changing of the
characteristics and interactions of fish and wildlife populations and their
habitats in order to promote, protect and enhance the ecological integrity
of those populations.
FLOODPLAIN — The relatively flat area adjoining the channel of a natural
stream, which has been or may be hereafter covered by floodwater.
Mapping of these areas may be available from state or county agencies.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal area of each story of a
building, measured from the surface of exterior walls, or from the center
line of a wall separating two buildings. "Floor area" shall not include cellar
space and any floor space where the average floor-to-ceiling height is less
than seven feet.
FORESTRY — The planting, cultivating and harvesting of trees for the
production of wood products, including firewood, or for forest health. It
includes such practices as reforestation, site preparation and other
silvicultural practices, including, but not limited to, artificial regeneration,
bedding, broadcast scarification, clearcutting, coppicing, disking, drum
chopping, group selection, individual selection, natural regeneration, root
raking, seed tree cut, shelterwood cut and thinning. For purposes of this
chapter, the following activities shall not be defined as forestry:[Amended
9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
FORESTRY MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan detailing forestry management
programs according to provisions of the N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.2(b)6ii.
FOREST STAND — A uniform group of trees of similar species, composition,
size, age and similar forest structure.[Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-15]
FRONTAGE — The portion of a lot that abuts one street. Frontage shall be
measured as an uninterrupted distance along one abutting street line.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A detached or attached structure used mainly for the
storage of vehicles or household items, owned or rented by the occupant
Removal of trees located on a parcel of land one acre or less on which
a dwelling has been constructed;
A.
Horticultural activities involving the planting, cultivating or harvesting
of nursery stock or Christmas trees;
B.
Removal of trees necessitated by the development of the parcel as
otherwise authorized by this chapter;
C.
Removal of trees necessary for the maintenance of utility or public
rights-of-way;
D.
Removal or planting of trees for the personal use of the parcel owner;
and
E.
F. Removal of trees for public safety.
§ 176-9 INSURANCE § 176-9
168:295
of the principal structures or by his/her family, with a minimum size of 240
square feet.[Amended 2-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-2]
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any garage other than a private garage that is open to
the public and used for the storage of motor vehicles.
GARDEN/UTILITY SHED — A simple detached roofed structure, typically
made of wood or metal, used as a storage space for lawn or garden
equipment, a shelter for animals or a workshop with a minimum square
footage of 80 square feet and a maximum of 239 square feet.[Added
2-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-2]
GROUP SELECTION — A silvicultural practice whereby a group of trees
is periodically selected to be removed from a large area so that age and
size classes of the reproduction are mixed.[Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-15]
HABITAT — The natural environment of an individual animal or plant,
population, or community.
HAZARDOUS OR TOXIC SUBSTANCES — Such elements, compounds and
substances that pose a present or potential threat to human health, living
organisms or the environment. They consist of all hazardous or toxic
substances defined as such by the NJDEP and the EPA as of and after May
20, 1996.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any waste or combination of wastes, including
toxic, carcinogenic, corrosive, irritating, sensitizing, radioactive,
biologically infectious, explosive or flammable waste, which poses a present
or potential threat to human health, living organism or the environment.
They consist of all hazardous wastes defined as such by the NJDEP and the
EPA as of and after May 20, 1996.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area designated by the Commission pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.154 as having such historic, cultural or archaeological
significance as to merit special protection.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION — See N.J.A.C. 70:50-6.153.
HISTORIC RESOURCE — Any site, building, area, district, structure or
object important in American history or prehistory, architecture,
archaeology and culture at the national, state, county, local or regional
level.
HOME BASED DAY CARE — An accessory use provided in a private
residence approved by the New Jersey Division of Youth and Family Services
or an organization that the division contracts for family day care in which
child-care services are regularly provided to no less than three nor more
than five children, for no less than 15 hours per week nor more than 18
hours within a single day. The limitation on the number of children for whom
day-care service can be provided shall not include children who are legally
related to the service provider or children who are being cared for as a part
of a cooperative agreement between parents for the care of their children
by one or more parents when no payment for the care is being provided.
§ 176-9 WATERFORD CODE § 176-9
168:296
HOME OCCUPATION — An activity for economic gain, carried out in a
residential dwelling or accessory structure thereto, in which an occupant
of the residence and no more than one additional individual is employed,
which activity is clearly secondary to the use of the residence as a dwelling,
and meets the requirements specified in this chapter. Home occupations are
permitted subject to certain special conditions and requirements.
HOTELS and MOTELS — A building or group of buildings consisting of
individual sleeping units, designed for transient travelers and not for
permanent residency, except that up to 3% of the total units may be
provided for the sole use of resident employees.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any hazardous waste material
derived from households, including single-family and multifamily
residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, farm labor housing, ranger
stations, crew quarters, campgrounds, picnic grounds and day-use
recreation areas.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — One or more persons living together in one
dwelling unit on a nonseasonal basis and sharing living, sleeping, cooking
and sanitary facilities on a nonprofit basis.
HYDROPHYTES — Any plant growing in water or in substrate that is at least
periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive water contact.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Those persons related by blood or legal relationship
in the following manner: great-grandparents, grandparents, greatgrandchild,
grandchild, parents, sons, daughters, brothers and sisters,
nieces and nephews, aunts and uncles, first cousins and spouses.
IMPERMEABLE SURFACE — Any surface which does not permit fluids to
pass through or penetrate its pores or spaces, typically having a maximum
permeability for water of 10-7 cm/second at the maximum anticipated
hydrostatic pressure. The term "impermeable" is equivalent in
meaning.[Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any surface that has been compacted or covered
with a layer of material so that it prevents, impedes or slows infiltration
or absorption of fluid, including stormwater directly into the ground, and
results in either reduced groundwater recharge or increased stormwater
runoff sufficient to be classified as impervious in urban areas by the United
States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service
Title 210 - Engineering, 210-3-1 - Small Watershed Hydrology (WINTR-55)
Version 1.0. Such surfaces may have varying degrees of
permeability.[Amended 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
INDIVIDUAL SELECTION — A silvicultural practice whereby single trees
are periodically selected to be removed from a large area so that age and
size classes of the reproduction are mixed.[Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-15]
INSTITUTIONAL USE — Any land used for the following public or private
purposes: educational facilities, including universities, colleges, elementary
and secondary and vocational schools, kindergartens and nurseries; cultural
§ 176-9 INSURANCE § 176-9
168:297
facilities, such as libraries, galleries, museums, concert halls, theaters and
the like; churches; cemeteries; public office buildings; hospitals, including
such educational, clinical, research and convalescent facilities as are
integral to the operation of the hospital; medical and health service
facilities, including nursing homes, rehabilitation therapy centers and
public health facilities; law enforcement facilities; military facilities; and
other similar facilities. For purposes of this chapter, institutional use shall
not include medical offices that are not associated with hospitals or other
medical or health service facilities, nor shall it include assisted living
facilities.
INTERESTED PERSON — Any person whose right to use, acquire or enjoy
property is or may be affected by any action taken under this chapter, or
whose right to use, acquire or enjoy property under this chapter or under
any other law of this state or of the United States has been denied, violated
or infringed upon by an action or a failure to act under this chapter.
INTERIM RULES AND REGULATIONS — The regulations adopted by the
Pinelands Commission pursuant to the Pinelands Protection Act to govern
the review of applications from the adoption of the regulations until the
CMP took effect on January 14, 1981. These regulations were formerly
codified as N.J.A.C. 7:1G-1 et seq.
JUNK — Any waste iron or other metal or substance, white goods, bicycle
parts, glass, paper, plastic, used lumber, rags, machinery, machines,
machine parts, accessories, unregistered motor vehicles which are unfit for
reconditioning, used parts of motor vehicles and any material commonly
known and generally referred to as "junk" in the ordinary and accepted
meaning of the word.
JUNKYARD or SALVAGE YARD — Any area of land, with or without
buildings, devoted to the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk or
debris, whether or not it is in connection with the dismantling, processing,
salvage, sale or other use or disposition thereof or of any material
whatsoever.
LAND — Includes the surface and subsurface of the earth as well as
improvements and fixtures on, above, or below the surface and any water
found thereon.
LANDFILL — A site where any waste is disposed of by application on or into
the land, with or without the use of management practices or soil covering.
It does not include a site where land application of waste or waste derived
material occurs in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.79.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of all land
proposed to be included in a planned development. The holder of an option
or contract to purchase, a lessee having a remaining term of not less than
20 years, or other person having an enforceable proprietary interest in such
land shall be a "landowner" for the purposes of this chapter.
LANDSCAPING — The installation of plant material or seed as a part of
development.
§ 176-9 WATERFORD CODE § 176-9
168:298
LAND USE ORDINANCE or LAND USE REGULATION — Any county or
municipal ordinance or regulation which, in any way, regulates or affects
the development of land.
LAWFUL USE — A use of land, building or structure, or portion thereof, that
is permitted under all relevant local, state and federal land use, nuisance
and environmental statutes.
LEACHATE COLLECTOR — For the purpose of this chapter, shall mean
attributed to the phrase by, and each such "leachate collector" shall conform
to the requirements of the New Jersey Solid Waste Administration.
LIMITED-ACCESS HIGHWAY — A highway designed in such manner that
it provides no direct access to properties abutting its right-of-way and
all highways designated as limited-access highways designated by the
Planning Board in the Master Plan.
LIVING AREA — The area within the wall exteriors above the main grade
level, but excluding cellars, attics, garages or porches.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street parking space or berth on the same
lot with a building or group of buildings for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading.
LOCAL COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — An antenna and any support
structure, together with any accessory facilities, which complies with the
standards in N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.4 and which is intended to serve a limited,
localized audience through point to point communication, including cellular
telephone cells, paging systems and dispatch communications. It does not
include radio or television broadcasting facilities or microwave
transmitters.
LOCAL PERMITTING AGENCY — Any county or municipal official,
department, agency or other body authorized to rule on any application for
development.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat, or
otherwise as permitted by law, and to be used, developed, or built upon as
a unit having frontage on a public street.
A. AREA — The computed area contained within the lot lines.
CORNER — A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection or upon two parts of the same street, such streets or parts
of the same street, forming an interior angle of less than 135°. The
point of intersection of the street lot line is the corner.
B.
C. DEPTH — The mean distance between the front and rear lot lines.
D. INTERIOR — Any lot not a corner lot.
LINES — The property lines bounding the lot.
(1) FRONT — The dividing line between the lot and a street.
E.
§ 176-9 INSURANCE § 176-9
168:299
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which is deemed acceptable
by a municipality for the maintenance of any improvements required by the
MLUL, including, but not limited to, surety bonds, letters of credit under the
circumstances specified in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.3, and cash.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of the mapped and written proposals
recommending the physical development of the municipality, duly adopted
by the Planning Board and pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision containing not more than four
lots fronting on an existing minor street, not involving any new street or
road or the extension of municipal facilities and not adversely affecting the
development of the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property and not
in conflict with any provision or portion of the Master Plan, Official Map, or
this chapter.
MOBILE OR MODULAR HOME — A dwelling unit manufactured in one or
more sections, that may have axles and wheels, designated for long-term
occupancy and which can be transported, after fabrication, to a site where
it is to be occupied.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — The governing body of a municipality or the
Planning Board created by a municipality in accordance with the state
enabling statute, which shall administer any ordinance pursuant to this
statute.
NATURAL REGENERATION — The establishment of a plant or plant age
class from natural seeding, sprouting, suckering or layering.[Added
9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
NAVIGABLE WATERS — Water capable of being traversed by pleasure craft.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimensions or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a land use
and development ordinance, but that fails to conform to the present
requirements of the zoning district by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR BUILDING — A structure or building,
the size, dimension or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption,
revision or amendment of a land use, development and zoning ordinance,
but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located by reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment.86
REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot
line.
(2)
(3) SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
WIDTH — The distance between the two side lot lines measured at the
required setback line.
F.
§ 176-9 WATERFORD CODE § 176-9
168:300
NONCONFORMING USE — A use occupying a lot, building or structure,
legally existing and/or used at the time of adoption of a land use and
development ordinance, or any amendment thereto, which does not
conform to the use regulations of the zone in which it is located.
NURSERY SCHOOL — A school designed to provide daytime care or
instruction for two or more children from two to six years of age inclusive,
and operated on a regular basis.
NURSING HOME — Any premises meeting the standards of the New Jersey
Department of Human Services to operate as a nursing home.87
OFFICE, CORPORATE — A building, of more than 10,000 square feet with
at least 50% of its occupancy by a single corporation or firm, serving as a
regional or national center.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted in accordance with the MLUL, or any
prior act, authorizing such adoption. Such a map shall be deemed to be
conclusive with respect to the location and width of the streets, public parks
and playgrounds and drainage rights-of-way shown thereon.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated, or reserved for public or private use or
enjoyment, provided such areas may be improved with only those buildings,
structures, streets and off-street parking and other improvements that are
designed to be incidental to the natural openness of the land.
PARCEL — Any quantity of land, consisting of one or more lots that is
capable of being described with such definiteness that its location and
boundaries may be established.
PARKING AREA, COMMERCIAL — An open area, other than a street or
other public way, used for the parking of automobiles and available to
the public, whether for a fee, free, or as an accommodation for clients or
customers.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be accepted by
the municipality, including, but not limited to, surety bonds, irrevocable
letters of credit, escrow agreements or similar collateral, or security
agreements under the circumstances specified in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.5, and
cash, provided that the municipality shall not require more than 10% of the
total guarantee in cash.
PERMEABILITY — The rate at which water moves through a unit area of
soil, rock, or other material at hydraulic gradient of one.[Added 9-12-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-15]
PERSON — An individual, corporation, public agency, business trust,
partnership, association, two or more persons having a joint or common
interest, or any other legal entity.
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-9 INSURANCE § 176-9
168:301
PINELANDS — The Pinelands National Reserve and the Pinelands Area.
PINELANDS AREA — That area designated by Section 10(a) of the
Pinelands Protection Act.88
PINELANDS DEVELOPMENT CREDIT — A use right allocated to certain
lands within the Township pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.43 that can be used
to secure a residential density bonus on other lands within the Township or
on other designated lands in the Pinelands Area.
PINELANDS DEVELOPMENT REVIEW BOARD — The agency responsible
from February 8, 1979, until June 28, 1979, for the review of and action
on applications for development in the Pinelands Area which required
approvals of other state agencies, except where the Pinelands Commission
acted on applications during that time period.
PINELANDS NATIONAL RESERVE — That area designated as such by
Section 3(i) of the Pinelands Protection Act.89
PINELANDS NATIVE FOREST TYPE — See N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.43.[Added
9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
PINELANDS PROTECTION ACT — N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 to 13:18A-29.
PINELANDS RESOURCE-RELATED USE — Any use which is based on
resources which are indigenous to the Pinelands, including, but not limited
to, forest products, berry agricultural, and sand, gravel, clay or ilmenite.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — An area with a specified minimum
contiguous or noncontiguous acreage containing one or more residential
developments, and one or more institutional, commercial or industrial areas
with specified minimum contiguous or noncontiguous acreage to be
developed as a single entity according to a plan.
PLANNING BOARD — The municipal board charged with ensuring orderly
development in accordance with this chapter.
PLANTS, THREATENED OR ENDANGERED — A Pinelands plant species
whose survival worldwide, nationwide or in the state is in jeopardy.
PLAT — One or more maps of subdivision or a site plan that show the
location, boundaries and ownership of individual properties.
PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE — See N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.2 of the Pinelands
Plan.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map indicating the proposed layout
to the subdivision that is submitted to the Planning Board Clerk for Planning
Board consideration and tentative approval and meeting the requirements
of this chapter.
PRELIMINARY ZONING PERMIT — A permit, issued by the Zoning Officer,
which is a prerequisite to the issuance of a construction permit or other
permits or approvals that are needed to develop a single-family dwelling on
88.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:18A-11a.
89.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:18A-3i.
§ 176-9 WATERFORD CODE § 176-9
168:302
an existing lot of record. A preliminary zoning permit shall be accepted in
lieu of a Pinelands certificate of filing.
PRESERVATION AREA — That area so designated by Section 10(b) of the
Pinelands Protection Act.90
PROTECTION AREA — All land within the Pinelands Area which is not
included in the preservation area.
PUBLIC AGENCIES — The government of the United States of America; the
State of New Jersey or any other state; their political subdivisions, agencies
or instrumentalities; and interstate and regional agencies exercising
sovereign powers of government.
PUBLIC AREAS — Public parks, playgrounds and other recreational areas;
other public spaces; scenic or historic sites; school sites and sites for other
public buildings; and other areas dedicated to public use or enjoyment.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency, board of education, state or
county agency, or other public body for recreational or conservational uses.
PUBLIC SERVICE INFRASTRUCTURE — Sewer service, gas, electricity,
water, telephone, cable television and other public utilities, developed
linearly; roads, streets and other similar services provided or maintained by
any public or private entity.
RECOMMENDED MANAGEMENT PRACTICE — A management program
that employs the most efficient use of available technology, natural, human
and economic resources.
RECORD TREE — The largest tree of a particular species in New Jersey
based on its circumference at 4.5 feet above ground level. A listing of the
largest known tree of each species and its location is maintained at the
principal offices of the Pinelands Commission.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY, INTENSIVE — Any recreational facility which
does not satisfy the definition of low-intensive recreational facility including
but not limited to golf course, marinas, amusement parks, hotels and
motels.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY, LOW-INTENSIVE — A facility or area that
complies with the standards of N.J.A.C. 7:50-5, Part III, of the CMP, utilizes
and depends on the natural environment of the Pinelands and requires no
significant modifications of that environment other than to provide access,
and which has an insignificant impact on surrounding uses or on the
environmental integrity of the area. It permits such low-intensity uses as
hiking, hunting, trapping, fishing, canoeing, nature study, orienteering,
horseback riding and bicycling.
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL — Recreation facilities operated as a
business and open to the general public for a fee.
90.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:18A-11b.
§ 176-9 INSURANCE § 176-9
168:303
RECREATION, PRIVATE NONCOMMERCIAL — Clubs or recreation
facilities operated by a nonprofit organization and open only to bona fide
members of such nonprofit organization.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — The following materials which would otherwise
become solid waste and which may be collected, separated or processed
and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials
or products: source-separated nonputrescible metal, glass, paper, plastic
containers, corrugated and other cardboard; vegetative waste; waste
concrete; asphalt; brick; block; asphalt-based roofing scrap and wood
waste; other waste resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and
demolition operations on houses, commercial buildings, pavements and
other structures; whole trees, tree trunks, tree parts, tree stumps, brush
and leaves that are not composted; scrap tires; petroleum contaminated soil
that is delivered to a nonmobile in-state asphalt plant, concrete production
plant or brick-making facility for incorporation as a raw material; and
petroleum contaminated soil that is processed at its point of generation by
mobile recycling equipment which produces asphalt, concrete or bricks by
incorporating it as a raw material in its mobile production process.
RECYCLING CENTER — A facility designed and operated solely for
receiving, storing, processing or transferring recyclable materials, except
that recycling center shall not include a manufacturer. For purposes of
this definition, processing may include, but is not necessarily limited to,
separating by type, grade or color, crushing, grinding, shredding or baling.
Junk/salvage yards shall not be considered recycling centers for the purpose
of this chapter.
REGULATED MEDICAL WASTE — Any waste regulated pursuant to the
New Jersey Comprehensive Regulated Medical Waste Management Act,
N.J.S.A. 13:1E-48.1 et seq.
RELIGIOUS USE — A church, mosque, synagogue, temple or other similar
place of worship.
REMEDIATION — A process to remove or treat a waste or hazardous or
toxic substance from soil or water but does not include any subsequent
burial or land application of contaminated soil or other solids.
RESOURCE CONSERVATION PLAN — A plan, prepared for review by the
Soil Conservation District, which details the proposed use of agricultural
recommended management practices.
RESOURCE EXTRACTION — The dredging, digging, extraction, mining
and quarrying of sand, gravel, clay, or ilmenite for commercial purposes,
not including, however, the private or agricultural extraction and use of
extracted material by a landowner.
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM PLAN — A plan, prepared in
accordance with the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service New Jersey Field Office Technical Guide,
dated June 2005. Such plans shall prescribe needed land treatment and
related conservation and natural resources management measures,
including forest management practices, for the conservation, protection and
§ 176-9 WATERFORD CODE § 176-9
168:304
development of natural resources, the maintenance and enhancement of
agricultural or horticultural productivity, and the control and prevention of
nonpoint source pollution; and establish criteria for resource sustainability
of soil, water, air, plants and animals.[Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-15]
RESTAURANT — An establishment where food and drink is prepared,
served and consumed, primarily within the principal building. However, a
snack bar or refreshment stand at a public or community swimming pool,
playground, play field or park, operated solely by the agency or group
operating the recreational facility and for the convenience of patrons of the
facility, shall not be deemed a restaurant.
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD — A commercial establishment where food and
drink, prepared for immediate consumption, are purchased at a counter
and either eaten on the premises, in the purchaser's automobile, or off the
premises. Those restaurants where a majority of prepared food is consumed
only at tables on the premises and served by waiters or waitresses at said
tables shall not be deemed "fast foot restaurants." Any restaurant with
drive-through window service shall be considered a "fast food restaurant."
"Fast food restaurants" shall not include those retail stores where food
is primarily sold for preparation and consumption elsewhere, such as a
supermarket, or stores where, as a secondary use of the premises, prepared
foods may be sold over the counter for immediate consumption, such as a
delicatessen.
ROOMING HOUSE or BOARDINGHOUSE — A dwelling unit containing
rooms for the rooming and/or boarding of individuals for a fee.
ROOT RAKING — A silvicultural practice involving the drawing of a set
of tines, mounted on the front or trailed behind a tractor, over an area to
thoroughly disturb tree and vegetation roots and/or to collect stumps and
slash.[Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAE — Any apparatus or structure constructed
or installed out of doors with the purpose of receiving television, radio or
similar waves, but excluding, however, conventional television antennae.
SCENIC CORRIDORS — See N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.103 of the CMP.
SEASONAL HIGH-WATER TABLE — The level below the natural land
surface to which water seasonally rises in the soil in most years.
SEED TREE CUT — A silvicultural practice involving the removal of old
forest stand in one cutting, except for a small number of trees left singly,
in small groups or narrow strips, as a source of seed for natural
regeneration.[Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING — Specially designed housing for persons
aged 62 and over providing units within low-, and mid-rise buildings,
specifically designed for the safety and comfort of an older population.
SEWAGE SLUDGE — The solid residue and associated liquid resulting from
the physical, chemical or biological treatment of wastewater in domestic
treatment works.
§ 176-9 INSURANCE § 176-9
168:305
SHELTERWOOD CUT — A silvicultural practice involving the establishment
of a new, essentially even-aged forest stand from release, typically in a
series of cuttings, of new trees started under the old forest stand. A
shelterwood cut involves the establishment of the new forest stand before
the old forest stand is removed.[Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
SHOPPING CENTER — Two or more commercial establishments in one or
more structures on 10 or more acres of land designed and operated as
a coordinated, integrated entity with respect to parking, services, signs,
etc. Use may include retail and service establishments; offices and office
structures; theaters; recreational facilities; meeting and convention
facilities; museums and cultural facilities; motels and hotels; auto service
stations where gasoline, oil and grease, batteries, tires and automobile
accessories may be supplied and dispensed directly to the motor vehicle
trade and where minor repair service is rendered; and uses accessory to all
such permitted uses.
SIGN — Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, situated
outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or
attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business,
product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters,
figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images.
Signs do not include the flag or emblem of any nation, organization of
nations, state or city; or any fraternal, religious or civic organizations;
merchandise, pictures or models of products or services incorporated in
a window display; works of art which in no way identify a product; or
scoreboards located on athletic fields. Flags and banners displaying
products or product names shall be considered signs.
SIGHT IMPROVEMENTS — Any improvement in connection with a
development involving streets, roads, parking facilities, sidewalks, lighting,
landscaping, drainage structures, and utilities.
SIGHT TRIANGLES — A triangular portion of land established at street
intersections and driveways in which nothing is erected, placed, planted or
OFF-SITE ADVERTISING — A sign that directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered
elsewhere.
A.
BUSINESS — A sign which directs attention to a business or profession
conducted or to a commodity service or entertainment sold or offered
upon the premises where the sign is located.
B.
FLASHING — Any sign of which the artificial light is not maintained
constant in intensity and/or color at all times when such sign is in use.
C.
GROSS ADVERTISING AREA — The entire space within a single
continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of such, but in no
case passing through or between any adjacent elements of same.
However, such perimeter shall not include any structural or framing
elements lying outside the limits of such sign and not forming an
integral part of the display.
D.
§ 176-9 WATERFORD CODE § 176-9
168:306
maintained more than 24 inches above the street center line. The purpose
of a sight triangle is to eliminate any viewing obstruction for motorists
entering or leaving the intersection or driveway. Exceptions are street
signs, fire hydrants and light standards.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown the
existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including, but not necessarily
limited to, topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, marshes, and
waterways; the location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives,
parking spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, circulation, rightsof-
way, easements, drainage facilities, utility services, landscaping,
structures, signs, lighting and screening devices; and any other information
that may be reasonably required by the approving agency in order to make
an informed determination pursuant to this chapter.
STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE — Standards adopted by ordinance
regulating noise levels, glare, earthborn or sonic vibrations, noxious odors,
toxic matter, explosive and flammable matter, smoke matter, smoke and
airborne particles, waste discharge, screening of unsightly objects or
conditions and such other reasonable requirements as a municipal authority
may provide by ordinance.
SITE PLAN, EXEMPT — Site plan for an individual single-family, duplex
or twin dwelling, or accessory buildings to agricultural and
horticultural uses, unless such uses are located on an unimproved road,
in a flood hazard area, or involve a home occupation. Interior building
alterations that do not involve a change in use or additional parking
shall also be exempt.
A.
SITE PLAN, ADMINISTRATIVE — Site plan requiring less than 10
parking spaces as required in this chapter, containing no more than
2,500 square feet of floor area, having no more than 30% of lot
coverage and involving clearing, grading or land disturbance of an area
no more than 5,000 square feet, and which does not include any new
street or extension or any off-tract improvements or design waivers. If
design waivers are required, the plan will be deemed a minor site plan.
B.
SITE PLAN, MINOR — Site plan for a development requiring more
than 10 parking spaces as required in this chapter, containing no more
than 5,000 square feet of floor area, having no more than 30% of lot
coverage and involving the clearing, grading or land disturbance of an
area no more than 10,000 square feet, and which does not include any
new street or extension of any off-tract improvements.
C.
SITE PLAN, MAJOR — All site plans not defined as administrative,
minor or exempt.
D.
SITE PLAN AMENDMENTS — The Administrative Review Committee
shall determine if proposed changes are substantial or administrative.
Nonsubstantial changes may be administratively approved by the
inspecting engineer. Substantial changes require Board approval.
E.
§ 176-9 INSURANCE § 176-9
168:307
STATE AGENCY — A state department, board, commission, division, bureau
or an agency created by the state.
STORMWATER DETENTION — A provision for storage of stormwater runoff
and the controlled release of such runoff during and after a flood or storm.
STORMWATER RETENTION — A provision for storage of stormwater
runoff.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor above it or, if there is no floor above it, then
the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, FIRST — The lowest story of the ground story of any building, the
floor of which is not more than 12 inches below the average finished grade
of the adjoining ground within 20 feet of the structure.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way that is an existing state, county or municipal roadway;
a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or
approved by official action; a street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded
in the office of the county recording officer prior to the appointment of a
Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats
and that includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks,
parking areas and other areas within the street lines. For the purpose of this
chapter "streets" shall be classified as follows:
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use, or ornamentation having a fixed location on, above or below
the surface of land or attached to something having a fixed location on,
above or below the surface of land.
SUBDIVISION or RESUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract, or parcel
of land into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions of land
for sale or development. The following shall not be considered subdivisions
ARTERIAL STREETS — Streets which are used primarily for fast or
heavy traffic.
A.
COLLECTOR STREETS — Streets which carry traffic from minor streets
to the major system of arterial streets, the principal entrance streets
of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a
development.
B.
MINOR STREETS — Streets that are used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
C.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS — Streets which are parallel to and
adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access to
abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
D.
ALLEYS — Minor ways that are used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a
street.
E.
§ 176-9 WATERFORD CODE § 176-9
168:308
if no new streets are created: divisions of land found by the Planning
Board for agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres or
larger in size; divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
divisions of property upon court order, including, but not limited to,
judgments of foreclosures; consolidation of existing lots by deed or other
recorded instrument; and the conveyance of one or more adjoining lots,
tracts, or parcels of land owned by the same person or persons, all of
which are found and certified by the administrative officer to conform
to the requirements of the municipal development rules, and are shown
and designated as separate lots, tracts, or parcels on the Tax Map of the
municipality.
SUBMERGED LANDS — Those lands that are inundated with water
throughout the year.
SUITABLE SEWAGE SLUDGE — Sewage sludge in which the concentrations
of any metals, measured on a dry weight basis, do not exceed the following
limits: 10 parts per million arsenic; 40 parts per million cadmium; 1,000
parts per million chromium; 1,200 parts per million copper; 4,800 parts per
million lead; 10 parts per million mercury; 1,250 parts per million nickel;
and 2,400 parts per million zinc. The metal concentration limits used to
define suitable sewage sludge are identical to those set forth in the DEP's
September 1993 draft Solid Waste Management State Plan Update for Class
B sludge.
SUSTAINABLE ENERGY FACILITIES — [Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-13]
THINNING — A silvicultural practice involving the removal of competing
trees to favor certain species, sizes and qualities of trees.[Added
9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
TRANSFER STATION OR FACILITY — A facility at which waste is
transferred from one waste vehicle to another waste vehicle for
transportation to a waste management facility.
TUTORING — The teaching or instruction of academic, business or artistic
subjects to not more than four students simultaneously.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy system, and all associated
equipment, converts solar energy into a usable electrical energy, heats
water or produces hot air or other similar function through the use of
solar panels.
A.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy system converts mechanical
energy from the wind into electrical power. This term includes the
base, blades, foundation, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer, vane, wire
inverter, batteries, and associated mechanical and electrical conversion
components necessary to generate, store and/or transfer energy.
B.
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy system, as defined
herein, is used to generate electricity, and has a nameplate capacity of
100 kilowatts or less.
C.
§ 176-9 INSURANCE § 176-9
168:309
UTILITY DISTRIBUTION LINES — Lines, conduits, pipes or cables located
in a street, road, alley or easement through which natural gas, electricity,
telephone, cable television, water, sewage, or stormwater discharge is
distributed to or from service lines extending from the main line to the
distribution system of the building or premises served. Utility distribution
lines do not include electric transmission lines.
VEGETATION — Any plant material, including grasses, shrubs and trees.
VEGETATIVE WASTE — Leaves, grass clippings, twigs, shrubbery and
residue from the raising of plants, such as stalks, hulls and leaves. It
includes vegetative processing wastes that do not contain nonvegetative
additives and whole trees, branches, tree trunks and stumps processed
through a wood chipper.
WASTE — Any hazardous waste, regulated medical waste, garbage, refuse,
septage sludge, discarded materials and other by-products and substances
which become unsuitable for their original purpose, resulting from
industrial, commercial and agricultural operations and from domestic and
community activities. They shall include solid and liquid waste materials.
For the purposes of this definition, liquids which are released from a sewage
treatment plant or on-site septic wastewater treatment system and solid
animal and vegetable wastes collected by swine producers licensed by the
New Jersey Department of Agriculture to collect, prepare and feed such
wastes to swine on their own farms shall not be considered waste.
WASTE-DERIVED MATERIAL — A waste, which has been separated,
collected or processed such that it is converted into an economically
valuable raw material or product which is not hazardous.
WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any property, site, system, equipment
or structure which is utilized for the storage, collection, processing,
transfer, transportation, separation, recycling, reclamation, recovery, reuse
or disposal of waste. It includes, but is not necessarily limited to, landfills,
composting facilities, recycling facilities and centers, incinerators,
materials recovery facilities, reclamation facilities, resource recovery
facilities, waste reuse facilities and transfer facilities.
WASTEWATER COLLECTION FACILITY — Any part of a system used to
carry wastewater and includes laterals, mains, trunks, interceptors and
other similar facilities.
WETLANDS — See N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.3.
WETLANDS, IMPAIRED — Any wetland that meets each of the following
three tests:
The wetland meets at least one of the following two criteria:
(1) The entire wetland is less than one acre; or
The overall wetland area is larger than one acre but the portion of
the wetland that is to be directly impacted is less than one acre and
the impacted area is separated from the remainder of the wetland
by a substantial hydrologic barrier; and
(2)
A.
§ 176-9 WATERFORD CODE § 176-9
168:310
WETLANDS MANAGEMENT — The establishment of a characteristic
wetland or the removal of exotic species or phragmites from a wetland
in accordance with the standards of N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.10. For purposes of
this definition, exotic species are those that are not indigenous to North
America.[Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
WETLAND SOILS — Those soils designated as very poorly drained or
poorly drained by the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the USDA,
including, but not limited, to Atsion, Bayboro, Berryland, Colemantown,
Elkton, Keansbury, Leon, Muck, Othello, Pocomoke, St. Johns, Freshwater
Marsh and Tidal Marsh soil types.
YARD — An open space that lies between the principal building or group of
buildings and the nearest lot line and that is unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward, except as herein permitted.
The wetland meets at least one of the following three criteria:
The wetland is within an area that is predominantly developed, has
direct access to a paved public road and is serviced by a municipal
wastewater treatment system; or
(1)
The wetland was filled prior to February 8, 1979, the fill is at least
one foot in depth, and the seasonal high water table is not within
one foot of the altered land surface; or
(2)
The wetland is an actively cultivated non-berry agricultural field
which was cleared and in production prior to February 8, 1979; and
(3)
B.
The wetland is not:
(1) An Atlantic white cedar swamp;
A wetland that is frequently ponded or flooded for a period of at
least seven days during the growing season;
(2)
A herbaceous or shrub dominated wetland type found in naturally
occurring circular or nearly circular depressions within upland or
wetland complexes;
(3)
Located within 300 feet of a lake, pond, river or permanent stream;
or
(4)
A wetland supporting plant species that are designated as
endangered pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.151 et seq. or supporting
plant or wildlife species designated as threatened or endangered
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.27 and N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.33.
(5)
C.
FRONT — An open space extending the full width of the lot between a
principal building and the front lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward, except as may be specified elsewhere in this
chapter. Any portion of a lot abutting a street will be considered a front
yard for the purpose of this chapter.
A.
§ 176-9 INSURANCE § 176-9
168:311
YARD SALE — The sale of personal used property from a residential
dwelling lot. For the purpose of this chapter, "yard sale" does not mean the
collection of and/or purchase of used items for resale from a residential
dwelling lot or any lot located within Waterford Township. The sale of items
collected and/or purchased for resale shall be deemed a business subject
to the restrictions and requirements of commercial use. This term shall
include "flea market" for sales conducted by religious or civic organizations
on public or private property for fund-raising purposes.
ZONING MAP — The Zoning Map or Maps for the Township of Waterford,
New Jersey, together with all amendments subsequently adopted,
delineating the various districts controlling land use and lot size.
REAR — An open space extending the full width of the lot between a
principal building and the rear lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward, except as may be specified elsewhere in this
chapter.
B.
SIDE — An open space extending from the front lot line to the rear
lot line between a principal building from the nearest side lot line,
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as may
be specified elsewhere in this chapter.
C.
§ 176-9 WATERFORD CODE § 176-9
168:312
ARTICLE II
Administration; Enforcement; Certificates and Permits; Violations
and Penalties
§ 176-10. Administration.
These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of the Township of Waterford. Any action taken by the Township
under the terms of this chapter shall give primary consideration to the
above-mentioned matters and to the welfare of the entire municipality.
§ 176-11. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Township Engineer, Construction Official and
Zoning Official to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
A. Amendments. In amending this chapter, the Master Plan, or any other
ordinance regulating the use of land, the Township shall comply with all
the requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:50-3.45.
B. Conflicting provisions. The standards and regulations in this chapter
are intended to be the minimum provisions necessary to achieve the
purposes and objectives of this chapter, the Pinelands Protection Act
and Chapter 21 of the New Jersey Administrative Code (Residential Site
Improvement Standards). In the event of a conflict between any
provisions, the stricter provision shall apply.
C. Interpretation of regulations. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70,
the Planning Board shall hear and decide requests for interpretation of
the Zoning Map or this chapter.
D. Repealer. All sections of any other ordinance of the Township that
contain provisions contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be
and are, to the extent of such inconsistency, repealed.
E. Effective date. This chapter shall take effect upon its final passage and
publication according to law.
A. Township Engineer.
(1) The Township Engineer shall monitor all land disturbances and
improvements undertaken in the Township pursuant to approval of
a subdivision and/or site plan in accordance with the applicable
provisions of this chapter.
(2) Prior to the commencement of any land disturbance or
improvement, the developer shall arrange for and attend a
preconstruction meeting with the Township Engineer. At said
meeting, the subject subdivision plat and/or site plan shall be
identified, marked and dated by the Township Engineer with an
acknowledgement of its conformity to the approval granted by the
§ 176-10 INSURANCE § 176-11
168:313
Planning Board, including any conditions written in the approval
resolution. The marked and dated subdivision and/or site plan shall
be filed in the office of the Zoning Official.
(3) Written communication.
(a) The Township Engineer shall issue a written communication to
the developer within 10 days after the preconstruction
meeting, either:
[1] Authorizing the commencement of land disturbance and/or
improvement in accordance with the approved plat or
plan, including any conditions written in the approval
resolution, and in accordance with any and all limitations
and/or conditions as deemed appropriate by the Township
Engineer specifically enumerated; or
[2] Denying the commencement of land disturbance and/or
improvement, with the reasons for such denial specifically
enumerated.
(b) A copy of the written communication shall be filed in the office
of the Construction Official, and a copy shall be forwarded to
the Planning Board.
(4) In accordance with § 176-25, the Township Engineer shall inspect
all improvements for site plans and subdivisions during the time of
their installation. At the time of inspection, in addition to evaluation
and determination of the sufficiency of the engineering aspects of
the improvements, the Township Engineer shall evaluate and
determine the correctness of the improvements relative to all
aspects of the approved subdivision and/or site plan. Should any
improvement, whether completed or under construction, be found
by the Township Engineer to be contrary to Township Board
approval, including any imposed conditions, such fact shall be
orally communicated to the developer or appropriate
representative on site. The Township Engineer shall also
communicate such fact, in writing, to the developer and his
attorney. A copy of the written communication shall be filed in the
office of the Construction Official, and a copy shall be forwarded to
the Planning Board.
(5) On the day following the oral communication from the Township
Engineer stating the improvement found to be contrary to the
subdivision and/or site plan, the developer shall correct the specific
improvement to conform to the approval for the project or the
Township Engineer shall:
(a) Direct the Construction Official to issue a stop-work order
pending the correction of said improvement or the resolution
of any dispute; and/or
§ 176-11 WATERFORD CODE § 176-11
168:314
(b) Refer the matter, in writing, to the Planning Board for review
and reconsideration of the prior approval.
(6) The developer shall immediately comply with any issued stop-work
order and/or any other conditions imposed by the Township
Engineer; otherwise the Township Engineer shall communicate, in
writing within two working days, the particulars of the developer's
noncompliance to the attorney of the Planning Board.
B. Construction Official.
(1) The Construction Official shall monitor the construction of any
building or structure in the Township. No new structure, and no
improvement to the interior of any existing structure shall be
undertaken until a construction permit is obtained from the
Construction Official in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.14 and
§ 176-11B(1) through (6).
(2) In accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.5, the Construction Official shall
keep a record of all applications and construction permits that are
either issued or denied, with notations of any conditions involved,
including the actual elevation (NGVD) of the lowest floor area of
any structure and/or the elevation to which a structure has been
floodproofed in floodplain areas, which data shall form a part of the
Township public records. A monthly report of all construction
permits shall be filed with the Township Administrator and
continuous reports of construction permits shall be filed with the
Tax Assessor.
(3) Should any construction, whether completed or in process, be
found by the Construction Official to be contrary to the approved
construction plans and/or the Uniform Construction Code of the
State of New Jersey, such fact shall immediately be noticed to the
landowner or his appropriate representative on site. The
Construction Official shall issue, to the landowner or his attorney, a
written notice of violation and orders to terminate, directing the
discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the correction
of the violation pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.30.
(4) The improvement found by the Construction Official to be contrary
to the approved construction plans and/or the Uniform
Construction Code shall be immediately corrected to conform to
the applicable construction requirements, or the Construction
Official shall, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.31:
(a) Issue a stop-construction order pending the correction of said
construction or the resolution of any disputes; and/or
(b) Assess a monetary penalty.
(5) The landowner shall immediately comply with any issued stopconstruction
order and/or any other conditions imposed by the
§ 176-11 INSURANCE § 176-11
168:315
§ 176-12. Certificates and permits.
The municipality may grant, to the extent that it is so authorized by state
law or municipal ordinance, any permits or approvals of development
subject to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.31 through 7:50-4.42; provided, however, that all
such permits or approvals granted, and any other action taken by such
municipality with respect to the development or use of land within the
Construction Official; otherwise the Construction Official may
communicate, in writing, the particulars of the landowner's
noncompliance to the Township Attorney pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.31.
C. Zoning Official.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Zoning Official to inspect the uses, land
and structures in the Township and order the owner, in writing, to
remedy any condition found to exist in violation of any provision of
this chapter and/or any approved subdivision and/or site plan by
the Planning Board, including any conditions of approval written in
the approval resolution. No structure or land shall be used in
violation of this chapter and/or any approved subdivision and/or
site plan.
(2) Should any use, land or structure be found by the Zoning Official to
exist in violation of any provision of this chapter and/or any
approved subdivision and/or site plan, such fact shall be
communicated, in writing, to the landowner. If the violation
involves any approved subdivision and/or site plan, a copy of the
written communication shall be forwarded to the attorney for the
Planning Board.
(3) The use, land or structure found by the Zoning Official to be in
violation of any provision of this chapter and/or any approved
subdivision and/or site plan shall be corrected immediately to
conform to this chapter and any subdivision and/or site plan
approval, or the Construction Official, at the Zoning Official's
request, may revoke the certificate of occupancy and, in any case,
shall notify the Township Attorney and the Township Engineer of
the violation by written communication.
D. Sufficient notice. In all cases where oral communication can not be
completed, the written communication shall be considered sufficient
notification by the Township Engineer, Construction Official or Zoning
Official.
E. Violation requires new certificate of occupancy. When any parcel,
developed or undeveloped, is deemed to be in violation of any
provisions of this chapter and subject to the penalties hereinafter
prescribed, a new certificate of occupancy shall be required for any
further use of such parcel.
§ 176-11 WATERFORD CODE § 176-12
168:316
Pinelands Area, shall be in strict conformance with the certified Municipal
Master Plan, this chapter, and the CMP.
A. Certificate of occupancy.
(1) It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any structure or part
thereof until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by
the Construction Official pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.33. Any
change of use from one category of permitted use to another
category of permitted use shall require a new certificate of
occupancy. Additionally, any use requiring site plan approval shall
require a new certificate of occupancy. It shall be the duty of the
Construction Official to issue a certificate of occupancy only when:
(a) The structure or parts thereof and the proposed use conform to
this chapter and all other applicable codes and ordinances of
the Township;
(b) Prior site plan, subdivision or variance approvals, as may be
necessary, have been granted by the appropriate municipal
agencies in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;
(c) All local taxes and assessments on the property have been
paid; and
(d) A letter from each utility company has been received by the
Township stating that the utility has been installed and has
been inspected in accordance with the approved plan and is
ready for use.
(2) Fees for a certificate of occupancy shall be in accordance with the
Uniform Construction Code as incorporated into a "Schedule of
Fees" in the codes of the Township, including any amendments or
supplements which may from time to time be adopted.91
(3) Unless additional time is agreed upon by the applicant in writing, a
certificate of occupancy shall be granted or denied, in writing,
within 10 working days from the date that a written notification and
a certified location or field survey, signed and sealed by a New
Jersey State licensed surveyor, is filed with the Construction
Official stipulating that the erection of the structure and all
required site improvements are completed pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.23 and 5:23-2.24.
(4) With respect to any approved subdivision and/or final site plan, or
subsection thereof, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued only
upon the written confirmation by the Township Engineer to the
Construction Official that the following improvements (to the
extent that same are required as part of the subdivision and/or site
plan approval) have been completed:
91.Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
§ 176-12 INSURANCE § 176-12
168:317
(a) Curbs;
(b) All utilities;
(c) Water supply and sewerage treatment facilities, which shall be
functioning and servicing the property in question;
(d) Storm drainage facilities;
(e) Final grading of the property;
(f) Base course (in the case of subdivisions) or final course (in the
case of site plans) of the street or streets serving the property;
(g) Base course (in the case of subdivisions) or final course (in the
case of site plans) of driveways and parking areas;
(h) Lighting (street and/or site);
(i) Landscaping;
(j) Any other improvements required as part of subdivision and/or
site plan approval.
(5) With respect to any individual residential lot within a subdivision or
any building containing townhouses or apartments, a certificate of
occupancy shall be issued only upon the written confirmation by
the Township Engineer to the Construction Official that the
following improvements, in addition to those listed in § 176-12A(4)
above (to the extent that same are required by subdivision and/or
site plan approval) have been completed:
(a) Sidewalks;
(b) Driveway aprons;
(c) Street names and regulatory signs.
(6) A copy of any issued certificate of occupancy shall be kept on file at
the premises affected and shall be shown to the Construction
Official upon request. Additionally, the Construction Official shall
provide a copy of an issued certificate of occupancy to the Clerk of
the Planning Board for placement in the site plan or subdivision
application file.
(7) Should the Construction Official decline to issue a certificate of
occupancy, his reason for doing so shall be stated on two copies of
the application and one copy shall be returned to the applicant.
(8) Temporary certificate of occupancy.
(a) A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for any
new structure or use for which site plan and/or subdivision
approval has been granted although not all conditions of said
approval have been complied with. Such temporary certificate
§ 176-12 WATERFORD CODE § 176-12
168:318
of occupancy shall be issued only in extenuating circumstances
and only with the concurrent written approval of the Township
Engineer, Construction Official and Zoning Official who,
together, shall establish specific terms and conditions,
including, but not limited to, a timetable not exceeding 90
days for the installation of the uncompleted site improvements,
and the receipt of a performance guarantee assuring the
installation of the improvements as indicated on the approved
plat or plan, whether or not said improvements were included
within a performance bond in accordance with § 176-22D. Any
temporary certificate of occupancy beyond a ninety-day time
period may only be granted by the Planning Board who issued
the subdivision and/or site plan approval.
(b) A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the
Construction Official for any building or structure not part of a
site plan or subdivision application pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.23(e).
(9) A monthly report of the certificates of occupancy issued shall be
filed with the Tax Assessor. A record of all certificates of occupancy
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.5 shall be kept in the office of the
Construction Official and copies shall be furnished on request to
any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the structure
or land affected. The charge for each copy shall be established by
resolution of the Township, except that there shall be no charge to
a municipal agency.
(10) The following shall be prohibited until the Construction Official
issues a certificate of occupancy:
(a) Occupancy and use of a structure erected, constructed,
restored, altered or moved, when such erection, construction,
restoration, alteration or movement requires a construction
permit.
(b) Occupancy, establishment of use or change in use of vacant
land, other than for agricultural purposes.
(c) Any change of use from one category of permitted use to
another category of permitted use, in accordance with the
applicable listings of permitted uses in this chapter.
(d) Any change in the use of a nonconforming use or
nonconforming structure.
(11) Any applicant requesting a certificate of occupancy that involves
the provision of more than 10 off-street parking spaces, or the
construction of new access or circulation roads to serve the parking
or loading areas, or the relocation or rearrangement of such roads,
or any permitted use requiring a site plan review by a Township
§ 176-12 INSURANCE § 176-12
168:319
Board as provided for in this chapter, shall first receive the
approval of said Township Board.
B. Construction permit. Where applicable, no construction permit shall be
issued until a Pinelands Certificate of Filing or the Construction Official
has received preliminary zoning permit.
(1) Every application for a construction permit shall be accompanied
by two sets of plans drawn in ink or a blueprint showing the
following information:
(a) Property lines and dimensions of the lot to be built upon;
(b) Roadway rights-of-way and cartway;
(c) Building locations, dimensions, set backs, first floor and garage
elevation;
(d) Height of all existing and proposed structures and
substructures;
(e) All deed restrictions and easements, if any exist;
(f) Minimum yard area requirements;
(g) All existing and proposed drainage facilities, if required;
(h) Adequate provisions to minimize erosion during construction;
(i) Wetlands and buffer areas, if any exist;
(j) Finished grading plan showing existing and proposed grades at
the building corners, property corners, and any required spot
elevations along swales and channels;
(k) The location of any existing or proposed private well or septic
system;
(l) The existing or intended use of each structure;
(m) The number of dwelling units the structure is designed to
accommodate;
(n) The number and location of off-street parking spaces and offstreet
loading areas;
(o) Such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring
lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for the
enforcement of this chapter. Additionally, all requirements for
construction permits contained in the Uniform Construction
Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.15, shall be met. A licensed surveyor in
the State of New Jersey shall base all dimensions on these
plans relating to the location and size of the lot to be built upon
on an actual survey of the lot.
§ 176-12 WATERFORD CODE § 176-12
168:320
(2) The fee for each construction permit shall be in accordance with
Chapter 217, Laws of New Jersey 1975 and Title 5, Chapter 23 of
the New Jersey Administrative Code as incorporated into a
"Schedule of Fees" in the codes of the Township of Waterford,
including any amendments or supplements which may from time to
time be adopted.92
(3) A construction permit shall be granted or denied, in writing, within
20 working days of a complete application unless additional time is
agreed upon in writing by the applicant. One copy of the plan shall
be returned to the owner, when approved or denied by the
Construction Official, together with any permits granted.
(4) The lot and location of the proposed new structure or addition
thereto shall be staked out before construction is started and a
copy of the construction permit shall be posted conspicuously
during construction. Additionally, all other requirements for
construction permit procedures set forth in the Uniform
Construction Code in N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.16 shall be met.
(5) No construction permit shall be issued for any structure until prior
site plan, subdivision and variance approvals, as may be necessary,
have been granted by the appropriate federal, state, county, or
municipal agencies, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and until all review and inspection fees and all local taxes
and assessments on the property have been paid.
(6) All grading plans and any proposed extension of public utilities
shall be reviewed and approved by the Township Engineer prior to
the issuance of a construction permit, and a written communication
of the results of such reviews and a statement of approval or denial
shall be provided by the Township Engineer to the Construction
Official. The appropriate escrow fees for such reviews shall
accompany the application for the construction permit.
(7) Evidence that a construction dumpster will be on site for collection
of refuse and construction debris.
C. Temporary use permit.
(1) It is recognized that it may be in accordance with the purpose of
this chapter to permit temporary activities for a limited period of
time which activities may be prohibited by other provisions of this
chapter. If such uses are of such a nature and are so located that at
the time of petition they will:
(a) In no way exert a detrimental effect upon the uses of land
activities normally permitted in the zone; or
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
§ 176-12 INSURANCE § 176-12
168:321
(b) Contribute materially to the welfare of the Township,
particularly in a state of emergency, under conditions peculiar
to the time and place involved.
(2) For nonresidential applications, the Planning Board may, subject to
all regulations for the issuance of special permits elsewhere
specified, direct the Zoning Official to issue a permit for a period
not to exceed six months. Such period may be extended not more
than once for an additional period of six months.
(3) For residential applications, the Zoning Official may issue such
permit under the same terms conditions set forth above.
D. Preliminary zoning permit. The Zoning Official is hereby authorized and
directed to issue preliminary zoning permits as a prerequisite to the
issuance of a construction permit or other permits or approvals which
are needed to develop a single-family dwelling on an existing lot of
record through implementation of an alternative local permitting
program as provided in N.J.A.C. 7:50-3.81 through 3.85. The
requirements for issuance of a preliminary zoning permit are set forth
in § 176-14C.
E. Zoning permit. A zoning permit is required prior to the establishment of
any use of land, change of use of any structure or land, change in the
exterior dimensions of any structure, or construction of a new
structure.
(1) An application for a zoning permit shall not be deemed complete
unless two copies of a plan showing the exact dimensions of the
parcel and the location of existing and/or proposed structures, at a
scale no less than one inch equals 20 feet, is provided. The plan
shall be drawn by a licensed engineer or surveyor.
(2) A zoning permit shall be granted or denied by the Zoning Official,
in writing, within seven working days of a complete application
unless additional time is agreed upon in writing by the applicant. If
the Zoning Official deems an application incomplete, the applicant
shall be notified of any deficiency, in writing, within 10 working
days.93
(3) One copy of the plan, dated and signed by the Zoning Official, shall
be returned to the applicant together with the zoning permit.
(4) When an application is denied, the Zoning Official shall provide the
applicant with the reason for the denial in writing.
F. Forestry permit.
(1) The information in Subsection F(1)(a) or (b) below shall be
submitted to the Department of Planning and Zoning prior to the
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-12 WATERFORD CODE § 176-12
168:322
issuance of any forestry permit: [Amended 9-12-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-15]
(a) For forestry activities on a parcel of land enrolled in the New
Jersey Forest Stewardship Program, a copy of the approved
New Jersey Forest Stewardship Plan. This document shall
serve as evidence of the completion of an application with the
Pinelands Commission as well as evidence that the activities
are consistent with the standards of the Pinelands
Comprehensive Management Plan. No certificate of filing from
the Pinelands Commission shall be required.
(b) For all other forestry applications:
[1] The applicant's name and address and his interest in the
subject parcel;
[2] The owner's name and address, if different from the
applicant's, and the owner's signed consent to the filing of
the application;
[3] The description, including block and lot designation and
street address, if any, of the subject parcel;
[4] A description of all existing uses of the subject parcel;
[5] A brief written statement generally describing the
proposed forestry operation;
[6] A USGS quadrangle map, or copy thereof, and a copy of
the Municipal Tax Map sheet on which the boundaries of
the subject parcel, the Pinelands management area
designation and the municipal zoning designation are
shown;
[7] A forestry management plan that includes, as appropriate:
[a] A cover page for the plan containing:
[i] The name, mailing address and telephone number
of the owner of the subject parcel;
[ii] The municipality and county in which the subject
parcel is located;
[iii] The block and lot designation and street address,
if any, of the subject parcel;
[iv] The name and address of the forester who
prepared the plan, if not prepared by the owner of
the subject parcel; and
§ 176-12 INSURANCE § 176-12
168:323
[v] The date the plan was prepared, subsequent
revision dates and the period of time the plan is
intended to cover;
[b] A clear and concise statement of the owner's
objectives for undertaking the proposed forestry
activities, including a description of the short- (five
years) and long-term (20 years) objectives for all
proposed silvicultural techniques that will be used to
manage the parcel;
[c] A description of the existing conditions of the subject
parcel and of each forest stand in which a proposed
activity, prescription or practice will occur. These
stand descriptions shall include photographs of each
stand taken at eye level showing the location of all
Pinelands native forest types, as identified at N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.43, and shall be keyed to an activity map that
shall include, as appropriate, the following
information:
[i] The number of acres;
[ii] The general condition and quality of each stand;
[iii] The overall site quality, relative to the
management goals and objectives identified in
Subsection F(1)(b)[7][b] above;
[iv] An inventory and map of Pinelands native forest
types with native forest types broken into
"stands," including information on type, size and
volume by species;
[v] The age of representative trees;
[vi] The species composition, including overstory,
understory, ground layer structure and
composition;
[vii] The stand cohort composition;
[viii] The percent cover;
[ix] The basal area;
[x] The structure, including age classes, diameter
breast height (dbh) classes and crown classes;
[xi] The condition and species composition of
advanced regeneration when applicable;
[xii] A stocking table showing the stocking levels,
growth rates and volume;
§ 176-12 WATERFORD CODE § 176-12
168:324
[xiii] Projections of intended future stand
characteristics at ten-, twenty-, and forty-year
intervals;
[xiv] A description of the forestry activities,
silvicultural prescriptions, management activities
and practices proposed during the permit period
and the acreage proposed for each activity. These
may include, but are not necessarily limited to, a
description of:
[A] Stand improvement practices;
[B] Site preparation practices;
[C] Harvesting practices;
[D] Regeneration and reforestation practices;
[E] Improvements, including road construction,
stream crossings, landings, loading areas and
skid trails;
[F] Herbicide treatments;
[G] Silvicultural treatment alternatives;
[H] If planting will occur to accomplish
reforestation, the application shall include
seed sources records, if such records are
available;
[I] Implementation instructions; and
[J] Measures that will be taken to prevent the
potential spread of exotic plant species or
phragmites into wetlands; and
[xv] A description, if appropriate, of the forest
products to be harvested, including volume
expressed in cords and board feet; diameter
breast height (dbh) classes and average diameter;
age; heights; and number of trees per acre; and
[d] A map of the entire parcel which includes the
following:
[i] The owner's name, address and the date the map
was prepared;
[ii] An arrow designating the north direction;
[iii] A scale which is not smaller than one inch equals
2,000 feet or larger than one inch equals 400 feet;
§ 176-12 INSURANCE § 176-12
168:325
[iv] The location of all property lines;
[v] A delineation of the physical features, such as
roads, streams and structures;
[vi] The identification of soil types (a separate map
may be used for this purpose);
[vii] A map inset showing the location of the parcel in
relation to the local area;
[viii] Clear location of the area and acreage in which
each proposed activity, prescription or practice
will occur. If shown on other than the property
map, the map or maps shall note the scale, which
shall not be smaller than one inch equals 2,000
feet or larger than one inch equals 400 feet, and
shall be appropriately keyed to the property map;
and
[ix] A legend defining the symbols appearing on the
map.
[8] A letter from the Office of Natural Lands Management
identifying any threatened or endangered plants or
animals reported on or in the immediate vicinity of the
parcel and a detailed description by the applicant of the
measures proposed to meet the standards set forth in
§§ 176-62, 176-66 and 176-72;
[9] A cultural resource survey documenting cultural resources
on those portions of the parcel where ground disturbance
due to site preparation or road construction will occur and
a detailed description of the measures proposed by the
applicant to treat those cultural resources in accordance
with § 176-70;
[10] A statement identifying the type, location and frequency of
any proposed herbicide treatments and how such
treatments will comply with the standards set forth in
Subsection F(2)(i)[2] below;
[11] A statement identifying the specific steps to be taken to
ensure that trees or areas to be harvested are properly
identified so as to ensure that only those trees intended for
harvesting are harvested;
[12]Written comments from the New Jersey State Forester
concerning the extent to which the proposed forestry
activities are consistent with the guidelines provided in
the New Jersey Forestry and Wetlands Best Management
Practices Manual developed by the New Jersey
§ 176-12 WATERFORD CODE § 176-12
168:326
Department of Environmental Protection, dated October
1995, as amended. Any such comments which indicate
that the proposed activities are not consistent with said
Manual must be addressed by the applicant in terms of
their potential impact on the standards set forth in
Subsection F(2) below; and
[13] A certificate of filing from the Pinelands Commission
issued pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34; and
[14] When prior approval for the forestry activities has been
granted by the Zoning Officer or other city approval
agency, a letter from the Pinelands Commission indicating
that the prior approval has been reviewed pursuant to
§ 176-14I.
(2) Forestry standards. Forestry operations shall be approved only if
the applicant can demonstrate that the standards set forth below
are met: [Amended 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
(a) All forestry activities shall serve to maintain Pinelands native
forest types, including those which are locally characteristic,
except in those stands where other forest types exist;
(b) Any newly developed access to lands proposed for harvesting
shall avoid wetland areas except as absolutely necessary to
harvest wetlands species or to otherwise gain access to a
harvesting site;
(c) The following actions shall be required to encourage the
establishment, restoration or regeneration of Camden white
cedar in cedar and hardwood swamps:
[1] Clearcutting cedar and managing slash;
[2] Controlling competition by other plant species;
[3] Utilizing fencing and other retardants, where necessary, to
protect cedar from overbrowsing;
[4] Utilizing existing streams as cutting boundaries, where
practical;
[5] Harvesting during dry periods or when the ground is
frozen; and
[6] Utilizing the least intrusive harvesting techniques,
including the use of winches, corduroy roads and
helicopters, where practical.
(d) All forestry activities and practices shall be designed and
carried out so as to comply with the standards set forth in
§§ 176-62, 176-66 and 176-72. The species accounts provided
§ 176-12 INSURANCE § 176-12
168:327
in the "Recommended Forestry Management Practices
Report," Appendix I - Endangered Animals, dated March 2006,
as amended and supplemented and available at the principal
office of the Commission or at www.nj.gov/pinelands, may be
utilized as a guide for meeting these standards;
(e) All forestry activities and practices shall be designed and
carried out so as to comply with the standards for the land
application of waste set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.79, except as
expressly authorized in this section;
(f) All forestry activities and practices shall be designed and
carried out so as to comply with the standards for the
protection of historic, archaeological and cultural resources
set forth in § 176-70;
(g) A vegetated streamside management zone shall be maintained
or established adjacent to streams, ponds, lakes and marshes,
except that no streamside management zone shall be required
when Camden white cedar is proposed to be harvested,
established, restored or regenerated. The streamside
management zone shall be at least 25 feet in width. Where soils
are severely erodible, slopes exceed 10% or streamside
vegetation is not vigorous, the streamside management zone
shall be increased up to a maximum of 70 feet to buffer the
water body from adjacent forestry activities;
(h) Stream crossings, access roads, timber harvesting, skid trails,
log decks, portable sawmill sites, site preparation, and
reforestation shall be designed and carried out so as to:
[1] Minimize changes to surface and groundwater hydrology;
[2] Minimize changes to temperature and other existing
surface water quality and conditions;
[3] Prevent unnecessary soil erosion, siltation and
sedimentation; and
[4] Minimize unnecessary disturbances to aquatic and forest
habitats.
(i) The following standards shall apply to silvicultural practices
for site preparation, either before or after harvesting:
[1] In areas with slopes of greater than 10%, an undisturbed
buffer strip of at least 25 feet in width shall be maintained
along roads during site preparation to catch soil particles;
[2] Herbicide treatments shall be permitted, provided that:
§ 176-12 WATERFORD CODE § 176-12
168:328
[a] The proposed treatment is identified in the forestry
application submitted to the Commission pursuant to
Subsection F(1)(b)[10] above;
[b] Control of competitive plant species is clearly
necessary;
[c] Control of competitive plant species by other,
nonchemical means is not practical;
[d] All chemicals shall be expressly labeled for forestry
use and shall be used and mixed in a manner that is
consistent with relevant state and federal
requirements; and
[e] In pine-shrub oak native forest types, herbicide
treatments shall only be permitted as a method to
temporarily suppress shrub-oak understory in order to
facilitate pine regeneration. All such herbicide
treatments shall be applied in a targeted manner so
that there will be no significant reduction in tree or
shrub-oak resprouting outside those areas subject to
the herbicide treatment;
[3] Broadcast scarification and mechanical weeding shall be
permitted in all Pinelands native forest types;
[4] Disking shall be permitted, provided that:
[a] It shall not be permitted in pine plains native forest
types;
[b] Disking shall only be permitted in pine-shrub oak
native forest types as a method to temporarily
suppress shrub-oak understory in order to facilitate
pine regeneration, and shall be limited as follows:
[i] Disking may occur one time during the first year
of the establishment of a stand to assure the
successful growth of pine seedlings and may be
repeated one time during the second year of the
growth of the stand only in areas where pine
seedling establishment has not successfully
occurred; and
[ii] Only single-pass disking, which penetrates the
soil no deeper than six inches, shall be permitted.
[c] It shall not occur in wetlands, except as may be
necessary to establish, restore or regenerate Camden
white cedar. When so used, disking shall be limited to
shrub-dominated parcels and recently abandoned
agricultural lands; and
§ 176-12 INSURANCE § 176-12
168:329
[d] It shall follow land contours when slopes are
discernible;
[5] Root raking shall be permitted, provided that:
[a] It shall not be permitted in pine-shrub oak native
forest types or pine plains native forest types;
[b] When used to establish, restore or regenerate Camden
white cedar, root raking shall be limited to shrubdominated
parcels and recently abandoned
agricultural lands; and
[c] Root raking debris shall not be piled in wetlands;
[6] Bedding shall be permitted only in recently abandoned,
cultivated wetlands where there are no established
Pinelands native forest types; and
[7] Drum chopping shall be permitted, provided that:
[a] It shall not be permitted in pine plains native forest
types except to create road shoulder fuelbreaks,
which shall be limited to 25 feet in width, or to create
scattered early successional habitats under two acres
in size;
[b] It shall not be permitted in wetlands, except as may be
necessary to establish, restore or regenerate Camden
white cedar. When so used, drum chopping shall be
limited to shrub-dominated parcels and recently
abandoned agricultural lands; and
[c] It shall adhere to the following procedures:
[i] No more than two passes shall be permitted
except to create scattered early successional
habitats under two acres in size;
[ii] Drums shall remain unfilled when used during the
dormant season;
[iii] Chop up and down the slope on a parcel so the
depressions made by the cleats and chopper
blades run parallel to the contour of the land to
help reduce the occurrence of channeled surface
erosion;
[iv] Chop so the depressions made by the cleats and
chopper blades run parallel to a wetland or water
body; and
[v] Avoid short-radius, 180° turns at the end of each
straight pass.
§ 176-12 WATERFORD CODE § 176-12
168:330
(j) The following standards shall apply to silvicultural practices
for harvesting:
[1] Clearcutting shall be permitted, provided that:
[a] It shall not be permitted in pine plains native forest
types;
[b] It shall be limited to 300 acres or 5% of a parcel,
whichever is greater, during any permit period;
[c] A fifty-foot-wide buffer strip, in which only periodic
pruning and thinning may occur, shall be maintained
between any clearcut and the parcel boundaries;
[d] A buffer strip, in which only periodic pruning and
thinning may occur, shall also be maintained to
separate each twenty-five-acre or larger clearcut from
other twenty-five-acre or larger clearcuts, coppice
cuts and seed tree cuts that occur within a fifteen-year
period. The buffer strip separating two twenty-fiveacre
harvests shall be 50 feet in width and, for a larger
harvest, shall increase in width by one foot for each
acre of that harvest above 25, to a maximum of 300
feet in width;
[e] Where present on a parcel, a minimum of 18 dead
snags per acre of at least 10 inches diameter breast
height (dbh) and six feet in height shall be left on the
parcel for a minimum of five years; and
[f] The area of the parcel subject to the clearcut shall
have contoured edges unless the boundary of the
clearcut serves as a firebreak in which case straight
edges may be used;
[2] Coppicing shall be permitted in all Pinelands native forest
types, provided that:
[a] It shall be limited to 500 acres in size or 10% of a
parcel, whichever is greater, during any permit
period;
[b] A fifty-foot-wide buffer strip, in which only periodic
pruning and thinning may occur, shall be maintained
between any coppice cut and the parcel boundaries;
[c] A buffer strip, in which only periodic pruning and
thinning may occur, shall also be maintained to
separate each twenty-five-acre or larger coppice cut
from other twenty-five-acre or larger clearcuts,
coppice cuts and seed tree cuts that occur within a
fifteen-year period. The buffer strip separating two
§ 176-12 INSURANCE § 176-12
168:331
twenty-five-acre harvests shall be 50 feet in width and,
for a larger harvest, shall increase in width by one foot
for each acre of that harvest above 25, to a maximum
of 300 feet in width;
[d] Where present on a parcel, a minimum of 18 dead
snags per acre of at least 10 inches dbh and six feet in
height shall be left on the parcel for a minimum of five
years; and
[e] The area of the parcel subject to the coppice cut shall
have contoured edges unless the boundary of the
coppice cut serves as a firebreak in which case
straight edges may be used;
[3] Seed tree cutting shall be permitted in all Pinelands native
forest types, provided that:
[a] It shall be limited to 500 acres in size or 10% of a
parcel, whichever is greater, during any permit
period;
[b] A fifty-foot-wide buffer strip, in which only periodic
pruning and thinning may occur, shall be maintained
between any seed tree cut and the parcel boundaries;
[c] A buffer strip, in which only periodic pruning and
thinning may occur, shall also be maintained to
separate each twenty-five-acre or larger seed tree cut
from other twenty-five-acre or larger clearcuts,
coppice cuts and seed tree cuts that occur within a
fifteen-year period. The buffer strip separating two
twenty-five-acre harvests shall be 50 feet in width and,
for a larger harvest, shall increase in width by one foot
for each acre of that harvest above 25, to a maximum
of 300 feet in width;
[d] Where present on a parcel, a minimum of 18 dead
snags per acre of at least 10 inches dbh and six feet in
height shall be left on the parcel for a minimum of five
years;
[e] The area of the parcel subject to the seed tree cut
shall have contoured edges unless the boundary of the
seed tree cut serves as a firebreak in which case
straight edges may be used;
[f] Dominant residual seed trees shall be retained at a
distribution of at least seven trees per acre; and
[g] Residual seed trees shall be distributed evenly
throughout the parcel; and
§ 176-12 WATERFORD CODE § 176-12
168:332
[4] Shelterwood cutting, group selection and individual
selection shall be permitted in all Pinelands native forest
types.
(k) The following standards shall apply to silvicultural practices
for forest regeneration:
[1] Natural regeneration shall be permitted in all Pinelands
native forest types and shall be required in the pine plains
native forest type, except as provided in Subsection
F(2)(k)[2] below; and
[2] Artificial regeneration shall be permitted in all Pinelands
native forest types, provided that:
[a] The use of nonnative cuttings, seedlings or seeds shall
not be permitted;
[b] The use of hybrid cuttings, seedlings or seeds shall be
permitted if it can be demonstrated that the cutting is
from a locally native, naturally occurring hybrid which
will be planted within its natural range and habitat;
[c] Cuttings, seedlings or seeds shall be collected and
utilized so as to ensure genetic diversity; and
[d] When used in pine plains native forest types, artificial
regeneration shall only be permitted to restore
drastically disturbed sites if seeds or seedlings from
the immediate vicinity have been collected from local,
genetically similar sources.
(l) Following site preparation and harvesting activities, slash shall
either be retained in piles on the parcel, distributed
throughout the parcel, removed from the parcel or burned.
(m) Thinning shall be permitted in all Pinelands native forest types,
including that which serves to maintain an understory of native
plants and/or manage stand composition, density, growth and
spatial heterogeneity.
(n) A copy of the approved municipal forestry permit shall be
conspicuously posted on the parcel which is the site of the
forestry activity.
(3) Permit procedures.
(a) Applications for forestry permits shall be submitted to the
Department of Planning and Zoning and shall be accompanied
by an application fee as set forth in § 176-20.94
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-12 INSURANCE § 176-12
168:333
(b) Within 14 days of receipt of any application, the Zoning Official
shall determine whether the application is complete and, if
necessary, notify the applicant in writing of any additional
information that is necessary to complete the application.
Should the Zoning Official fail to make such a determination
within 14 days, the application shall be considered to be
complete as of the 15th day following its submission.
(c) Within 45 days of determining an application to be complete
pursuant to § 176-12F(3)(b) above, or within such further time
as may be consented to by the applicant, the Zoning Official
shall issue a forestry permit if the activities proposed in the
application comply with the standards of § 176-12F(2) above or
disapprove any application which does not meet the
requirements of § 176-12F(2) above. Any such notice of
disapproval shall specifically set forth the deficiencies of the
application.
(d) Upon receipt of a notice of disapproval pursuant to
§ 176-12F(3)(c) above, the applicant shall have 30 days in
which to correct the deficiencies and submit any necessary
revisions to the application to the Zoning Official for review.
The Zoning Official shall review the revised application to
verify conformity with the standards in § 176-12F(2) above and
shall, within 14 days of receipt of the revised application, issue
a forestry permit or disapprove the application pursuant to
§ 176-12F(3)(c) above.
(e) Failure of the Zoning Official to act within the time period
prescribed in § 176-12F(3)(b), (c) or (d) above shall constitute
an approval of the forestry application as submitted. At the
request of the applicant, the municipality shall issue a
certificate as to the failure of the Zoning Official to act and it
shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other
evidence of municipal approval required herein.
(f) In reviewing and issuing permits for forestry applications, the
Zoning Official shall also comply with the Pinelands Area
notice and review procedures set forth in § 176-14G through J.
(g) Forestry permits shall be valid for a period of 10 years. Nothing
in this section shall be construed to prohibit any person from
securing additional permits, provided that the requirements of
this chapter and the CMP are met.
(4) Upon the issuance of a forestry permit pursuant to § 176-12F(3)
above, the applicant shall be required to pay a sum of $250 which
shall serve as reimbursement for any administrative costs incurred
by the municipality during the 10 year permit period. The applicant
shall not be subject to any additional fees or escrow requirements
for the duration of the forestry permit.
§ 176-12 WATERFORD CODE § 176-12
168:334
(5) No harvesting shall be commenced until the applicant has provided
the Zoning Official with 72 hours written notice of the intention to
begin harvesting operations.
G. Resource extraction permit.
(1) Resource extraction activities, as permitted under this chapter,
require site plan review and shall:
(a) Be designed so that no area of excavation, sedimentation pond,
storage area, equipment, or machinery or other structure or
facility is closer than:
[1] Two hundred feet to any property line;
[2] Five hundred feet to any residential or nonresource
extraction related commercial use that is in existence on
the date the permit is issued.
(b) Be located on a parcel of land at least 20 acres.
(c) Provide that all topsoil that is necessary for restoration will be
stored on the site and will be protected from wind or water
erosion. Topsoil shall not be stored within 200 feet of any
property line unless the area proposed for storage is
unforested and will be restored.
(d) Be fenced or blocked to prevent unauthorized entry into the
resource extraction operation through access roads.
(e) Provide ingress and egress to the resource extraction
operation from public roads by way of gravel or porous paved
roadways.
(f) Be designed so that the surface runoff will be maintained on
the parcel in a manner that will provide for on-site recharge to
groundwater.
(g) Not involve excavation below the seasonal high water table,
unless the excavation will serve as a recreational or wildlife
resource or a water reservoir for public, agricultural or
industrial uses or for any other use authorized in the zoning
district in which the site is located;
(h) Not involve excavation exceeding 65 feet below the natural
surface of the ground existing prior to excavation unless it can
be demonstrated that a depth exceeding 65 feet will result in
no significant adverse impact relative to the proposed final use
or on off-site areas.
(i) Be carried out in accordance with an extraction schedule that
depicts the anticipated sequence, as well as anticipated length
of time that each of the twenty-acre units of the parcel
§ 176-12 INSURANCE § 176-12
168:335
proposed for extraction will be worked. This shall not preclude
more than one twenty-acre unit from being worked at any one
time, provided that there is a demonstrated need for additional
units, restoration is proceeding on previously mined units and
the area of clearing does not exceed that specified in
Subsection G(1)(j) below.
(j) Not involve clearing adjacent to ponds in excess of 20 acres or
an area necessary to complete scheduled operations; or will
not involve unreclaimed clearing exceeding 100 acres or 50%
of the area to be mined, whichever is less, for surface
excavation at any time.
(k) Involve restoration of disturbed areas at the completion of the
resource extraction operation in accordance with the following
requirements:
[1] Restoration shall be a continuous process and each portion
of the parcel shall be restored such that the ground cover
be established within two years and tree cover established
within three years after resource extraction is completed
for each portion of the site mined.
[2] Restoration shall proceed in the same sequence and time
frame set out in the extraction schedule required in
Subsection G(1)(i) above.
[3] All restored areas shall be graded to conform to the
natural contours of the parcel to the maximum extent
practical. Grading techniques that help to control erosion
and foster revegetation shall be utilized. The slope of
restored surfaces shall not exceed one foot vertical to
three feet horizontal except as provided in Subsection
G(1)(k)[6] below of this section.
[4] Topsoil shall be restored in approximately the same quality
and quantity existing at the time the resource extraction
operation was initiated. All topsoil removed shall be
stockpiled and used for the next area to be restored,
unless it is immediately reused for reclamation that is
currently underway.
[5] Drainage flows, including direction and column, shall be
restored to the maximum extent practical to those flows
existing at the time the resource extraction operation was
initiated.
[6] Any body of water created by the resource extraction
operation shall have a shoreline not less than three feet
above and three feet below the projected average water
table elevation. The shoreline both above and below the
surface water elevation shall have a slope of not less than
§ 176-12 WATERFORD CODE § 176-12
168:336
five feet horizontal to one foot vertical. This requirement
shall apply to any water body or portion of a water body
created after December 5, 1994. For any water body or
portion of a water body created prior to December 5, 1994,
this requirement shall apply to the extent that it does not
require grading of areas which have not been disturbed
by mining activities. Where grading would require such
disturbance, a reduction in the distance of the graded
shoreline above and below the average water table
elevation shall be permitted.
[7] All equipment, machinery and structures, except for
structures that are usable for recreational purposes or any
other use authorized in the area, shall be removed within
six months after the resource extraction operation is
terminated and restoration is completed.
[8] Reclamation shall, to the maximum extent practical, result
in the reestablishment of the vegetation association that
existed prior to the extraction activity and shall include:
[a] Stabilization of exposed areas by establishing ground
cover vegetation; and
[b] Reestablishment of the composition of the natural
forest and shrub types that existed prior to the
extraction activity through one of the following:
[i] Planting a minimum of 1,000 one-year-old pitch
pine seedlings or other native Pinelands tree
species per acre in a random pattern;
[ii] Cluster planting of characteristic Pinelands oak
species, such as blackjack oak, bear oak, chestnut
oak and black oak, and shrubs such as black
huckleberry, sheep laurel and mountain laurel, at
a spacing sufficient to ensure establishment of
these species;
[iii] A combination of the planting techniques set forth
in Subsection G(1)(k)[8][b][i] and [ii] above; or
[iv] The use of other planting techniques or native
Pinelands species as necessary to restore the
vegetation association which existed prior to the
extraction activity.
[9] Slopes beyond a water body's shoreline shall be permitted
at the natural angle of repose to the bottom of the pond.
[10] The effective and timely completion of the aforementioned
restoration requirements is secured by a performance
§ 176-12 INSURANCE § 176-12
168:337
§ 176-13. Violations and penalties.
The governing body of the Waterford Township shall provide for the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. If a landowner or other
interested party is found guilty of a violation in a court of competent
jurisdiction, fines and/or imprisonment may be imposed.
guarantee accepted and approved by the Township
Committee. The Township Engineer in accordance with
§ 176-22D shall submit a performance guarantee estimate
to the Planning Board. The Board may request the
Township Engineer to review and update this estimate
from time to time.
[11] The letter of credit, surety bond, or other guarantee of
performance which secures restoration of each section
shall be released only after the Township has determined
that the requirement of Subsection G(1)(k)[1] through [9]
above are being met and the guarantee of performance is
replaced with a maintenance guarantee for a period of two
years thereafter.
(l) Not result in a substantial adverse impact upon those
significant resources depicted on the Special Areas Map
appearing as Figure 7.1 in the CMP.
(2) No permit authorizing resource extraction shall be issued for any
period exceeding two years. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to prohibit any person from securing additional permits,
provided that the requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.66.
A. Fines.
(1) Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine not to exceed $2,000 per day for each offense, imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days. The following individuals shall be
subject to potential punishment:95
(a) The owner, general agent, contractor or occupant of a building,
lot, or part thereof, where such a violation has been committed
or does exist; and
(b) Any agent, contractor, architect, engineer, builder, corporation
or other party of interest who commits, takes part, or assists in
the violation.
(2) Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-12 WATERFORD CODE § 176-13
168:338
(3) The imposition of penalties herein shall not preclude the Township
or any other person from instituting an action to prevent an
unlawful construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
conversion, or use, or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to
prevent the illegal occupancy of a building, land, or premises.
(4) In the event the court wishes to impose a fine in an amount greater
than $1,250 upon an owner of real property for violations of
housing or zoning codes of the Township, then and in that event a
thirty-day grace period shall be provided to said owner in order to
cure or abate the violative condition, and said owner shall also be
afforded an opportunity for a hearing before a court of competent
jurisdiction for an independent determination concerning said
violation. Subsequent to the expiration of the thirty-day period, a
fine greater than $1,250 may be imposed if a court has not
determined otherwise or, upon reinspection of the property the
court determines that the abatement has not been substantially
completed.96
B. Injunctive relief. In addition to the foregoing, the Township may
institute and maintain a civil action for injunctive relief.
C. Selling land before final subdivision approval.
(1) If, before final subdivision has been granted, any person, as owner
or agent, transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell any land
which forms a part of a subdivision for which municipal approval is
required in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, except
pursuant to an agreement expressly conditioned on final
subdivision approval, such person shall be subject to a penalty not
to exceed $1,000, and each lot disposition so made may be deemed
a separate violation.97
(2) In addition to the foregoing, the Township may institute and
maintain a civil action:
(a) For injunctive relief.
(b) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to
such a contract of sale, if a certificate of compliance has not
been issued in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
96.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. III).
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-13 INSURANCE § 176-13
168:339

ARTICLE III
Pinelands Commission Review and Procedures
§ 176-14. Local development to comply with Pinelands
Comprehensive Management Plan.
Waterford Township is a certified Pinelands municipality. Local development
approvals are subject to review to ensure that such development will be
consistent with the CMP.
A. Applicability of procedures.
(1) No person shall carry out any development within the Township
without obtaining approval from an approving authority and
without obtaining development approval in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this article.
(2) For the purpose of this article only, the following shall not be
considered development except for development of any historic
resource designated by the Pinelands Commission pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.154:
(a) The improvement, expansion or reconstruction within five
years of destruction or demolition of any single-family dwelling
unit or appurtenance thereto;
(b) The improvement, expansion, construction, or reconstruction
of any structure accessory to a single-family dwelling;
(c) The improvement, expansion, construction or reconstruction of
any structure used exclusively for agricultural or horticultural
purposes;
(d) The construction, repair or removal of any sign, except for the
construction or replacement of any off-site commercial
advertising sign;
(e) The repair of existing utility distribution lines;
(f) The clearing of less than 1,500 square feet of land;
(g) The construction of any addition or accessory structure for any
nonresidential use or any multifamily residential structure,
provided that said addition or structure will be located on or
below an existing impermeable surface, that the existing use is
served by public sewers and that said addition or structure will
cover an area of no more than 1,000 square feet;
(h) The demolition of any structure that is less than 50 years old;
(i) The installation of utility distribution lines, except for sewage
lines, to serve areas which are effectively developed or
§ 176-14 INSURANCE § 176-14
168:341
development which has received all necessary approvals and
permits;
(j) The repair or replacement of any existing on-site wastewater
disposal system;
(k) The repaving of existing paved roads, provided no increase in
the paved width of said roads will occur;
(l) The clearing of land solely for agricultural purposes;
(m) Fences, provided no more than 1,500 square feet of land is to
be cleared;
(n) Aboveground telephone equipment cabinets;
(o) Tree pruning;
(p) The following forestry activities:
[1] Normal and customary forestry practices on residentially
improved parcels of land that are five acres or less in size;
[2] Tree harvesting, provided that no more than one cord of
wood per five acres of land is harvested in any one year
and that no more than five cords of wood are harvested
from the entire parcel in any one year;
[3] Tree planting, provided that the area to be planted does
not exceed five acres in any one year, no soil disturbance
occurs other than that caused by the planting activity, and
no trees other than those authorized by N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25
are to be planted; and
[4] Forest stand improvement designed to selectively thin
trees and brush, provided that no clearing or soil
disturbance occurs and that the total land area on the
parcel in which the activity occurs does not exceed five
acres in any one year;
(q) Prescribed burning and the clearing and maintaining of fire
breaks; or
(r) Normal and customary landscape plantings, unless a
landscaping plan is required for site plans pursuant to
§ 176-72.
(3) As of January 13, 1991, the provisions of the CMP shall apply to any
proposed development or portion thereof which received approval
from the Commission pursuant to the interim rules and regulations
or which received approval from the Pinelands Development
Review Board and said approvals expired as of that date or will
expire subsequent to that date, without exception, unless the
§ 176-14 WATERFORD CODE § 176-14
168:342
requirements in Subsection A(3)(a), (b), and either (c) or (d) below
have been met and continue to be met:
(a) All necessary municipal Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment approvals were obtained by January 14, 1991;
(b) No additional approval, extension, renewal or any other action
whatsoever is required or received from either the municipal
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment after January 14, 1991;
and either
(c) All necessary approvals, including all necessary construction
permits, were obtained by January 3, 1995, or within 18
months of the expiration of any tolling pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-21 of the running of the period of the Planning Board
or Board of Adjustment approval pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-47 or 40:55D-52, whichever is later; and no
construction permit becomes invalid pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.16(b) after said date, provided that the lot for which the
approvals and permits are issued either fronts on a road that
prior to January 3, 1995, was improved at least to the extent of
the installation of a subbase or had a foundation or septic
system lawfully constructed on said lot prior to January 3,
1995; or
(d) All necessary approvals, including all necessary construction
permits, are obtained by December 31, 1996, and no
construction permit becomes invalid pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.16(b) after said date, provided that the lot for which the
approvals and permits are issued either fronts on a road that
prior to January 3, 1995, was improved at least to the extent of
the installation of a subbase or had a foundation or septic
system lawfully constructed on said lot prior to January 3,
1995.
(4) Nothing herein shall preclude any local or state agency from
reviewing, in accordance with the provisions of any applicable
ordinance or regulation, any proposed development which does not
require an application to the Commission pursuant to § 176-14A(1)
or (2) above.
B. Application requirements for minor development. Any application for
approval of minor development shall include at least the following
information, in addition to any other information required in § 176-37B:
(1) The applicant's name and address and his interest in the subject
property;
(2) The owner's name and address, if different from the applicant's,
and the owner's signed consent to the filing of the application;
§ 176-14 INSURANCE § 176-14
168:343
(3) The legal description, including block and lot designation and
street address, if any, of the subject property;
(4) A description of all existing uses of the subject property;
(5) A brief written statement generally describing the proposed
development;
(6) A USGS quadrangle map, or copy thereof, and a copy of the
Municipal Tax Map sheet on which the boundaries of the subject
property, the Pinelands management area designation and the
zoning designation are shown;
(7) A plat or plan showing the location of all boundaries of the subject
property, the location of all proposed development, existing or
proposed facilities to provide water for the use and consumption of
occupants of all buildings, and sanitary facilities which will serve
the proposed development. The following information shall be
included with respect to existing or proposed sanitary facilities:
(a) On-site treatment facilities. Location, size, type and capacity of
any proposed on-site water treatment facilities; and
(b) Soil borings and percolation tests. If on-site sewage disposal is
proposed, results of soil borings and percolation tests in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq. and the regulations
adopted pursuant thereto shall be submitted at a suitable
location with a tract map showing location, logs, elevations of
all test holes, indicating where groundwater was encountered,
estimating the seasonal high water table and demonstrating
that such facility is adequate to meet the water quality
standards contained in Subchapter 6 of the CMP;
(8) A location map, including the area extending at least 300 feet
beyond each boundary of the subject property, showing ownership
boundary of the proposed development, owners of holdings
adjoining and adjacent to the subject property, existing facilities,
buildings and structures on the site, all proposed development,
wetlands, streams (including intermittent streams), rivers, lakes
and other water bodies and existing roads;
(9) A soils map including a county soils survey which conforms to the
guidelines of the USDA, Natural Resources Conservation Service,
showing the location of all proposed development;
(10) A map showing existing vegetation identifying predominant
vegetation types in the area, and showing proposed landscaping of
the subject property, including the location of the tree line before
and after development and all areas to be disturbed as a result of
the proposed development;
§ 176-14 WATERFORD CODE § 176-14
168:344
(11) A certificate of filing from the Commission issued pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34 or, until January 14, 1991, evidence of prior
approval from the Pinelands Development Review Board or the
Commission pursuant to the interim rules and regulations;
(12) When prior approval for the development has been granted by the
approving authority, evidence of Commission review pursuant to
§ 176-14G below;
(13) In lieu of Subsection B(1) through (12) above, the application
requirements of § 176-14C below shall apply to applications for the
development of a single-family dwelling on an existing lot of record.
C. Procedures for applications for the development of a single-family
dwelling on an existing lot of record. The Zoning Official is hereby
authorized and directed to issue preliminary zoning permits as a
prerequisite to the issuance of a construction permit or other permits or
approvals which are needed to develop a single-family dwelling on an
existing lot of record.
(1) Application for a preliminary zoning permit.
(a) An application for a preliminary zoning permit shall be
submitted to the Zoning Official and shall include the
following:
[1] The applicant's name and address and his interest in the
subject property;
[2] The applicant's signed certification that he is duly
authorized to submit the application, that the materials
and information are accurate, and that duly authorized
representatives of the Township of Waterford and
Commission are authorized to inspect the property;
[3] The owner's name and address, if different from the
applicant's, and the owner's signed consent to the filing of
the application;
[4] The street address, if any, the Tax Map sheet and block and
lot number of the property;
[5] Proof that taxes for the property have been paid;
[6] Acreage of the property in square feet;
[7] A dated plot plan, with the scale noted, showing:
[a] The zoning district in which the property is located;
[b] The location and dimensions of all property lines,
easements affecting the property and streets abutting
the property;
§ 176-14 INSURANCE § 176-14
168:345
[c] The location of all yards and setbacks required
pursuant to the Schedule of Area and Bulk
Requirements;
[d] The location and use of all existing structures and
improvements on the property and their intended
disposition;
[e] A building envelope within which the single-family
dwelling is to be located;
[f] The location and dimensions of any proposed
accessory structures or improvements;
[g] The location and dimensions of the area in which any
sewage disposal system, including the disposal field, is
proposed to be located; and
[h] The location of any proposed water supply well;
[8] If proposed, certification that central sewer and/or water
service are available;
[9] If development of the property is proposed in accordance
with the density transfer program of § 176-16, the street
address, the Tax Map sheet, block and lot number and
acreage in square feet of the noncontiguous property.
(b) The Zoning Official is authorized to require such additional
information as may be necessary to determine compliance with
this chapter. Such may include, but is not limited to, a soil
boring in the area of any proposed septic system disposal field,
a wetland and wetland buffer map and information to
determine compliance with any permitted use requirement of
this chapter.
(c) The Zoning Official is authorized to waive any of the
aforementioned application requirements if the information is
not necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
(d) Within 14 days of receipt of an application, the Zoning Official
shall determine whether the application is complete and, if
necessary, notify the applicant of any additional information
that is necessary to complete the application.
(2) Permit decisions. Within 14 days of determining an application to
be complete, the Zoning Official shall issue either a preliminary
zoning permit or a refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit.
(3) Preliminary zoning permit.
(a) A preliminary zoning permit shall be issued if:
§ 176-14 WATERFORD CODE § 176-14
168:346
[1] The application is consistent with the requirements of this
chapter or any necessary variances from those
requirements have been obtained;
[2] No waiver of strict compliance from the requirements of
the CMP is necessary or any such waiver has been
approved by the Commission; and
[3] A duly authorized representative of the Commission
approves the Zoning Official's determination and so
signifies by signing the preliminary zoning permit.
(b) A preliminary zoning permit shall expressly incorporate the
plot plan being approved, shall specify any conditions which
the Zoning Official determines are necessary to ensure
compliance with this chapter and shall specify the expiration
date of the permit.
(c) The Zoning Official shall provide copies of the application and
the preliminary zoning permit to the Commission within five
days of the issuance of the permit.
(4) Effect of preliminary zoning permit.
(a) A preliminary zoning permit represents a determination that
the application meets the requirements of this chapter and the
CMP, N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et seq.
(b) A preliminary zoning permit shall be valid for two years and
shall, during that period, confer the following rights and
privileges:
[1] The approved application shall not be subject to any
substantive revisions of this chapter or the CMP, N.J.A.C.
7:50-1.1 et seq.
[2] Any subsequent approvals necessary for the development
of the single-family dwelling on the property may be
sought without the need for a certificate of filing from the
Commission.
(c) Any subsequent approvals to be sought, including, but not
limited to, construction permits, shall be subject to the notice,
review and decision requirements of § 176-14G and H.
(5) Refusal to issue preliminary zoning permit.
(a) The Zoning Official shall issue a refusal to issue a preliminary
zoning permit if any of the following are found to apply:
[1] A variance from this chapter is required;
[2] A variance from this chapter is not required but the Zoning
Officer determines that the application does not meet any
§ 176-14 INSURANCE § 176-14
168:347
requirement of this chapter that reflects a provision of the
CMP;
[3] A waiver of strict compliance from the CMP is required; or
[4] The duly authorized representative of the Commission has
not attested to the consistency of the application with the
CMP, N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et seq.
(b) A refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit shall expressly
reference the reasons why the refusal was issued. If the refusal
is predicated solely upon the need to obtain a variance from
this chapter, the refusal shall also indicate that upon the
applicant's submission of evidence of Planning Board approval
of the necessary variance, the Zoning Official shall determine
whether a preliminary zoning permit may be issued pursuant
to § 176-14C(3) above.
(c) When a refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit is
predicated solely upon the need to obtain a variance from this
chapter, the Zoning Official shall provide a copy of the
application and the refusal to the Commission within five days
of the issuance.
(d) When a refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit is
predicated wholly or in part upon § 176-14C(5)(a)[2], [3] or [4]
above, the Zoning Official shall provide the original application
and a copy of the refusal to the Commission within five days of
the issuance. The Commission shall thereafter process the
application pursuant to the CMP, N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et seq. and
§ 176-14G and H shall apply. In lieu of a preliminary zoning
permit, a certificate of filing from the Commission shall
thereafter be required as a prerequisite to the issuance of a
construction or other permit.
(6) Zoning Official vacancy. Should the position of Zoning Official
become vacant for any reason, the application procedures set forth
in § 176-14C(1) through (5) shall be of no force or effect and the
procedures of § 176-14G and H shall apply until the position has
been filled.
D. Submission requirements for applications for development in the
Haines Boulevard Environs Redevelopment Area. [Added 11-21-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-19; amended 2-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-6]
(1) Purpose. On December 26, 2001, the Township Committee adopted
a redevelopment plan for the Haines Boulevard Environs
Redevelopment Area with the goal of recreating this area of the
municipality as a destination or gateway, utilizing the intersection
of the New Jersey State Highway Routes 73 and 30 as a place of
convergence for development of business, entertainment and/or
shopping uses. On December 14, 2016, the Township Committee
§ 176-14 WATERFORD CODE § 176-14
168:348
adopted a revised redevelopment plan for the Haines Boulevard
Redevelopment Area in order to create a gateway and town center,
provide quality housing options, generate cohesive and vibrant
commercial districts, improve utilization of vacant land and
produce a flexible site plan. The redevelopment area, totaling
approximately 146 acres in size and consisting of Block 202, Lots
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7; Block 203, Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8;
and Block 204, Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10, is located
in the Pinelands Regional Growth Area, an area in which growth
and development are encouraged by the Pinelands Comprehensive
Management Plan. In recognition of the Township's ongoing
redevelopment efforts and the suitability of the redevelopment area
for development, as confirmed by the Pinelands Commission, it
is appropriate for the local review officer to relieve applicants
of certain application submission requirements as a means of
increasing the efficiency of the development application process in
this important area.
(2) Within the Haines Boulevard Redevelopment Area, applications for
development shall not be required to include the information listed
in Subsection D(3), below, provided that, prior to the municipality
declaring an application for development complete, the local
review officer verifies, in writing, to the appropriate Township land
use official that proposed development:
(a) Is located within the Haines Boulevard Redevelopment Area
and is consistent with the Haines Boulevard Redevelopment
Plan adopted by Ordinance No. 2001-30;
(b) Is or will be served by public sanitary sewer or will not require
on-site sanitary sewage disposal facilities; and
(c) Otherwise addresses all applicable standards set forth in
Article VIII of this chapter, including, but not limited to,
stormwater management.
(3) Notwithstanding § 176-14B and E, the following information shall
not be required as part of any application for development within
the Haines Boulevard Redevelopment Area which meets the
standards of Subsection D(2) above:
(a) Mapping and/or delineation of wetlands;
(b) A cultural resource survey, except a survey would be required
for Block 203, Lot 1;
(c) A threatened and endangered species survey; and
(d) A certificate of filing from the Commission issued pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34.
§ 176-14 INSURANCE § 176-14
168:349
(4) Upon determining any application for development in the Haines
Boulevard Redevelopment Area to be complete, the local review
officer shall provide the following information to the Pinelands
Commission:
(a) The block and lot designations of the property proposed for
development;
(b) The number of proposed housing units;
(c) The number of proposed affordable housing units;
(d) The proposed square footage of any nonresidential
development; and
(e) The anticipated water needs of the proposed development and
the proposed source for the necessary water supply.
(5) All approvals and permits for development within the Haines
Boulevard Redevelopment Area shall remain subject to the
Pinelands Commission notice, review and decision requirements of
§ 176-14G and H.
E. Application requirements for other development.
(1) Any application for approval of major development, except for
forestry or resource extraction operations, shall include at least the
following information in addition to any other information required
in § 176-37B:
(a) The applicant's names and address and his interest in the
subject property;
(b) The owner's name and address, if different from the
applicant's, and the owner's signed consent to the filing of the
application;
(c) The legal description, including block and lot designation and
street address of the subject property;
(d) A description of all existing uses of the subject property;
(e) A brief written statement generally describing the proposed
development; the number of total units; and the floor area of all
units to be included in the proposed development;
(f) A written statement addressing each of the standards or
guidelines set forth in Subchapters 5 and 6 of the CMP; and
stating specifically how the proposed development meets each
standard or guideline;
(g) A plat or plan showing the location of all boundaries of the
subject property, the location of all proposed development,
existing or proposed facilities to provide water for the use and
§ 176-14 WATERFORD CODE § 176-14
168:350
consumption of occupants of all buildings and sanitary
facilities which will serve the proposed development. The
following information shall be included with respect to existing
or proposed wastewater treatment facilities:
[1] Sanitary sewer distribution. Location, size and direction of
flow of all existing and proposed sanitary sewer lines and
pumping stations serving the proposed development and
all existing and proposed connections to existing facilities;
[2] On-site treatment facilities. Location, size, type and
capacity of any proposed on-site wastewater treatment
facilities, including, except with respect to discharges into
an individual residential septic system, quantities,
composition, proposed pretreatment and ultimate means
of disposal;
[3] Soil borings and percolation tests. If on-site sewage
disposal is proposed, results of soil borings and
percolation tests in accordance with the requirements of
N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq. and the regulations adopted
pursuant thereto shall be submitted with tract map
showing location, logs and elevations of all test holes,
indicating where groundwater was encountered, and
estimating the seasonal high water table;
[4] The proposed hours and days of operation and number of
employees of any nonresidential facility;
(h) A project site base map, at a scale of no less than one inch
equals 200 feet and including the areas extending at least 300
feet beyond each boundary of the subject property, showing
ownership boundary lines, the boundary of the proposed
development, owners of holdings, if any, adjoining and adjacent
to the subject property, existing facilities, buildings and
structures on the site, all proposed development, wetlands,
streams (including intermittent streams) rivers, lakes and
other water bodies and existing roads;
(i) A soils map, including a county soils survey in conformance
with the guidelines of the USDA, Natural Resources
Conservation Service, at the same size and scale as the project
site base map, delineating all soil series at an appropriate level
of detail and, in sewer projects, sufficient soil borings to
confirm the accuracy of this soils map;
(j) A slope map, at the same size and scale as the project site base
map, indicating contour elevations at two-foot intervals;
(k) A resource capability map, at the same size and scale as the
project site base map, indicating the cumulative limitations to
development due to the standards and the guidelines
§ 176-14 INSURANCE § 176-14
168:351
contained in this plan. This map should be prepared prior to
any engineering site layout or design work;
(l) A proposed development map, at the same size and scale as the
project site base map, showing areas of proposed
development; the location of surveyor's tape or other markers
placed on the site delineating the boundaries of the property;
the number of residential lots and other type of development in
each general area; all proposed lot lines; areas proposed to be
retained as open space; the applicable land use area
boundaries; the location of proposed facilities such as dams
and impediments; public or private water systems; storm
drainage systems; public or private sewerage systems; public
utilities; soil erosion and sedimentation control devices;
industrial wastewater discharges and solid waste disposal
areas; sources of air pollution; the proposed primary road
network; all areas to be disturbed by construction activities;
existing vegetation, identifying the predominant vegetation
types in the area, all vegetation which is to be removed or
disturbed as a result of the proposed development and the tree
line before and after development;
(m) A map, at the same size and scale as the project site base map,
showing stormwater drainage patterns and calculations and
the applicant's proposed stormwater runoff management plan,
which shall contain results of all percolation tests and soil
borings performed in each recharge area, including the
estimated seasonal high water table.
(n) Legal instruments evidencing the applicant's right, title or
interest in any PDCs and any existing or proposed deed
restrictions or easements relating to the subject parcel;
(o) A landscaping schedule and plan on a map, of the same size
and scale as the project site base map, identifying the species
of plants to be installed and the quantity and location of all
plants proposed to be planted, demonstrating that the planting
will be carried out within six months of the completion of
construction and demonstrating that the planting will stabilize
soils. Landscaping and planting plans shall incorporate the
elements set forth in § 176-72;
(p) All public service infrastructure agreements, or other
documentation, evidencing the availability of electric, gas,
water, sewer and other necessary public service infrastructure;
(q) The cultural resources survey described in §§ 176-70 and
176-106;
(r) A list of all permits required for the proposed development
from county, municipal, state and federal agencies;
§ 176-14 WATERFORD CODE § 176-14
168:352
(s) A certificate of filing from the Commission issued pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:50- 4.34 or, until January 14, 1991, evidence of prior
approval from the Commission pursuant to the interim rules
and regulations;
(t) When prior approval for the development has been granted by
the approving authority, evidence of Commission review
pursuant to § 176-14H.
(2) An application for approval of forestry operations shall be subject
to the application requirements set forth in § 176-67.
(3) An application for approval of resource extraction operations shall
be subject to the application requirements set forth in N.J.A.C.
7:50-4.2(b)6.
F. Reference of applications to Environmental Commission. All
applications for major development, forestry and resource extraction
shall be referred to the Environmental Commission for review and
comment.
G. Notices to Pinelands Commission.
(1) Application submission and modifications. Written notification will
be given by the Township to the Commission within seven days
after a determination is made by the Township that an application
for development is complete or if a determination is made by the
approving authority that the application has been modified. Said
notice shall contain:
(a) The name and address of the applicant;
(b) A brief description of the proposed development, including
uses and intensity of uses proposed;
(c) The application number on the certificate of filing issued by the
Commission and the date on which it was issued:
(d) The date on which the application, or any change thereto, was
filed and any application number or other identifying number
assigned to the application by the approving authority;
(e) Any written reports or comments received by the approving
authority on the application for development which have not
been previously submitted to the Commission;
(f) The content of any change made to the application since it was
filed with the Commission, including a copy of any revised
plans or reports; and
(g) The nature of the municipal approval being sought.
(2) Meetings and hearings. Where a meeting, hearing or other formal
proceeding on an application for development approval in the
§ 176-14 INSURANCE § 176-14
168:353
Pinelands Area is required, the applicant shall provide notice to
the Commission by regular mail or delivery of the same to the
principal office of the Commission at least five days prior to such
meeting or hearing. Such notice shall contain at least the following
information:
(a) The name and address of the applicant;
(b) The application number on the certificate of filing issued by the
Commission and the date on which it was issued;
(c) The date, time and location of the meeting, hearing or other
formal proceeding;
(d) The name of the approving authority or representative thereof
which will be conducting the meeting, hearing or other formal
proceeding;
(e) Any written reports or comments received by the approving
authority on the application for development which have not
been previously submitted to the Commission; and
(f) The purpose for which the meeting, hearing or other formal
proceeding is to be held.
(3) Notice of approvals and denials. The Pinelands Commission shall
be notified of all approvals or denials of development in the
Pinelands Area, whether the approval occurs by action or inaction
of any approving authority or an appeal of any agency's decision.
The applicant shall, within five days of the approval, give notice by
certified mail to the Commission. Such notice shall contain the
following information:
(a) The name and address of the applicant;
(b) The legal description and street address, if any, of the property
which the applicant proposed to develop;
(c) The application number of the certificate of filing issued by the
Commission and the date on which it was issued, if any;
(d) The date on which the approving authority's approval or denial
was issued;
(e) Any written reports or comments received concerning the
application for development approval not previously submitted
to the Commission;
(f) Any revisions to the application not previously submitted to the
Commission;
(g) A copy of the resolution, permit or other documentation of the
approval or denial which was granted; and
§ 176-14 WATERFORD CODE § 176-14
168:354
(h) The names and addresses of all persons actively participating
in the proceedings.
(4) Exceptions. Except as provided in § 176-14C, the requirements of
this section shall not apply to the issuance of a preliminary zoning
permit or a refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit for the
development of a single-family dwelling on an existing lot of record.
H. Review by Pinelands Commission.
(1) Upon receipt by the Pinelands Commission of the notice of approval
pursuant to § 176-14G(3) above, the application for development
approval shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions in
N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.37 through 7:50-4.42. The approval of the Township
shall not be effective and no development shall be carried out prior
to a determination of whether the development approval will be
reviewed by the Commission. If the applicant is notified that the
Commission will review the application for development, no
development shall be carried out until such review has been
completed. Until January 14, 1991, approvals issued by the
Pinelands Development Review Board or the Commission under the
interim rules and regulations shall serve as the basis for
Commission review of the local approval under this section.
Although the Commission shall be notified of all denials, no such
denial actions are subject to further review and action by the
Commission.
(2) Except as provided in § 176-14C, the requirements of this section
shall not apply to the issuance of a preliminary zoning permit or a
refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit for the development of
a single-family dwelling on an existing lot of record.
I. Condition on prior approvals by Township.
(1) Where a prior approval has been granted by the Township, no
subsequent approval of an application for development approval
shall be obtained until one of the following is satisfied:
(a) Notification is received from the Commission that review of the
Township's approval is not required; or
(b) Review of the Township's approval has been completed
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.37-4.42 and a final order regarding
the approval is received by the Township from the Commission.
(2) Except as provided in § 176-14C, the requirements of this section
shall not apply to the issuance of a preliminary zoning permit or a
refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit for the development of
a single-family dwelling on an existing lot of record.
J. Effect of Pinelands Commission's decision on Township's approval.
§ 176-14 INSURANCE § 176-14
168:355
(1) If the Commission disapproves an application for development
previously approved by an approving authority, such approval shall
be revoked by the approving authority within 30 days of the
Commission's action and the agency shall thereafter deny approval
of the application. If the Commission approves the decision of an
approving authority subject to conditions, the approving agency
which had previously approved the application shall, within 30
days, modify its approval to include all conditions imposed by the
Commission; and if final approval of the application is required,
shall grant final approval only if the application for approval
demonstrates that the conditions specified by the Commission have
been met by the applicant.
(2) Except as provided in § 176-14C, the requirements of this section
shall not apply to the issuance of a preliminary zoning permit or a
refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit for the development of
a single-family dwelling on an existing lot of record.
K. Participation of Pinelands Commission in public hearings. The
Commission may participate in a hearing held in the Township involving
the development of land in the Pinelands Area pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:50-4.36.
L. Public development. All development proposed by the Township or any
agency thereof will comply with all the requirements for public
development set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.51 et seq. and all the standards
set forth in Article VII. In accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.52(c), a
memorandum of agreement, adopted by Resolution No. 122 on April 10,
1996, has been entered into between Waterford Township and the
Commission to facilitate the review of projects undertaken by the
Township in the Pinelands Area. This agreement, available for review in
the Municipal Clerk's office, sets forth certain activities which will not
require the filing of a formal application.
§ 176-14 WATERFORD CODE § 176-14
168:356
ARTICLE IV
Pinelands Development Credit Program and Municipal Density
Transfer Program
§ 176-15. Pinelands Development Credit Program.
A. Credits established.
(1) Except for land which was owned by a public agency on January 14,
1981, land which is thereafter purchased by the state for
conservation purposes, land which is subject to an easement
limiting the use of land to nonresidential uses or land otherwise
excluded from entitlement in this section, every parcel of land in
the Preservation District or Agricultural District shall have a use
right known as "Pinelands development credit" (PDC) that can be
used to secure a density bonus for lands located in the regional
growth area. Pinelands development credits may also be allocated
to certain properties in the Township by the Commission pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.61 et seq.
(2) PDCs are hereby established at the following ratios:
(a) In the Preservation District, including those areas designated
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.22(b)7:
[1] Uplands which are undisturbed but currently or previously
approved for resource extraction pursuant to this chapter:
two PDCs per 39 acres;
[2] Uplands which are mined as a result of a resource
extraction permit approved pursuant to this chapter: zero
PDCs per 39 acres;
[3] Other uplands: one PDC per 39 acres; and
[4] Wetlands: 0.02 PDC per 39 acres.
(b) In the Agricultural District:
[1] Uplands which are undisturbed but approved for resource
extraction pursuant to this chapter: two PDCs per 39
acres;
[2] Uplands which are mined as a result of a resource
extraction permit approved pursuant to this chapter: zero
PDCs per 39 acres;
[3] Other uplands and areas of active berry agricultural bogs
and fields: two PDCs per 39 acres;
[4] Wetlands in active field agricultural use currently and as of
February 7, 1979: two PDCs per 39 acres; and
[5] Other wetlands: 0.02 PDC per 39 acres.
§ 176-15 INSURANCE § 176-15
168:357
(c) The allocations established in Subsection A(2)(a) and (b) above
shall be reduced as follows:
[1] Any parcel of 10 acres or less which is developed for a
commercial, industrial, resource extraction, intensive
recreation, institutional, campground or landfill use shall
not receive PDC entitlement. For such an improved
property of more than 10 acres, the area actively used for
such use or 10 acres, whichever is greater, shall not
receive PDC entitlement.
[2] The PDC entitlement of a parcel of land shall be reduced
by 0.25 PDC for each existing dwelling unit on the
property.
[3] The PDC entitlement for a parcel of land shall be reduced
by 0.25 PDC for each reserved right to build a dwelling
unit on the parcel retained by the owner of the property
pursuant to § 176-15B(2) below.
(d) If the allocations established in Subsection A(2)(a) and (b)
above are less than 0.25 PDC, the allocation shall be increased
to 0.25 of a PDC if the owner of record of 0.1 or greater acres
of land in the Preservation or Agricultural Production District,
as of February 7, 1979, owns a vacant parcel of land that was
not in common ownership with any contiguous land on or after
February 7, 1979, and the parcel has not been sold or
transferred except to a member of the owner's immediate
family.
(e) The provisions of Subsection A(2)(d) above shall also apply to
owners of record of less than 0.1 acre of land in the
Preservation and Agricultural Districts as of February 7, 1979,
provided that said owners acquire vacant, contiguous lands to
which PDCs are allocated pursuant to Subsection A(1) and
(2)(a) through (d) above, which lands, when combined with the
acreage of the parcel owned prior to February 7, 1979, total at
least 0.1 of an acre.
(3) The owners of parcels of land which are smaller than 39 acres shall
have fractional PDC at the same ratio established in Subsection
A(2) above for the management area in which the parcel is located.
B. Limitations on use of Pinelands development credits.
(1) No Pinelands development credit may be conveyed, sold,
encumbered, or transferred unless the owner of the land from
which the credit has been obtained has received a PDC certificate
from the New Jersey Pinelands Development Credit Bank pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 3:42-3, and has deed restricted the use of the land in
perpetuity to those uses set forth in § 176-15E(2)(a) and (b), by a
recorded deed restriction which is in favor of a public agency or
§ 176-15 WATERFORD CODE § 176-15
168:358
not-for-profit organization and specifically and expressly
enforceable by the Commission.
(2) Notwithstanding the provision of Subsection B(1) above, an owner
of a parcel from which PDCs are sold may retain a right for
residential development on that parcel, provided that the recorded
deed restriction expressly provided for same and that the total
allocation of PDCs for that property is reduced by 0.25 PDC for
each reserved right to build a dwelling unit. Subdivision of the
property shall not be required until such time as the residential
development right is exercised.
(3) The bonus density of a parcel of land on which PDCs are used shall
not exceed the upper limits of the density range of the zone in
which the parcel is located.
C. Pinelands development credit bonus multipliers. PDCs which are used
for securing a density bonus for parcels of land located in a regional
growth area shall yield a bonus of four dwelling units per credit.
D. Aggregation of Pinelands development credits. PDCs may be
aggregated from different parcels for use in securing a bonus for a
single parcel of land in a regional growth area, provided that the
density does not exceed the limits of the density range specified in the
municipal district in which the parcel is located.
E. Deed restriction to be recorded.
(1) No conveyance, sale or transfer of PDCs shall occur until the
municipality with jurisdiction over the parcel of land from which
the PDCs were obtained, the agency or organization to which the
restriction is in favor, and the Commission have been provided with
evidence of recordation of a restriction on the deed to the land from
which the development credits were obtained.
(2) Such deed restriction shall specify the number of PDCs sold and
that the property may only be used in perpetuity for the following
uses: [Amended 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
(a) In the Preservation District: berry agriculture; horticulture of
native Pinelands plants; forestry; beekeeping; fish and wildlife
management; wetlands management; agricultural employee
housing as an accessory use; and low-intensity recreational
uses in which the use of motorized vehicles is not permitted
except for necessary transportation, access to water bodies is
limited to no more than 15 feet of frontage per 1,000 feet of
frontage on the water body, clearing of vegetation does not
exceed 5% of the parcel, and no more than 1% of the parcel
will be covered with impervious surfaces.
(b) In the Agricultural District: agriculture; forestry; agricultural
employee housing as an accessory use; low-intensity
§ 176-15 INSURANCE § 176-15
168:359
recreational uses in which the use of motorized vehicles is not
permitted except for necessary transportation, access to water
bodies is limited to no more than 15 feet of frontage per 1,000
feet of frontage on the water body, clearing of vegetation does
not exceed 5% of the parcel, and no more than 1% of the parcel
will be covered with impervious surfaces; fish and wildlife
management; wetlands management; agricultural commercial
establishments, excluding supermarkets and restaurants and
convenience stores, where the principal goods or products
available for sale were produced in the Pinelands and the sales
area does not exceed 5,000 square feet; airports and heliports
accessory to agricultural uses and which are used exclusively
for the storage, fueling, loading and operation of aircraft as
part of an ongoing agricultural operation; and agricultural
products processing facilities.
(3) No development involving the use of Pinelands development
credits shall be approved until the developer has provided the
Commission and the approving authority with evidence of his
ownership and redemption of the requisite Pinelands development
credits; provided, however, that the approving authority may grant
general development plan, preliminary subdivision or preliminary
site plan approval conditioned upon such evidence being presented
as a prerequisite to final subdivision or site plan approval. For such
a final subdivision or site plan, the developer shall provide evidence
of Pinelands development credit ownership and redemption to
secure the same proportion of lots or residential units as was
approved for Pinelands development credit use in the preliminary
approval or, as appropriate, the general development plan.
Notification of any such development approval shall be made to the
Pinelands Commission pursuant to § 176-14G(1) and to the New
Jersey Pinelands Development Credit Bank in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 3:42-3. Redemption of the requisite Pinelands development
credits shall occur in accordance with N.J.A.C. 3:42-3.6, prior to the
memorialization of the resolution granting final subdivision or site
plan approval, or if no such approval is required, prior to the
issuance of any construction permits.
F. Use of credits. PDCs shall be used in the following manner:
(1) To permit development of parcels of land in the R1, R2, R3, R4 and
OC Zones according to the density and lot area requirements set
forth in Article XI.
(2) When a variance of density or minimum lot area requirements for
the R1, R2, R3, R4 and OC or PV Zones is granted, PDCs shall be
used for all dwelling units or lots in excess of that otherwise
permitted without the variance. When a variance of density or lot
area requirements for a residential or principal nonresidential use
in the PV Zone is granted by the Township, PDCs shall be used for
§ 176-15 WATERFORD CODE § 176-15
168:360
§ 176-16. Density transfer program.
all dwelling units or lots in excess of that otherwise permitted
without the variance.
(3) When a variance or other approval for a nonresidential use not
otherwise permitted in the R1, R2, R3 or R4 Zones is granted by the
Township, Pinelands development credits shall be used at 50% of
the maximum rate permitted for Pinelands development credit use
in the zone in which the nonresidential use will be located for
parcels under 10 acres in size; at 75% of the maximum rate for
parcels between 10 and 20 acres in size; and at 100% of the
maximum rate for parcels over 20 acres in size. This requirement
shall not apply to a variance or other approval that authorizes the
expansion of or changes to existing nonresidential uses in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.2.
(4) When a variance or other approval for a residential use in the NB,
PHB, TC or PI Zones, excluding Block 252, Lots 1 and 26, is granted
by the Township, Pinelands development credits shall be used for
50% of the authorized units for parcels under 10 acres in size; for
75% of the authorized units for parcels between 10 and 20 acres in
size; and for 100% of the authorized units for parcels over 20 acres
in size.
(5) When a variance for cultural housing is granted by the Township in
accordance with § 176-57B.
(6) When a waiver of strict compliance is granted by the Commission
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.61 et seq.
A. Forest area. Residential dwelling units on lots of one acre existing as of
January 14, 1981, shall be permitted in those RC Districts located along
the Mullica River and in the vicinity of Beaver Dam Lake, provided that:
(1) The owner of the lot proposed for development acquires sufficient
vacant contiguous or noncontiguous land which, when combined
with the acreage of the lot proposed for development, equals at
least 37.6 acres.
(2) All lands acquired pursuant to § 176-16A(1) above, which may or
may not be developable, must be located in the above mentioned
RC Districts.
(3) All noncontiguous lands acquired pursuant to § 176-16A(1) and (2)
above shall be permanently protected through recordation of a
deed of restriction in accordance with the following requirements:
[Amended 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
(a) The deed of restriction shall permit the parcel to be managed
for:
§ 176-15 INSURANCE § 176-16
168:361
[1] Low-intensity recreation, ecological management and
forestry, provided that no more than 5% of the land may be
cleared, no more than 1% of the land may be covered with
impervious surfaces and any such uses or activities are
approved and conducted in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter;
[2] Where agricultural use exists on a parcel proposed to be
protected, the following standards shall apply:
[a] For those agricultural uses in existence as of April 6,
2009, the deed of restriction may provide for the
continuation of agricultural uses and the expansion of
the area of agricultural use by up to 50%;
[b] For those agricultural uses established after April 6,
2009, the deed of restriction may provide for the
continuation of agricultural uses, provided the
agricultural use has been in existence for a period of
at least five years prior to submission of an application
for density transfer;
[c] For those agricultural uses established after April 6,
2009, which do not meet the standards of Subsection
A(3)(a)[2][b] above, the deed of restriction shall
permit the land to be managed only in accordance
with Subsection A(3)(a)[1] above and shall not provide
for continuation of any agricultural use on the parcel;
and
[d] The deed of restriction to be recorded pursuant to
Subsection A(3)(a)[2][a] or [b] above shall authorize
agricultural uses and provide that impervious surface
may not exceed that which currently exists or 3%,
whichever is greater, unless a resource management
system plan has been prepared. Before these
impervious surface limits may be exceeded, evidence
of Pinelands Commission approval of the resource
management system plan shall be provided. If the
deed of restriction is in favor of Camden County or the
State Agricultural Development Committee, evidence
of their approval shall also be provided.
(b) The deed of restriction shall be in favor of the parcel to be
developed and the Township or another public agency or
nonprofit conservation organization. In all cases, such
restriction shall be expressly enforceable by the Pinelands
Commission. The deed restriction shall be in a form to be
approved by the Township Solicitor and the Pinelands
Commission.
§ 176-16 WATERFORD CODE § 176-16
168:362
(4) Tax assessments for the acquired noncontiguous lands are
combined and assigned to the land to be developed and shall be
included on one tax bill.
(5) The lot proposed for development otherwise meets the minimum
design and performance standards of this chapter.
B. Rural development area. Residential dwelling units on lots of one acre
existing as of January 14, 1981, shall be permitted in the RR District,
provided that:
(1) The owner of the lot proposed for development acquires sufficient
vacant contiguous or noncontiguous land which, when combined
with the acreage of the lot proposed for development, equals at
least 5.7 acres.
(2) All lands acquired pursuant to § 176-16B(1), which may or may not
be developable, must be located within the RR District or the RPF
District or consist of the following: Block 120, Lot 5; Block 123, Lot
2 and 3; and Block 125, a portion of Lot 1 South of Hays Mill
Branch, Lot 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 90, 38, 39, 40, 42, 43, 44, 45
and 46. [Amended 10-23-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-13]
(3) The requirements of § 176-16A(3), (4) and (5) are met.
§ 176-16 INSURANCE § 176-16
168:363

ARTICLE V
Planning Board
§ 176-17. (Reserved)98
§ 176-18. Planning Board.
A. Establishment and membership.
(1) A Planning Board is hereby created consisting of nine regular
members and two alternate members of the following four classes:
(a) Class I: the Mayor.
(b) Class II: one of the officials of the municipality other than a
member of the governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor,
provided that if there is an Environmental Commission, the
member of the Environmental Commission who is also a
member of the Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1
shall be deemed to be the Class II Planning Board member if
there is a member of the Board of Education among the Class
IV or alternate members.
(c) Class III: a member of the governing body to be appointed by
it.
(d) Class IV: six other citizens of the municipality, to be appointed
by the Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other
municipal office, except that one may be a member of the
Board of Education. A member of the Environmental
Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board as
required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be a Class IV Planning
Board member unless there is among the Class IV members of
the Planning Board a member of the Board of Education, in
which case the member of the Environmental Commission shall
be deemed to be the Class II member of the Planning Board.
(e) Class IV alternates: two other citizens of the municipality who
may be appointed by the Mayor. Alternate members shall hold
no other municipal office, except that one member may be a
member of the Board of Education. The alternate members
shall be designated by the Mayor at the time of their
appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2."
[1] Alternate members shall be counted to comprise a
quorum. Alternate members may participate in the
discussions of all proceedings but may not vote except in
98.Editor's Note: Original § 176-17, regarding the Zoning Board of Adjustment, was repealed
1-22-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1. Ordinance No. 2003-1 dissolved the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as authorized pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25(c); and also provided that all
references to the "Zoning Board of Adjustment" and "Board of Adjustment," wherever they
appear in this chapter, shall be deleted or changed to "Planning Board," as appropriate.
§ 176-17 INSURANCE § 176-18
168:365
the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote
shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may
vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that
a choice must be made as to which alternate is to vote,
Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
(2) For the purpose of this section, membership on a municipal board
or commission whose function is advisory in nature, and the
establishment of which is discretionary and not required by statute,
shall not be considered the holding of municipal office.
B. Terms.
(1) The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with
his official tenure.
(2) The terms of the members composing Class II and Class III shall be
for one year or terminate at the completion of their respective
terms of office, whichever occurs first, except for a Class II member
who is also a member of the Environmental Commission. The term
of a Class II or a Class IV member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission shall be for three years or terminate at
the completion of his term of office as a member of the
Environmental Commission, whichever occurs first.
(3) The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board
of Education shall terminate whenever he is no longer a member of
such other body or at the completion of his Class IV term,
whichever occurs first.
(4) The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable
extent the expiration of such term shall be evenly distributed over
the first four years after their appointment, provided that no term
of any member shall exceed four years, and further provided that
nothing herein shall affect the terms of any present members of the
Planning Board, all of whom shall continue in office until the
completion of the terms for which they were appointed. Thereafter
all Class IV members shall be appointed for terms of four years
except as otherwise herein provided. All terms shall run from
January 1 of the year in which the appointment was made.
(5) The terms of the alternate Class IV members shall be for two years,
except that the terms of the alternate members shall be such that
the term of not more than one alternate member shall expire in any
one year; provided, however, that in no instance shall the terms of
the alternate members first appointed exceed two years.
(6) A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be
filled by appointment by the Mayor to serve the unexpired term of
the member whose term shall become vacant. Any member, other
than a Class I member, may be removed by the governing body for
§ 176-18 WATERFORD CODE § 176-18
168:366
cause, but only after public hearing, if requested, and other
requested procedural due process protection.
C. Officers. The Planning Board shall organize annually by selecting from
among its Class IV members a Chairman and Vice Chairman. The Board
shall also select a Secretary who may or may not be a Board member or
municipal employee.
D. Attorney. There is hereby created the office of Attorney to the Planning
Board. The Planning Board may annually appoint to such office and fix
the compensation or rate of compensation of an attorney at law in the
State of New Jersey other than the Township Attorney.
E. Experts and staff. The Planning Board may also employ or contract for
and fix the compensation of such experts and other staff and services as
it may deem necessary.
F. Budget. The Township Committee, after giving due consideration to
budget requests that may be submitted by the Planning Board, shall
make provisions in its budget and appropriate funds for the expenses of
the Planning Board. In any case, the Board shall not authorize
expenditures which exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount
appropriated by the governing body for its use.99
G. Rules and regulations. The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations
as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of
this chapter. In the issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and
taking of testimony, the provisions of the County and Municipal
Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
H. Powers and jurisdiction of the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall
have the powers listed below in addition to other powers established by
law. Since the powers and jurisdiction of the Planning Board have been
delegated to and imposed upon it by the MLUL, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq., the Planning Board shall in all cases follow the provisions
applicable to it in the said statute or subsequent statutes in such case
made and provided.
(1) Make, adopt and, from time to time, amend a Master Plan for the
physical development of the Township, including any areas outside
its boundaries which, in the Board's judgment, bear essential
relation to the planning of the Township, in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
(2) Administer the subdivision and site plan review provisions of this
chapter in accordance with the applicable provisions of said
chapter and with applicable provisions of the Pinelands Protection
Act (N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 et seq.).
99.Editor's Note: Original § 176-18.7, Quorum, which immediately followed this subsection,
was repealed at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-18 INSURANCE § 176-18
168:367
(3) Hear and decide conditional use applications in accordance with
the applicable provisions of this chapter, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-67.
(4) Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulation.
(5) Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous
planning process.
(6) Annually, at the request of the Township Committee, prepare a
program of municipal capital improvement projects projected over
a term of six years and recommend same to the governing body.
(7) Consider and report to the Township Committee within 35 days
after referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted
to it, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a, and pass
upon other matters specifically referred to the Planning Board by
the Township Committee, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-26b.
(8) Perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by
ordinance or resolution of the governing body for the aid and
assistance of the governing body or other agencies and officers.
(9) Error or refusal. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the
applicant that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision
or refusal made by an official based on or made in the enforcement
of the zoning provisions of this chapter.
(10) Exceptions or interpretations. Hear and decide requests for
interpretation of the Zoning Map or the zoning provisions of this
chapter or for decisions upon other special questions upon which
the Board is authorized to pass by any zoning provisions of this
chapter or by any duly adopted Official Map.
(11) General bulk variances.
(a) Where a) by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or
shape of a specific piece of property; b) or by reason of
exceptional topographic conditions or physical features
uniquely affecting a specific piece of property; or c) by reason
of an extraordinary and exceptional situation uniquely
affecting a specific piece of property or the structures lawfully
existing thereon, the strict application of any regulation of this
chapter would result in peculiar and exceptional practical
difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardship upon the
developer of such property, grant, upon an application or an
appeal relating to such property, a variance from such strict
application of such regulation to relieve such difficulties or
hardship; or
§ 176-18 WATERFORD CODE § 176-18
168:368
(b) Where, in an application or appeal relating to a specific piece
of property the purposes of this chapter would be advanced by
a deviation from the zoning requirements and the benefits of
the deviation would substantially outweigh any detriment,
grant a variance to allow departure from such zoning
requirements of this chapter; provided, however, that the fact
that a proposed use is an inherently beneficial use shall not be
dispositive of a decision on a variance under this subsection
and provided that no variance from those departures
enumerated in § 176-18I(12) below (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d) shall
be granted under this subsection.
(12) Use variance, variances from conditional use standards, and major
specific bulk variances.
(a) In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a variance to
allow departure from the zoning provisions of this chapter to
permit:
[1] A use or principal structure in a district restricted against
such use or principal structure;
[2] An expansion of a nonconforming use;
[3] A deviation from a particular specification or standard set
forth in this chapter pertaining solely to a conditional use;
[4] An increase in the permitted floor area ratio as defined in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4;
[5] An increase in the permitted density as defined in this
chapter, and in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, except as applied to the
required lot area for a lot or lots for detached one or two
dwelling unit buildings, which lot or lots are either an
isolated undersized lot, or lots, resulting from a minor
subdivision, in which event applications would be made
pursuant to § 176-18I(11) above; or
[6] A height of a principal structure which exceeds by 10 feet
or 10% the maximum height permitted in the zoning
district for the principal structure.
(b) A variance under this subsection shall be granted only by an
affirmative vote of at least five members of the Board.
(c) If an application for development requests one or more
variances but not a variance for a purpose enumerated in this
subsection, the decision on the requested variance or
variances shall be rendered under Subsection I(11) of this
section.
(13) General provisions.
§ 176-18 INSURANCE § 176-18
168:369
(a) Public good. No variance or other relief may be granted by the
Board unless such variance or other relief can be granted
without substantial detriment to the public good and will not
substantially impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan
and the zoning provisions of this chapter.
(b) Referrals. An application under this section may be referred by
the Planning Board to any appropriate person or agency for its
review and report; provided that such reference shall not
extend the period of time within which the Planning Board
shall act.
(c) Conditions. The Planning Board, in granting any variance
which by law it is authorized to grant, may impose such
conditions, in addition to those required in this chapter, as are
necessary to assure that the general purposes and intent of
this chapter are met. Such conditions may include, but are not
limited to, harmonious design of buildings; maintenance of a
sign or sound screen; the minimizing of noxious, offensive or
hazardous elements; preservation of natural features;
landscaping; and the posting of performance guarantees of the
nature required in this chapter to assure compliance with the
requirements that will survive initial construction and the
issuance of the certificates of occupancy.
(d) Expiration. All variances shall expire within one year from the
date of approval unless the owner shall have secured a
construction permit and shall have commenced construction in
conformity with the variance approval, including any
conditions attached to the approval. For variances which
become the subject of litigation, the one-year period shall
commence on the date of the last reviewing court's decision to
grant the variance.
(e) Extensions. For good cause shown, and after a hearing before
the Board on notice in the manner required for original
variance applications, the Board may extend the variance by
resolution. Any extension may not exceed one year in duration
and no more than four extensions shall be permitted. To
receive consideration, an application for extension of a
variance shall be made prior to the expiration of the time limit
sought to be extended. Anything herein to the contrary
notwithstanding, any variance granted with a site plan,
subdivision, and/or conditional use approval shall expire with
the expiration of the site plan, subdivision, and/or conditional
use approval.
(f) PDCs required for variances in regional growth area and
Pinelands Village. The regional growth area of Waterford
Township consists of the R1, R2, R3, R4, TC, OC, OP, PHB and
§ 176-18 WATERFORD CODE § 176-18
168:370
the NB Districts. The Pinelands Village of Waterford Works
consists of the PV District.
[1] Any municipal variance which grants relief from the
density or lot area requirements set forth in Article XI for
the R1, R2, R3 or R4 District shall require that PDC be
used for all dwelling units or lots in excess of that
permitted without the variance.
[2] Any municipal variance or other approval for the
development of a residential use in the TC, NB, PHB, or PI
Zones, excluding Block 252, Lots 1 and 26, shall require
that Pinelands development credits be used for 50% of the
authorized units for parcels under 10 acres in size; for 75%
of the authorized units for parcels between 10 and 20
acres in size; and for 100% of the authorized units for
parcels over 20 acres in size.
[3] Any municipal variance or other approval for the
development of a nonresidential use not otherwise
permitted in the R1, R2, R3 or R4 Zones shall require that
the Pinelands development credit use in the zone in which
the nonresidential use will be located for parcels under 10
acres in size; at 75% of the maximum rate for parcels over
20 acres in size; and at 100% of the maximum rate for
parcels over 20 acres in size. This requirement shall not
apply to a variance or other approval that authorizes the
expansion of or changes to existing nonresidential uses in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.2.
[4] Any municipal variance approval which grants relief from
the density or lot area requirements in the PV District for a
residential or principal nonresidential use shall require
that PDCs be used for all dwelling units or lots in excess of
that permitted without the variance.
(g) Airport hazard areas. In respect to any airport hazard areas
delineated under the "Air Safety and Zoning Act of 1983"
(N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et seq.), no variance or other relief may be
granted permitting the creation or establishment of a
nonconforming use which would be prohibited under the
standards promulgated pursuant to that act, except upon
issuance of a permit by the Commissioner of Transportation.100
(14) Additional powers. The Planning Board shall have such other
powers as prescribed by law, including, but not limited to, the
following:
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-18 INSURANCE § 176-18
168:371
(a) Direct issuance of a construction permit pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-34 for the construction of a building or structure within
the bed of a mapped street or public drainage way, flood
control basin or public area as shown on the duly adopted
Official Map, whenever one or more parcels of land within said
bed cannot yield a reasonable return to the owner unless a
construction permit is granted. The Board may grant such
relief only by the affirmative vote of at least five members,
ensuring that such relief will tend to cause a minimum change
of the Official Map and will not significantly add to the cost of
opening any proposed street. The Board shall impose
reasonable requirements as a condition of granting the
construction permit to promote the health, morals, safety and
general welfare of the public.
(b) Direct issuance of a construction permit pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-36 for a building or structure on a lot not abutting a
street which is shown on the duly adopted Official Map, or
which is a) an existing state, county or municipal street or
highway; or b) a street shown upon a plat approved by the
municipal Planning Board; or c) a street on a plat duly filed in
the office of the County Recording Officer. The Board may
grant such relief only when the enforcement of the statute
requirement that a building lot abut a street would entail
practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, or where the
circumstances of the case do not require the building or
structure to abut a street. The Board shall impose
requirements or conditions that will provide adequate access
for fire-fighting equipment, ambulances and other necessary
emergency vehicles for the protection of the health and safety
and that will protect any future street layout on the Official
Map or on the Traffic Circulation Plan element of the municipal
Master Plan.
(15) Effective June 3, 1997, whenever the Planning Board grants
subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76(b), then the Board shall ensure that any plans
and plats comply with the requirements of the rules of N.J.A.C. 5:21
et seq., as latest revised, before issuing a preliminary or final
approval.
(16) To administer the historic resource preservation provisions of
§ 176-70.
(17) Effective June 3, 1997, ensure that the plans and plats for any
residential development subject to review pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 and this chapter comply with the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:21 et seq., as latest revised, before
issuing a preliminary or final approval.
I. Conditional uses; site plan review.
§ 176-18 WATERFORD CODE § 176-18
168:372
(1) Before a construction permit or certificate of occupancy shall be
issued for any conditional use as permitted by this chapter, an
application shall be made to the Planning Board for conditional use
approval as well as required site plan and/or subdivision approval
as may be necessary. The review by the Planning Board of a
conditional use shall include any required site plan review pursuant
to § 176-36. Public notice and a hearing shall be required as
stipulated in § 176-19C and D.
(2) The Planning Board shall grant or deny an application for a
conditional use within 95 days of submission of a complete
application to the Department of Planning and Zoning or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Where a
conditional use application involves a site plan or subdivision,
notice of the hearing shall include reference to all matters being
heard, and the approving authority shall review and approve or
deny the subdivision or site plan simultaneously with the
conditional use application. Failure of the approving authority to
act within the required time period shall constitute approval of the
application.
J. Combination of Planning and Zoning Boards. The Planning Board shall
exercise to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions, all the
powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment; but the Class I and Class III
members shall not participate in the consideration of applications for
development which involves relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d).
K. Appeal to Planning Board.
(1) An appeal to the Planning Board may be taken by any interested
party affected by any decision of an administrative officer of the
municipality based on or made in the enforcement of the zoning
provisions of this chapter or a duly adopted Official Map. Such
appeal shall be taken within 20 days by filing a notice of appeal
with the official from whom the appeal is taken, with three copies of
the notice given to the Secretary of the Planning Board. The notice
shall specify the grounds for the appeal. The official from whom the
appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the Board all the
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed
from was taken.
(2) The Planning Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may
modify the action, order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination appealed from and to that end have all powers of the
municipal official from whom the appeal is taken.
(3) An appeal to the Planning Board shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed
from was made unless the municipal official from whose action the
appeal is taken certifies to the Planning Board after the notice of
appeal shall have been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the
§ 176-18 INSURANCE § 176-18
168:373
§ 176-19. Conduct of meetings.
certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property. In such cases proceedings shall not be stayed other
than by an order of the Superior Court upon notice to the municipal
official from whom the appeal is taken and due cause shown.
(4) A developer may file an application for development with the
Planning Board for action under any of its powers without prior
application to a municipal official.
(5) The Planning Board shall act upon any appeal or any application for
development within 120 days either from the date the appeal is
taken from the decision of the municipal official or from the date
the application is certified as a complete application, as the case
may be, or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant, except that when an applicant elects to submit separate
consecutive applications for use variance approval and site plan,
subdivision or conditional use approval, the one-hundred-twentyday
time period for action shall apply to the application for
approval of the use variance, and the time period for granting or
denying any subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in
this chapter.
(6) All appeals and applications to the Board shall be in writing. Every
appeal or application shall refer to the specific provision of the
section of this chapter involved and shall exactly set forth the
interpretation that is claimed or the details of the variance that is
applied for and the grounds on which it is claimed that the variance
should be granted.
L. Appeal of variance; approval for development. Any interested party may
obtain a review of a final decision of the Planning Board from any court
of competent jurisdiction in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17h. An
appeal in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17a to g, inclusive, is
specifically omitted from this chapter.
A. Conflict of interest. No regular or alternate member of the Planning
Board shall act on any matter in which he has either directly or
indirectly any personal or financial interest. Whenever any such
member shall disqualify himself from acting on a particular matter, he
shall not continue to sit with the Board on the hearing of such matter
nor participate in any discussion by the Board or decision relating
thereto.
B. Meetings.
(1) Meetings of the Planning Board shall be scheduled at least once a
month, and any meeting so scheduled shall be held unless
cancelled for lack of applications or business to be handled.
§ 176-18 WATERFORD CODE § 176-19
168:374
(2) Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or
on the request of any two Board members, which meetings shall be
held on notice to its members and the public in accordance with all
applicable legal requirements.
(3) No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present, said quorum to be the majority of the full-authorized
(regular and/or alternate) membership of the Board.
(4) All actions shall be taken by majority vote of the members of the
Board present at the meeting except as otherwise required by any
provision of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. A member of the Board who
was absent for one or more of the meetings at which a hearing was
held shall be eligible to vote on a matter upon which the hearing
was conducted, notwithstanding his absence from one or more of
the meetings; provided, however, that such Board member has read
a verbatim transcript of the recorded minutes or listened to such
recording.
(5) All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public, except as provided in the Open Public Meeting Law,
Chapter 231, Laws of New Jersey, 1975. Notice of all such meetings
shall be given in accordance with the requirements of the Open
Public Meeting Law, Chapter 231, Laws of New Jersey, 1975.
(6) Not less than five days prior to any hearing, public meeting, or
other formal proceeding, at which an application for development
is to be considered by the Township, notification shall be given to
the Commission by certified mail to the principal office of the
Commission. The notice shall be in such form as the Executive
Director of the Commission shall, from time to time, specify; but at
a minimum, the notice shall contain the following information:
(a) The name and address of the applicant;
(b) The docket number of the certificate of filing issued by the
Executive Director and the date on which it was issued;
(c) The date, time and location of the meeting, hearing, or other
formal proceeding;
(d) The name of the local permitting agency or representative
thereof which will be conducting the meeting, hearing, or
other formal proceeding;
(e) Any written reports or comments received by the local
permitting agency on the application for development which
have not been submitted previously to the Commission; and
(f) The purpose for which the meeting, hearing, or other formal
proceeding is to be held.
C. Public hearings.
§ 176-19 INSURANCE § 176-19
168:375
(1) Subsequent to an application for development being declared
complete, the Planning Board shall hold a hearing on the
application for development. The Planning Board shall make rules
governing such hearings.
(2) Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at a hearing
shall be on file and available for public inspection as least 10 days
before the date of the hearing during normal business hours in the
office of the Department of Planning and Zoning. The applicant may
produce any documents, records or testimony at the hearing to
substantiate, clarify or supplement the previously filed maps and
documents.
(3) The officer presiding at the hearings, or such person as he may
designate, shall have the power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant evidence, including witnesses and
documents presented by the parties, and the provisions of the
"County and Municipal Investigations Law," P.L. 1953, c. 38
(N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
(4) Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing,
but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence and testimony.
D. Public notice of a hearing.
(1) Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. or pursuant to the
determination of the approving agency in question, the applicant
shall give notice thereof as set forth below.
(2) The Clerk of the Planning Board shall notify the applicant at least
15 days prior to the public hearing at which the application will be
discussed. Notice of a hearing requiring public notice shall be
given by the applicant at least 10 days prior to the date of the
hearing in the following manner:
(a) Publication in an official newspaper of the Township at least 10
days prior to the hearing; and
(b) Notification by personal service or certified mail to all owners
of real property, as shown on the current tax duplicate of this
or any adjoining municipality, located within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing
and whether located within or without the municipality in
which the applicant's land is located, provided that this
requirement shall be deemed satisfied by notice to:
[1] The condominium association, in the case of any unit
owner whose unit has a unit above or below it, or
§ 176-19 WATERFORD CODE § 176-19
168:376
horizontal property regime, in the case of any co-owner
whose apartment has an apartment above or below it.
[2] The property owner as shown on the current tax duplicate
or his agent in charge of the property or by mailing a copy
thereof by certified mail to the property owner at his
address as shown on the said current tax duplicate.
[3] A partnership owner by service upon any partner.
[4] A corporate owner by service upon its president, a vice
president, secretary or other person authorized by
appointment or be law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation.
[5] A condominium association, horizontal property regime,
community trust or homeowners' association, because of
its ownership of common elements or areas located within
200 feet of the property which is the subject of the
hearing, may be made in the same manner as to a
corporation without further notice to unit owners, coowners,
or homeowners on account of such common
elements or areas.
(c) Except for those activities not subject to Commission review
under § 176-14A(2), the Commission shall be provided with
notice of hearings in accordance with § 176-14G.
(d) To the Clerk of any adjoining municipalities when the property
involved is located within 200 feet of said adjoining
municipality.
(e) To the County Planning Board when an application involves
property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road
shown on the Official County Map or on the County Master
Plan, adjoining other county land or situate within 200 feet of a
municipal boundary.
(f) To the Commissioner of Transportation of the State of New
Jersey when the property abuts a state highway.
(g) To the State Planning Commission when an application
involves property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units, in which case the notice shall include a copy of any maps
or documents required to filed with the Township.
(h) To the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Division
of Codes and Standards, when an application includes a
request for a waiver of any residential site improvement
standard under N.J.A.C. 5:21 et seq., as latest revised, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-40.4(c).
§ 176-19 INSURANCE § 176-19
168:377
E. Affidavit for proof of notice. An affidavit of proof for the required notice
shall be filed by the applicant with the municipal agency prior to the
hearing date. It is not required that a return receipt is obtained since
notice is deemed complete upon mailing (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14); however,
evidence that the required notice was mailed to the above shall be
provided to the Planning Board prior to the subject public hearing.
F. Form of notice. Notices shall state the name and address of the
applicant; the date, time and place of the hearing and the nature of the
matters to be considered, including all variances and/or waivers
requested by the applicant; an identification of the property proposed
for development by street address, and by reference to lot and block
numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the Municipal Tax
Assessor's office; and the location and times at which any maps and
documents for which approval is sought are available for inspection.
G. Additional notice requirement - substantial revisions. Any application
for development being reviewed by the Planning Board, and said Board
determines that substantial revisions have been made to said
application subsequent to the date when it was determined to be a
complete application, then the Board may require the applicant to again
comply with the notice requirements specified under § 176-19D.
H. List of property owners. Upon written request of an applicant, the Clerk
in the Department of Planning and Zoning shall, within seven days,
make and certify a list from current tax duplicates of names and
addresses of owners within the Township to whom the applicant is
required to give notice. The applicant shall be charged the fee set forth
in § 176-20 for said list and shall be entitled to rely upon the
information contained therein, and failure to give notice to any lot
owner not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
Additionally, the applicant shall be responsible for giving proper notice
to all property owners pursuant to Subsection D(2)(b) above who own
property not located within the Township.101
I. Taxes. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65,
every application for development submitted to the Planning Board
shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or assessments for local
improvements are due or delinquent on the property which is the
subject of such application; or if it is shown that taxes or assessments
are delinquent on said property, any approvals or other relief granted
by the Board shall be conditioned upon either the prompt payment of
such taxes or assessments or the making of adequate provision for the
payment thereof in such manner that the municipality will be
adequately protected.
J. Record of hearings.
101. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-19 WATERFORD CODE § 176-19
168:378
(1) Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall
include the names of the persons appearing and addressing the
Planning Board and of the persons appearing by attorney, the
action taken by the Planning Board and the findings, if any, made by
it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made
available, after approval by the Board, for public inspection during
normal business hours at the office of the Department of Planning
and Zoning. Any interested party shall have the right to compel
production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal
proceedings concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such
interested party shall be charged a reasonable fee for reproduction
of the minutes.
(2) A verbatim recording shall be made of every hearing on an
application for development submitted to the Township. The
recording of the proceedings shall be made either by stenographer,
mechanical or electrical means. The municipality shall furnish a
transcript on request to any interested party at his expense,
provided that the charge for a transcript shall not exceed the
maximum amount permitted in N.J.S.A. 2B:7-4. Each transcript
shall be certified, in writing, by the transcriber to be accurate.102
K. Decisions.
(1) Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth,
in writing, as a resolution of the Board, which resolution shall
include findings of fact and legal conclusions based thereon.
(2) The Board shall provide the findings and conclusions through:
(a) A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period
provided in this chapter for action by the Board on the
application for development; or
(b) A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held no later
than 45 days after the date of the meeting at which the Board
voted to grant or deny approval. Only the members of the
Board who voted for the action taken may vote on the
memorializing resolution, and the vote of a majority of such
members present at the meeting at which the resolution is
presented for adoption shall be sufficient to adopt the
resolution. An action pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9 (resulting
from the failure of a motion to approve an application) shall be
memorialized by resolution as provided above, with those
members voting against the motion for approval being the
members eligible to vote on the memorializing resolution.
(3) The vote on any memorializing resolution shall be deemed to be a
memorialization of the action of the Board and not to be an action
102. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-19 INSURANCE § 176-19
168:379
of the Board; however, the date of the adoption of the
memorializing resolution shall constitute the date of the decision
for purposes of the mailings, filings and publications required in
§ 176-19L.
(4) If the Board fails to adopt a resolution or memorializing resolution
as hereinabove specified, any interested party may apply to the
Superior Court in a summary manner for an order compelling the
Board to reduce its findings and conclusions to writing within a
stated time and the cost of the application, including attorneys'
fees, shall be assessed against the municipality [N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10g(2)].
L. Publication and mailing of decisions.
(1) A copy of the resolution memorializing a decision shall be mailed by
the Clerk of the Board, within 10 days of the date of adoption, to the
applicant or, if represented, then to his attorney, without separate
charge. A copy of the resolution shall also be mailed to all persons
who have requested it and who have paid the fee prescribed by the
Board for such service. A copy of the resolution shall also be filed in
the office of the Department of Planning and Zoning. A copy of such
filed resolution shall be available to any interested party upon
payment of a fee calculated in the same manner as those
established for copies of other public documents in the
municipality.
(2) A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the
official newspaper of the municipality. Such publication shall be
arranged by the Clerk of the Planning Board. A fee shall be charged
pursuant to the Fee Ordinance.103 Said notice shall be sent to the
official newspaper for publication within 10 days of the date of
adoption of the resolution to memorialize any such decision.
(3) Except for those activities not subject to Pinelands Commission
review under § 176-14A(2), the Pinelands Commission shall be
provided with notice of all final approvals or denials of site plans
and subdivisions in accordance with § 176-14G(3).
M. Fees. Fees for all classifications of development applications, or for the
rendering of any service by the Planning Board or any member of their
administrative staff, which are not otherwise provided by ordinance
may be provided for and adopted as part of the rules of the Board, and
copies of said rules or of the separate fee schedule shall be available to
the public. All fees presently established by ordinance or by resolution
of the respective boards shall continue in effect.
N. Exceptions.
103. Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Art. II, Fee Schedule.
§ 176-19 WATERFORD CODE § 176-19
168:380
(1) The approving agency, when acting upon applications for
preliminary or minor subdivision approval or preliminary site plan
approval, shall have the power to grant such exceptions from the
design and performance standards of this chapter, as may be
reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the
provisions for subdivision/site plan review and approval if the
literal enforcement of one or more provisions of this chapter is
impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question.
(2) The approving agency shall have the power to review and approve
or deny conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with a review
for subdivision approval without the developer being required to
make further application or the approving agency being required to
hold further hearings. The longest time period for action by the
approving agency, whether it is for subdivision, conditional use or
site plan approval, shall apply whenever approval of a conditional
use is requested by the developer in conjunction with a site plan or
subdivision, notice of the hearing on the plat shall include
reference to the request for such conditional use.
(3) Notwithstanding the aforementioned exceptions, no such exception
shall apply to Pinelands application requirements or development
standards nor shall it affect the Township's compliance with the
standards of the Comprehensive Management Plan.
(4) Effective June 3, 1997, the approving agency may grant such de
minimis exceptions from the requirements of the residential site
improvement standards contained in N.J.A.C. 5:21 et seq, as latest
revised. Within 30 days of granting a de minimis exception request,
the approving authority shall send a copy of the documents
constituting the exception resolution to the New Jersey Department
of Community Affairs, Division of Codes and Standards. Such notice
shall be clearly marked "site improvement exception(s)."
§ 176-19 INSURANCE § 176-19
168:381

ARTICLE VI
Fees, Insurance, Guarantees and Inspections; Start of Construction;
Improvements
§ 176-20. Fees. [Amended 4-25-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-8]
A. General.
(1) The application charge is a flat fee to cover administrative
expenses and is nonrefundable. The escrow account is established
to cover the costs of professional services, including engineering,
planning, legal, and other expenses connected with the review of
the submitted materials, including any traffic engineering review
or other special analysis related to the Township's review of the
submitted materials, or any necessary studies regarding off-tract
improvements. No application shall be deemed complete until the
initial required escrow fees have been paid. If additional sums are
deemed necessary, the applicant shall be notified of the required
additional amount and shall add such sum to the escrow prior to
any further consideration of the application by the Township. Sums
not utilized in the review process shall be returned to the applicant
within 20 days of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the
development.
(2) The Township may enforce payment by withholding issuance of
building permits or certificates of occupancy. When a depleted
escrow is not brought current or a bill for deficiency remains
unpaid, the engineers and solicitors shall be authorized to withhold
all further services relating to the matter, including the granting of
any approvals, until such time as the depleted escrow account is
brought current or the deficiency is paid in full. In the event it is
necessary for the Township to file suit to collect any unpaid costs,
the applicant will be responsible for all costs of collection,
including reasonable attorneys' fees.
(3) Every application for development shall be accompanied by a check
payable to the Township of Waterford. No application shall be
deemed complete until the required fee has been paid. Where one
application for development includes several approval requests,
the sum of the required applications and escrow fees shall be paid.
(4) Each applicant for subdivision or site plan approval shall agree to
pay all reasonable costs for professional review and inspection of
the improvements. All such costs for review shall be paid before
any approved plat, plan or deed is signed. All inspection fees shall
be paid in accordance with § 176-25 before any construction permit
is issued. All remaining costs shall be paid in full before any
occupancy of the premises is permitted or certificate of occupancy
issued.
§ 176-20 INSURANCE § 176-20
168:383
(5) The Planning Clerk for the Department of Planning and Zoning
shall maintain an itemized account for each application and shall
supply a copy of the account to an applicant upon request. The
Chief Financial Officer of the Township shall periodically advise the
Planning Clerk of the balance of all escrow accounts and when
additional funds are required. It shall be the obligation of the
Administrative Clerk to notify the applicant of the amount needed
and to notify the Planning Board of any refusal or failure to
properly make any payments required.
(6) If an applicant desires a court reporter, the applicant shall arrange
for the reporter's attendance and pay the cost for taking testimony,
transcribing it, and providing a copy of the transcript to the
Township.
(7) The Planning Board shall include, as a condition to approval of any
application, that any additional fees required as a result of the
approval be paid by the applicant to Waterford Township.
B. Administrative review. Applications for development which do not
require Planning Board approval shall be reviewed by the
Administrative Review Committee. These include, but are not limited
to, applications as defined in § 176-9, grading plans, municipal road
opening permits, driveway paving permits, and the like.104
(1) Filing fee: $15.
(2) Escrow: $300.
C. General fees applicable to Planning Board applications.105
(1) Publication of decision: $25.
(2) List of adjoining property owners within 200 feet: not to exceed
$0.25 per name or $10, whichever is greater.
(3) Extension of approvals.
(a) Filing fee: $100.
(b) Escrow: $150.
D. Review for interpretation, guidance or clarification.
(1) Planning Board informal review of conceptual minor subdivision or
site plan (limited to one thirty-minute session for nonbinding
advice).
(a) Filing fee: $200.
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
105. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-20 WATERFORD CODE § 176-20
168:384
(b) Escrow: $2,000.
(c) If applicant requests input from Board Engineer: application
fee $200; escrow fee $500; engineering; plus $250 legal.
(2) Planning Board informal review of conceptual major subdivision or
site plan (nonbinding advice).
(a) Filing fee: $300.
(b) Escrow: $4,000, plus $500 per acre (first 10 acres) and $200
per acre (each additional acre); (application fee $200 and
escrow fee $500 engineering, plus $250 legal).
(3) Interpretation of Chapter 176.106
(a) Filing fee: $200.
(b) Escrow: $500 engineering, plus $250 legal.
(4) Appeal of Zoning Official's decision.107
(a) Filing fee: $200.
(b) Escrow: $500 engineering, plus $250 legal.
(5) Certification of preexisting use.108
(a) Filing fee: $200.
(b) Escrow: $250.
(6) Informal workshop meeting with the Zoning Official and Pinelands
representative to discuss potential development.
(a) Filing fee: $0.
(b) Escrow: $300 (if applicant requests Engineer be present).
E. Variance applications. Applications for each variance requested or
required under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(a), (b), (c), or (d).
(1) Filing fee:
(a) Residential: $100.
(b) Nonresidential: $200.
(2) Escrow:
106. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
107. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-20 INSURANCE § 176-20
168:385
(a) C variance: $500.
(b) D variance: $1,000.
F. Temporary use. Applications in accordance with § 176-12C.
(1) Filing fee:
(a) Residential: $100.
(b) Nonresidential: $200.
(2) Escrow: $250.
G. Minor site plan. Applications in accordance with § 176-37.
(1) Filing fee: $200.
(2) Escrow: $2,000.
H. Preliminary major site plan. Applications in accordance with § 176-40.
(1) Filing fee: $300.
(2) Escrow: $4,000, plus $500 per acre (first 10 acres) and $200 per
acre (each additional acre).
I. Final major site plans. Applications in accordance with § 176-42.
(1) Filing fee: $300.
(2) Escrow: $2,500 plus $300 per acre (first 10 acres) and $200 per
acre (each additional acre).
J. Amended site plans. Applications in accordance with § 176-37, 176-40
or 176-42.
(1) Filing fee: $200.
(2) Escrow: $1,000.
K. Minor subdivision. Applications in accordance with § 176-37.
(1) Filing fee: $200.
(2) Escrow: $2,000.
L. Preliminary major subdivision. Applications in accordance with
§ 176-40.
(1) Filing fee: $300.
(2) Escrow: $2,000 for first five lots, plus $100 for each additional lot
($4,000 plus $200 per lot (first 10 lots) and $100 per lot (each
additional lot).
M. Final major subdivision. Applications in accordance with § 176-42.
§ 176-20 WATERFORD CODE § 176-20
168:386
(1) Filing fee: $300.
(2) Escrow: $1,000 for first five lots, plus $50 for each additional lot
[$2,500, plus $100 per lot (first 10 lots) and $50 per lot (each
additional lot)].
N. Amended subdivision. Applications in accordance with § 176-37, 176-40
or 176-42.
(1) Filing fee: $200.
(2) Escrow: $1,000.
O. Conditional use (not including required site plan or subdivision review
fees when applicable). All conditional uses require Planning Board
review.
(1) Filing fee: $200 in addition to preliminary and final major site plan
if site changes are proposed.
(2) Escrow: $1,000 in addition to preliminary and final major site plan
if site changes are proposed.
P. Copy of minutes, transcripts or decisions.
(1) Copies of minutes of decisions: $0.05 per letter size page or
smaller, and $0.07 per legal size page or larger.109
(2) Certified copies of transcripts must be ordered through the
recording secretary. A cost estimate will be provided by the
Transcription Service.
Q. Copy of Chapter 176, Land Use, Development and Zoning, and Zoning
Map.
(1) Ordinance: $50.
(2) Zoning Map: $5.
R. Forestry permit.
(1) Fee: $25.
(2) Administrative fee upon issuance: $250.
S. Tax Map update.
(1) Subdivision:
(a) 1 to 3 lots: $150 per lot.
(b) 4 to 10 lots: $100 per lot.
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-20 INSURANCE § 176-20
168:387
§ 176-21. Insurance requirements. [Amended 4-25-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-8]
As a condition of approval, every applicant for major subdivision and site
plan approval shall be required to produce evidence of a comprehensive
general liability insurance policy in an amount not less than $300,000 per
occurrence, indemnifying and saving harmless Waterford Township and
its agencies, employees and agents from any liability for any act of the
developer or his agents, contractors or employees in the implementing
of the approved plan. A certificate of insurance issued by an insurance
carrier authorized to conduct business within the State of New Jersey shall
constitute acceptable evidence of such coverage. The applicant shall be
required to maintain such insurance until all improvements are completed
and, if required, a final certificate of occupancy is provided.
§ 176-22. Guarantees and inspections.
For the purposes of this section, the term "public improvements" shall
mean streets, grading, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, streetlighting,
street signs, shade trees, surveyor's monuments, fire prevention features,
water mains, culverts, sewers, sanitary sewers or other means of sewage
disposal, drainage structures, erosion control and sedimentation devices,
landscaping, public improvements of open space, and other on-site
improvements.
(c) 11 to 25 lots: $1,250.
(d) 26 to 50 lots: $2,500.
(e) More than 50 lots: $3,500.
A. Requirements specific to major subdivisions.
(1) No final major subdivision application, whether for an entire tract
or a section thereof, shall be approved by the Board until the
satisfactory completion and performance of all required public
improvements has been certified to the Board by the Township
Engineer unless the applicant has:
(a) Satisfactorily completed all required utility installations and
their appurtenances, including water mains, drainage and
detention facilities, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers or
dry sewers and public improvements of open space;
(b) Satisfactorily completed all required grading and the macadam
base course surfacing of all streets;
(c) Satisfactorily completed the construction of all required curbs;
and/or
(d) Filed a performance guaranty in accordance with § 176-22D,
sufficient in amount to cover the cost of all remaining required
§ 176-20 WATERFORD CODE § 176-22
168:388
improvements, as estimated by the Township Engineer, and
assuring the installation of said improvements on or before an
agreed date and as hereinafter provided.
(2) Except as hereafter provided, the remaining required
improvements shall be at least 50% complete as to each category
set forth in the performance guaranty within one year from the
date of final approval or by such time as 50% of the lots in the
section in question have been conveyed in any manner by the
applicant, whichever shall occur first. At least 75% of the
remaining required improvements shall be complete as to each
category as set forth in the performance guaranty within 18 months
from the date of final approval, or at such time as 75% of the lots in
the section in question have been conveyed in any manner by the
applicant, whichever occurs first. Such improvements shall be
100% complete and accepted by the Township within two years
from the date of final approval or at such time as all of the lots in
the section in question have been conveyed in any manner by the
applicant, whichever occurs first. It is the intention of the Township
Committee that this requirement will provide, to those living in
each new section of a subdivision, a lot that is as complete as
possible with respect to tract and individual lot improvements.
B. Requirements specific to major site plans. No final major site plan
application, whether for an entire tract or a section thereof, shall be
approved by the Board unless:
(1) The Township Engineer has certified to the Board that all public
improvements required by the preliminary site plan approval have
been satisfactorily completed; or
(2) The applicant, with the approval of the Planning Board, has entered
into a developer's agreement with the Township, in a form
satisfactory to the Township Attorney and authorized by the
governing body, requiring the installation and maintenance of the
public improvements by the applicant and successors in interest;
imposing such limitations upon and/or staging of the development
of the site as are necessary to ensure orderly construction of the
public improvements on or before an agreed upon date by the filing
of a performance guaranty in accordance with § 176-22D.
C. Requirements specific to minor subdivisions and minor site plans. In the
case of a minor site plan and/or minor subdivision, in the event that the
developer elects to complete all improvements without posting the
performance guaranty required by § 176-22D, no construction shall be
commenced until a revised plan incorporating all conditions of approval
is submitted and signed. The developer shall still post the inspection
escrow and notify the Township Engineer prior to commencement of
work. The Township shall have the power to waive the requirement of
an inspection escrow for minor site plans only where the site
improvements are established to be less than $3,500, in which case the
§ 176-22 INSURANCE § 176-22
168:389
Township building inspection staff shall perform the inspections and
notice of work to be commenced shall be given to the Township Uniform
Construction Code Official instead of to the Township Engineer.
Whether or not an inspection escrow is required, all site improvements
under this subsection must be completed prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy, or within 120 days of a temporary certificate
of occupancy if the performance guaranty covering the balance of the
uncompleted improvements has been posted.
D. Performance guaranty.
(1) A performance guaranty estimate shall be prepared by the
Township Engineer for review and approval, setting forth all
required improvements as determined by the Board and their
estimated cost. No performance guaranty shall be required for the
installation of utilities when they will be installed by the applicable
utility company. Any adjustment in the amount of the guaranty shall
be approved by resolution of the Township Committee.
(2) The cost of the installation of the required improvements shall be
estimated by the Township Engineer based on documented
construction costs for public improvements prevailing in the
Township.
(3) The applicant shall present two copies of the performance
guaranty, in an amount equal to 120% of the approved construction
cost estimate, for approval as to form and execution by the
Township Attorney. Additional copies of the performance guaranty
shall be forwarded by the owner to the Planning Board. The
performance guaranty estimates, as prepared by the Township
Engineer and approved by the Township Committee, shall be
appended to each performance guaranty posted by the obligor.
(4) The performance guaranty shall be made payable and deposited to
the Township and shall be in the form of cash, irrevocable letter of
credit, certified check, or performance bond, from an acceptable
surety company licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey,
in which the applicant shall be a principal. The Township shall issue
its receipt for such deposits. Deposits shall automatically renew for
one-year periods and shall be retained as security for completion of
all required work until the Township provides a resolution that the
required work has been completed or, in the event of default on the
part of the applicant, shall be used by the Township to pay the cost
and expense of completing all requirements. Upon receipt of the
resolution from the Township that the work has been completed
satisfactorily, the deposits shall be returned to the applicant.
(5) Ten percent of the amount of the approved performance guaranty
shall be deposited by the applicant in cash with the Township. The
remaining 90% may be in cash, irrevocable letter of credit or surety
bond. In the event of default, the 10% cash shall be applied to the
§ 176-22 WATERFORD CODE § 176-22
168:390
§ 176-23. Start of construction.
Construction pursuant to a site plan or subdivision approval shall not
commence until:
completion of the requirements and any bidding and legal costs
associated therewith. If the 10% cash is insufficient, the remaining
90% cash, letter of credit or surety bond shall be used for the
completion of the requirements and any additional bidding and
legal costs associated therewith.
E. Default by developer. If the required improvements are not completed
or corrected in accordance with the performance guaranty, the obligor
and surety, if any, under the performance guaranty shall be liable to the
Township for the cost of the improvements not completed or
constructed, and the Township, either prior to or after receipt of the
proceeds thereof, may complete the improvements. Such completion or
correction of improvements shall be subject to the public bidding
requirements of the Local Public Contracts Law, P.L. 1971, c. 198.110 For
the purposes of this subsection, "default" shall mean failure to install
the improvements in accordance with the Township standards of
construction, including, but not limited to, failure to install the
improvements prior to the expiration of the performance guaranty. The
Township Engineer's certification that the developer has defaulted in
compliance with the required standards of construction and installation
of improvements shall be the basis for Township Committee action
which rejects the improvements, withholds approval, withholds
construction permits or formally declares default and authorizes
collection on the performance guaranty.
F. Penalties. In addition to penalties for violation in accordance with
§ 176-13, the Township Engineer is specifically authorized to require
the replacement of any lands, buildings, structures and site
improvements (including clearing, whether on site or off site), or of any
other work commenced or continued on any site in violation of any stopconstruction
order or the standards for construction as established by
the Township.
A. The applicant has paid all fees required by this chapter;
B. The applicant has received all other governmental approvals required
by the Board's resolution of memorialization granting subdivision and/
or site plan approval;
C. All revisions to the submitted plat or plan required by the Board at the
time of subdivision or site plan approval have been filed with and
approved by the Township Engineer and any other individual or group
as may have been specified by the Board in the applicable resolution of
memorialization granting subdivision and/or site plan approval;
110. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 176-22 INSURANCE § 176-23
168:391
§ 176-24. Special provisions for escrow deposits exceeding $5,000.
Whenever an amount of money in excess of $5,000 is deposited by an
applicant or developer with the Township for professionals employed by
the Township for the review of submitted applications for development
pursuant to § 176-20, or for inspections pursuant to § 176-25, or to satisfy
the guaranty requirements pursuant to § 176-22D, the money, until repaid
or applied to the purposes for which it is deposited, including the applicant's
portion of the interest earned thereon, except as otherwise provided in this
section, shall continue to be the property of the applicant or developer and
shall be held in trust by the Township in accordance with the following:
§ 176-25. Inspections and tests.
D. The applicant's construction plans have been filed with and approved
by the Township Engineer; and
E. The applicant has had a preconstruction meeting with the Township
Engineer in accordance with § 176-11A for the purpose of forecasting
and resolving problems that may arise during the time of construction.
A. The money deposited shall be held in escrow.
B. The money shall be deposited by the Township in a banking institution
or savings and loan association in New Jersey insured by an agency of
the federal government, or in any other fund or depository approved for
such deposits by the state.
C. The money shall be deposited in an interest-bearing account at the
minimum rate currently paid by the institution or depository on time or
savings deposits.
D. The Township shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the name and
address of the institution or depository in which the deposit is made and
the amount of the deposit.
E. The Township shall not be required to refund an amount of interest paid
on a deposit which does not exceed $100. However, if the amount
exceeds $100, the entire amount shall belong to the applicant or
developer and shall be refunded to him by the Township annually or at
the time the deposit is repaid or applied to the purposes for which it
was deposited, as the case may be; except that the Township may retain
for administrative expenses a sum equivalent to not more than 33 1/3%
of that entire amount which shall be in lieu of all other administrative
and custodial expenses.
A. All site improvements and utility installations for site plans,
subdivisions, plot plans and other realty improvements shall be
inspected during the time of their installation under the supervision of
the Township Engineer to insure satisfactory completion. The cost of
said inspection shall be the responsibility of the developer who shall
deposit with the Township Chief Financial Officer inspection fees in an
§ 176-23 WATERFORD CODE § 176-25
168:392
amount not to exceed, except for extraordinary circumstances, the
greater of $500 or 5% of the cost of the improvements as determined by
the Township Engineer in accordance with § 176-22D(2), provided that:
(1) For those developments for which the reasonable anticipated
inspection fees are less than $10,000 the fees may, at the option of
the developer, be paid in two installments. The initial amount
deposited by the developer shall be 50% of the reasonably
anticipated fees.
(2) For those developments for which the reasonable anticipated
inspection fees are $10,000 or greater, the fees may, at the option
of the developer, be paid in four installments. The initial amount
deposited by the developer shall be 25% of the reasonably
anticipated fees. When the balance of deposit drops to 10% of the
reasonably anticipated fees because the amount deposited by the
developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the Township
Engineer for inspections, the developer shall make additional
deposits of 25% of the anticipated inspection fees.
B. The inspection escrow shall be deposited by the Chief Financial Officer,
or his designee, in an account for such purposes under the sole control
of the Township. Said inspection escrow may be commingled with
similar escrows from other developers, but accurate accounts and
records shall be kept to identify the particular escrows and charges
made against the same. The inspection escrow funds shall be used
solely for payment of the inspection fees, expenses and costs on behalf
of the Township during the course of construction by the Township
Engineer, or such other officials as designated by the Township,
including the Township Planner or the Township Attorney, for
preparation of bond reduction resolutions and approval of guarantees.
C. The Township Engineer shall not perform any inspection if sufficient
funds to pay for those inspections are not on deposit. Failure of the
developer to deposit the required inspection fees in accordance with
§ 176-25A will subject the developer to a stop-work order and/or
suspension of construction permits.
D. In no case shall any paving work be done without permission from the
Township Engineer. At least two working days' notice shall be given to
the Township Engineer prior to any construction so that he, or a
qualified representative, may be present at the time the work is to be
done.
E. Streets shall not be paved with a top course until all heavy construction
is completed and, if determined by the Township Engineer to be
necessary, the macadam base course has first been restored. Shade
trees shall not be planted until all grading and earth moving is
completed. The placing of surveyor's monuments shall be among the
last operations.
§ 176-25 INSURANCE § 176-25
168:393
F. The Township Engineer's office shall be notified at least two working
days prior to the commencement of the following phases of work so that
he, or a qualified representative, may inspect the work:
(1) Road subgrade.
(2) Curb and gutter forms.
(3) Curbs and gutters.
(4) Road paving.
(5) Sidewalk forms.
(6) Sidewalks.
(7) Drainage pipes and other drainage construction.
(8) Street name signs.
(9) Monuments.
(10) Sanitary sewers and pump stations.
(11) Detention and/or retention basins.
(12) Topsoil, seeding and planting.
(13) Underground utilities.
(14) Potable water facilities.
G. Any improvement installed contrary to the plan or plat approved by the
Township shall constitute just cause to void the municipal approval.
H. Any improvement installed without notice for inspection pursuant to
§ 176-25D above shall constitute just cause for:
(1) Removal of the uninspected improvement;
(2) The payment by the developer of any costs for material testing;
(3) The restoration by the developer of any improvements disturbed
during any material testing; and/or
(4) The issuance of a stop-work order by the Township Engineer
pending the resolution of any dispute.
I. Inspection by the Township of the installation of improvements and
utilities shall not subject the Township of Waterford to liability for
claims, suits or liability of any kind that may at any time arise because
of defects or negligence during construction or at any time thereafter; it
being recognized that the responsibility to maintain safe conditions at
all times during construction and to provide proper utilities and
improvements is upon the owner and his contractor, if any.
§ 176-25 WATERFORD CODE § 176-25
168:394
§ 176-26. Release.
The Township Committee, by resolution, shall either approve the
improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by the Township
Engineer, or reject any or all of these improvements upon the establishment
in the resolution of cause for rejection, and shall approve and authorize the
amount of reduction to be made in the performance guaranty relating to
the improvements accepted, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate
prepared by the Township Engineer and appended to the performance
guaranty pursuant to § 176-22D(3). This resolution shall be adopted not
later than 45 days after receipt of the list and report prepared by the
Township Engineer.
J. Upon substantial completion of all required street improvements,
except for the top course, and appurtenant utility improvements and
the connection of same to the public system, the obligor may request of
the Township Committee, in writing, by certified mail in care of the
Township Clerk, that the Township Engineer prepare, in accordance
with the itemized cost estimate appended to the performance guaranty
pursuant to § 176-22D(3), a list of all uncompleted or unsatisfactory
completed improvements. If such a request is made, the obligor shall
send a copy of the request to the Township Engineer. The request shall
indicate which improvements have been completed and which
improvements remain uncompleted in the judgement of the obligor. The
Township Engineer shall inspect all the improvements covered by the
obligor's request and shall file a written detailed list and report with the
Township Committee, and shall simultaneously send a copy thereof to
the obligor not later than 45 days after receipt of the obligor's request.
K. The list prepared by the Township Engineer pursuant to § 176-25J, shall
state, in detail with respect to each improvement determined to be
incomplete or unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the
incompleteness of each incomplete improvement or the nature and
extent of, and remedy for, the unsatisfactory state of each completed
improvement determined to be unsatisfactory. The report prepared by
the Township Engineer shall identify each improvement determined to
be complete and satisfactory together with a recommendation as to the
amount of reduction to be made in the performance guaranty in
accordance with the itemized cost estimate appended to the
performance guaranty pursuant to § 176-22D(3).
A. Upon adoption of the resolution by the Township Committee, the
obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to its performance
guaranty, with respect to those approved improvements, except for that
portion adequately sufficient to secure completion or correction of the
improvements not yet approved; provided that 30% of the amount of the
performance guaranty posted may be retained to ensure completion
and acceptability of all improvements.
B. In the event that the obligor has made a cash deposit with the Township
as part of the performance guaranty, then any partial reduction granted
§ 176-25 INSURANCE § 176-26
168:395
§ 176-27. Conditions and acceptance of improvements;
maintenance guaranty.
The approval of any application for development by the Township shall in
no way be construed as acceptance of any street or drainage system or
other improvement. No improvements shall be accepted by the Township
Committee unless and until all of the following conditions have been met:
in the performance guaranty shall be applied to the cash deposit in the
same proportion as the original cash deposit bears to the full amount of
the performance guaranty.
C. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the obligor
shall complete or correct such improvements and, upon completion or
correction, shall notify the Township Committee as specified in
§ 176-25J and the same procedures shall be followed as in the first
instance.
D. Prior to the Township Committee approving the final reduction and
release of the performance guaranty, all easements and open space
specified on the final plat shall be conveyed to the Township, or such
other grantee, by deed containing a metes and bounds legal
description.
A. The final application for development shall have been approved by the
Planning Board and the developer shall have submitted an affidavit,
signed by a licensed New Jersey professional land surveyor, certifying
that all required monuments have been set in accordance with the Map
Filing Law111 and any approved subdivision plat.
B. The Township Engineer shall have certified, in writing, that the
improvements are completed and that they comply with the
requirements of this chapter and the terms of the final application for
development approved by the Board.
C. The owner shall have filed with the Township Committee a maintenance
guaranty in an amount equal to and not more than 15% of the cost of
installing the improvements, the cost to be determined by the Township
Engineer in accordance with § 176-22D(2). The maintenance guaranty
shall run for a period of two years. The procedures and requirements
governing such maintenance guaranty shall be identical with the
procedures and requirements for a performance guaranty set forth in
this chapter. The requirements for a maintenance guaranty may be
waived by the Township Committee only if the Township Engineer has
certified that the improvements have been in continuous use for not
less than two years from the date the Township Engineer certified
completion of such improvements and that during this period the owner
has maintained the improvements in a satisfactory manner; and
111. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq.
§ 176-26 WATERFORD CODE § 176-27
168:396
§ 176-28. Off-tract improvements.
D. An as-built plan and profiles of all utilities and roads (two black and
white prints to be sent to the Township Engineer, plus a Mylar copy and
two black and white prints to be sent to the Administrative Officer),
with certification signed and sealed by a New Jersey licensed
professional engineer as to the actual construction as approved by the
Township Engineer, shall be provided.
A. Required improvements Applicants shall be required, as a condition for
approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use to pay their
proportionate share of the cost providing reasonable and necessary
street improvements and/or water, sewerage and drainage facility
improvements, and any necessary easements therefor located outside
the property limits of the subject premises and necessitated or required
by construction or improvements within such subdivision or
development.
B. Improvements to be constructed at the expense of the developer. In
cases where the need for an off-tract improvement is reasonably
created by the proposed subdivision or development and where no
other property owners receive a special benefit thereby, as opposed to a
mere incidental benefit, the applicant may be required, as a condition of
approval and at the applicant's sole expense, to acquire and/or improve
lands outside the tract and dedicate such lands to the Township of
Waterford, Camden County, or the State of New Jersey, or in lieu
thereof, require the subdivider or developer to deposit with the
Township a sum of money sufficient to allow the Township to acquire
and/or improve such lands or conditions it may deem appropriate under
the circumstances.
C. General standards for other improvements. In cases where the need for
any off-tract improvement to be implemented now or in the future is
reasonably necessitated by the proposed development application, the
following criteria, together with the provisions or rules and regulations
of the Township of Waterford or any department thereof, may be
utilized in determining the developer's proportionate share of such
improvements:
(1) Sanitary sewers.
(a) The capacity and the design of the sanitary sewer system shall
be based on the Rules and Regulations for the Preparation and
Submission of Plans for Sewerage Systems, NJDEP, and all
Waterford Township Municipal Utility Authority sewer design
standards, including infiltration standards.
(b) The applicant's engineer shall provide the Township Engineer
with the existing and anticipated gallons per day flow ratio.
The proportionate share shall be computed as follows:
§ 176-27 INSURANCE § 176-28
168:397
Developer's Proportionate
Share
Total project cost
=
Development gpd
Total tributary gpd
(c) Specific plans for the improved system or the extended system
shall be prepared by the developer's engineer and submitted to
the Planning Board during the time period when the Board is
reviewing the proposed subdivision and/or site plan
application. The total cost for the improvement and the
developer's proportionate share shall be calculated by the
developer's engineer, submitted to the Board, reviewed by the
Township Engineer and approved by the Board, with any
reasonable adjustments to the estimated costs, at the time
when preliminary approval of the application for development
is granted.
(2) Roadways. For street widening, alignment, channelization of
intersections, construction of barriers, new or improved traffic
signalization, signs, curbs, sidewalks, trees, utility improvements
not covered elsewhere, the construction or reconstruction of new
or existing streets and other associated streets or traffic
improvements:
(a) The applicant's engineer shall provide the Township Engineer
with the existing and anticipated peak-hour volumes that
impact the off-tract areas in question, which volumes shall
analyze pedestrian, bicycle and motor vehicle traffic. The
proportionate share shall be computed as follows:
Developer's proportionate share
Total cost of roadway
improvement and/or extension
=
Additional peak-hour
traffic
Generated by the
Development
Future total peak-hour
traffic
(b) The applicant shall furnish a plan for the proposed off-tract
improvements, which shall include the estimated peak-hour
traffic generated by the proposed development. The ratio of
the peak-hour traffic generated by the proposed development
to the future peak-hour traffic shall form the basis of the
proportionate share.
(c) Specific plans for the roadway improvement and/or extension
shall be prepared by the developer's engineer and submitted to
the Planning Board during the time period when the Board is
reviewing the proposed subdivision and/or site plan
application. The total cost for the enlargement or improvement
and the developer's proportionate share of the total cost shall
§ 176-28 WATERFORD CODE § 176-28
168:398
be calculated by the developer's engineer, submitted to the
Board, reviewed by the Township Engineer and approved by
the Board, with any reasonable adjustments to the estimated
costs, at the time when preliminary approval of the application
for development is granted.
(3) Drainage improvements. For the stormwater and drainage
improvements, including the installation, relocation or replacement
of storm drains, culverts, catch basins, manholes, riprap or
improved drainage ditches and appurtenances thereto and the
relocation or replacement of other storm drainage facilities or
appurtenances associated therewith:
(a) The capacity and design of the drainage system to
accommodate stormwater runoff shall be computed by the
developer's engineer and approved by the Township Engineer
and shall be based on a method either described in Natural
Resources Conservation Service Technical Release 55, or the
NRCS National Engineering Handbook, Section 4.
(b) Specific plans for the enlargement or improvement of the
drainage facilities shall be prepared by the developer's
engineer and submitted to the Planning Board during the time
period when the Board is reviewing the proposed subdivision
and/or site plan application. The total cost for the enlargement
or improvement and the developer's proportionate share of the
total cost shall be calculated by the developer's engineer,
submitted to the Board, reviewed by the Township Engineer
and approved by the Board, with any reasonable adjustments
to the estimated costs, at the time when preliminary approval
of the application for development is granted.
(4) Water.
(a) Regarding all nonresidential developments and all planned
developments, and regarding subdivisions where public water
is accessible, water mains shall be constructed and connected
to the existing public water supply systems by the applicant, at
the applicant's sole expense, and in such a manner as to make
adequate water service available to each lot or building within
the development. The entire system shall be designed in
accordance with the requirements and standards of the local
and/or state agency having approval authority and shall be
subject to their approval. The system also shall be designed
with adequate capacity and sustained pressure and in a looped
system with no dead-end lines whenever possible. For
purposes of this section with reference to subdivisions,
"accessible" shall mean that the property to be developed is no
further from an existing water main than the number of feet
calculated by multiplying the number of lots in the proposed
subdivision by 200 or, in the case of subdivisions in which more
§ 176-28 INSURANCE § 176-28
168:399
than 15 lots are proposed, "accessible" shall mean the property
to be developed is within one mile of an existing water main.
(b) Where no public water is accessible to a subdivision as defined
above, water shall be furnished on an individual lot basis. If
wells are installed on each lot and the lot also contains its own
sewage dispose facilities, the well shall be drilled and cased to
a depth of at least 100 feet unless the well penetrates an
impermeable clay aquiclude, in which case the well shall be
cased to at least 50 feet. Well installation, sealing and testing
shall be in accordance with the New Jersey Standards for
Construction of Water Supply Systems in Realty Improvements
(Chapter 199 of the Public Laws of 1954), as amended, and in
accordance with the guidelines and resolutions adopted by the
Camden County Department of Health. Prior to being placed in
consumer use and prior to issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for any building served by the well, the developer
shall certify to the County Department of Health that he has
complied with all applicable state, county and local
regulations.
(c) Where no public water is accessible to a subdivision as defined
above, in addition to complying with § 176-101, the applicant
shall deposit funds in escrow with the Township of Waterford in
an amount equal to the cost of connecting the subdivision to an
existing public water supply system, calculated on the basis of
200 feet per unit. The escrow amount shall be calculated by
determining the costs of providing such water main extension
as charged by the public water utility for such service,
including but not limited to, materials installation, taxes,
appurtenances and surcharges, if any.
(d) In lieu of depositing the aforesaid escrow funds, the applicant
may, at his option, elect to install water main extensions in the
subdivision, even though public water may not be accessible as
defined above.
D. Escrow accounts. Where the proposed off-tract improvement is to be
undertaken at a future date, funds required for the improvement shall
be deposited to the credit of the Township of Waterford in a separate
account until such time as the improvement is constructed. In lieu of a
cash escrow account developers may present irrevocable letters of
credit, for the term required, in a form acceptable to the Township
Attorney. If the off-tract improvement is not begun within 10 years of
the deposit, all monies and interest shall be returned to the applicant or
the letter of credit, as the case may be, surrendered. An off-tract
improvement shall be considered begun if the Township of Waterford
has taken legal steps to provide for the design and financing of such
improvements.
E. Referral to Township Committee.
§ 176-28 WATERFORD CODE § 176-28
168:400
(1) Where applications for development suggest the need for off-tract
improvements, whether to be installed in conjunction with the
development in question or otherwise, the reviewing municipal
Board shall forward, to the Township Committee, a list and
description of all such improvements together with a request that
the Township Committee determine and advise the Board of the
procedure to be followed in construction or installation thereof,
including timing. The Board shall defer final action upon the
subdivision or site plan until receipt of the Township Committee's
determination or the expiration of 90 days after forwarding such
list and description, whichever occurs first.
(2) The Township Committee, within 90 days after receipt of said list
and description, shall determine and advise the reviewing
municipal Board of the procedure to be followed and advise the
Board with regard to suggested conditions of approval, if any, to
adequately protect the municipality.
(3) In the event the reviewing municipal Board is required by statute to
act upon the application prior to receipt of the Township
Committee's determination regarding construction of off-tract
improvements, it shall request the applicant consent to an
extension of time within which to act, of sufficient duration to
enable the Township Committee to make the aforesaid
determination. In the event the applicant is unwilling to consent to
the requested extension of time, the reviewing municipal Board
shall condition its approval upon the subsequent determination of
the Township Committee.
F. Implementation of off-tract improvements.
(1) In all cases, developers shall be required to enter into an
agreement or agreements with the Township Committee, regarding
off-tract improvements, within one year from the date of municipal
subdivision or site plan approval in accordance with this chapter
and any other ordinances, policies, rules and regulations of the
Township of Waterford, Camden County, and the State of New
Jersey, and any departments, authorities or agencies thereof.
Should an agreement or agreements not be entered into within the
aforesaid time period, or within such extended time as may be
granted by the Township Committee, the municipal subdivision
and/or site plan approval shall be deemed null and void.
(2) Where properties outside the subject tract will be benefited by the
improvements, the Township Committee may require the applicant
to escrow sufficient funds, in accordance with § 176-25A
hereinabove, to secure the developer's proportionate share of the
eventual cost of providing future structural improvements based
upon the standards expressed herein.
§ 176-28 INSURANCE § 176-28
168:401
(3) Where properties outside the subject tract will benefit by the
improvements, the Township Committee may determine that the
improvement(s) are to be installed by the municipality as a general
improvement, the cost of which is to be borne as a general expense.
If the Township Committee shall determine that the
improvement(s) shall be constructed or installed as a general
improvement, the Township Committee may direct the Planning
Board to estimate, with the aid of the Township Engineer, the
amount, if any, by which the total cost thereof will exceed the total
amount by which all properties, including the subject tract, will be
specifically benefited thereby, and the subdivider or developer shall
be liable to the municipality for such expense.
(4) If the Township Committee shall determine that the
improvement(s) shall be constructed or installed as a local
improvement, all or part of the cost is to be assessed against
properties benefited thereby in proportion to the benefits conferred
by the improvements in accordance with Chapter 56 of Title 40 of
the Statutes of the State of New Jersey. The developer may be
required to sign an agreement acknowledging and agreeing to this
procedure and, in addition, the Township Committee may require
that the developer shall be liable to the municipality, in addition to
the amount of any special assessments against the subject property
for benefits conferred by the improvement(s), the difference
between the total cost actually incurred and the total mount by
which all properties, including the subject tract, are specially
benefited by the improvement as the same may be determined by
the Board of Improvements Assessors.
(5) If the Township Committee shall determine that the improvements
are to be constructed or installed by the applicant, such agreement
may contain provisions, consistent with the standards in this
chapter and any other rules, regulations or policies of Waterford
Township, Camden County and the State of New Jersey, and any
departments, authorities or agencies thereof with jurisdiction
therein, whereby the applicant shall be reimbursed by the
municipality or otherwise, as a result of any participation fees,
connection charges, charges paid in regard to developer's
agreements with other applicants and the like, all in accordance
with an agreement between the Township Committee and the
applicant.
(6) In determining the procedures to be followed in the event of the
submission of a list and request from the reviewing municipal
Board, the Township Committee shall be guided by the following
standards and considerations:
(a) The local trends in regard to the probability of development
within the drainage or circulation area in question and the
intensity of such development;
§ 176-28 WATERFORD CODE § 176-28
168:402
(b) The risk and exposure that neighboring areas are subject to in
the event that the improvements to be required are delayed;
(c) The extent to which temporary measures may sufficiently
alleviate the condition or conditions requiring the off-tract
improvement and the likelihood that larger regional or
subregional facilities will be required in the future to serve the
development tract and the general area of the municipality in
which the same is located; and
(d) The extent to which the health, safety and welfare of the
residents, both current and future, depend upon the immediate
implementation of the off-tract improvement.
§ 176-28 INSURANCE § 176-28
168:403

ARTICLE VII
Development Application Review Procedures
All applicants are urged to review Article III, Pinelands Commission
Review and Procedures, § 176-14A through K inclusive, prior to
proceeding with submissions under this article.
§ 176-29. Informal workshop.
To assist with the application process, the Zoning Official and a
representative of the Commission are available to meet with developers
informally to discuss their plans and provide guidance. These meetings can
be scheduled in the Waterford Township Municipal Building on the third
Tuesday of each month. The following shall be submitted 15 days prior to
the meeting date:
§ 176-30. Responsibility during development application review.
The Planning Board's responsibilities are outlined in Article V.
A. When the developer requests the Municipal or Planning Board
Engineer be present, the required escrow must be deposited in
accordance with § 176-20D(6).
B. A statement listing the following information:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of applicant;
(2) Street address and/or lot and block numbers for the parcel to be
discussed;
(3) A brief description of the proposed development.
A. Simultaneous review. The Planning Board shall have the power to act
upon subdivision, conditional use, site plan or variance applications
simultaneously without the applicant making further application for
hearings. The longest time period for action by the Board, whether it is
for subdivision, conditional use, site plan or variance approval, shall
apply. Whenever approval of a conditional use or variance is requested
by the applicant in conjunction with a site plan or subdivision
application, notice of the hearing on the plan shall include reference to
the request for such conditional use or variance.
B. Exceptions. The Planning Board shall have the power to grant such
exceptions from the design and performance standards in accordance
with § 176-19N.
C. Administrative review.
(1) An application shall not be scheduled for hearing before the
Planning Board until deemed complete in accordance with this
section. Upon submittal, the Clerk of the Board shall provide a copy
§ 176-29 INSURANCE § 176-30
168:405
§ 176-31. Time of submittal.
All applications requiring Planning Board review must be filed no later than
30 days prior to the anticipated hearing date.
§ 176-32. Revisions to correct adverse effect.
If it is determined that any proposed development may create, either
directly or indirectly, an adverse effect on either the remainder of the
property being developed or nearby property, the Planning Board may
require the developer to revise the plat. Where the remaining portion
of the original tract is of sufficient size to be developed or subdivided
further, the developer shall be required to submit a sketch plat of the entire
remaining portion of the tract to indicate a feasible plan whereby the design
of the proposed development, together with subsequent subdivisions or
development, will not create, impose, aggravate or lead to any such adverse
effect.
§ 176-33. Conditions of approval.
Regulations of the development of land and the attachment of reasonable
conditions to development applications are an exercise of valid police power
delegated by the state to this Township. The applicant has the duty of
compliance with reasonable conditions laid down by the approving authority
for design, dedication of improvements, and the use of the land to conform
to the physical and economical development of the Township and to the
safety and general welfare of the future residents and/or owners in the
development and in the community at large. In addition to conditions
imposed by the Planning Board, the following conditions will be part of all
approvals:
of the application to the Zoning Official, who shall submit a report
of the Administrative Review Committee to the Planning Board.
The Clerk of the Board shall send a copy of the Review Committee's
report for major and minor site plan and/or subdivision applications
to the Board's engineer.
(2) Applications which are exempt from Planning Board review shall be
subject to administrative review.
A. When County Planning Board review or approval is required on a
subdivision or site plan, the approving Board shall condition the
approval it grants upon either timely receipt of a favorable report by the
County Board or approval by the County Board. If the County Board's
report is negative or attaches conditions, the original action by the
municipal Board shall be null and void and a new resolution shall be
adopted which considers the County Board's report or approval.
B. When review is required by the Soil Conservation District, or any
federal, state, county, or municipal agencies, the Board shall condition
the approval it grants upon such other required approvals.
§ 176-30 WATERFORD CODE § 176-33
168:406
§ 176-34. Completeness of applications.
C. No development involving the use of PDCs shall be approved until the
developer has provided the Commission and the Township with
evidence of his ownership of the requisite PDCs. The Township may
grant preliminary subdivision or site plan approval conditioned upon
such evidence being presented as a prerequisite to final subdivision or
site plan approval. For such a final subdivision or site plan, the
developer shall provide evidence of PDC ownership to secure the same
proportion of lots or residential units as was approved for PDC use in
the preliminary approval.
D. No approval shall be given under this chapter for subdivision, site plan
or planned development, unless the developer submits satisfactory
proof that no taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or
delinquent for the property for which application is made.
E. The plat of a final major site plan shall include all data required on the
preliminary major site plan drawn to incorporate all changes required
as a condition of preliminary approval.
F. For major subdivision and site plan approvals to be effective the
applicant shall produce evidence of a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy in accordance with § 176-21.
G. For applications requiring a certificate of filing from the Commission,
approvals will be subject to review by the Commission in accordance
with § 176-14H, I and J.
A. Interpretation of Chapter 176, Land Use, Development and Zoning. In
addition to the required fees as set forth in § 176-20D(3), the following
information shall be provided before an application is deemed
complete:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Article, section and subsection number of the chapter for which
interpretation is requested.
(3) If a specific site is in question, 10 copies of a survey showing block
and lot number, street address, zoning district, and existing
conditions of the property.
(4) In the absence of a survey, 10 copies of a written statement listing
block and lot number, street address, zoning district, and one set of
photographs depicting the existing conditions of the property.
(5) Signed escrow agreement.
B. Appeal of Zoning Official's decision. In addition to the required fees as
set forth in § 176-20D(4) the following information shall be provided
before an application is deemed complete:
§ 176-33 INSURANCE § 176-34
168:407
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Ten copies of a survey showing block and lot number, street
address, zoning district, and existing conditions of the property.
(3) In the absence of a survey, 10 copies of a written statement listing
block and lot number, street address, zoning district, and one set of
photographs depicting the existing conditions of the property.
(4) Ten copies of a written statement setting forth applicant's reasons
why the decision should be overturned.
(5) Ten copies of the Zoning Official's written decision.
(6) Signed escrow agreement.
C. Certification of preexisting use. In addition to the required fees as set
forth in § 176-20D(5), the following information shall be provided
before an application is deemed complete:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Ten copies of a survey showing block and lot number, street
address, zoning district, and existing conditions of the property.
(3) In the absence of a survey, 10 copies of a written statement listing
block and lot number, street address, zoning district, and one set of
photographs depicting the existing conditions of the property.
(4) Ten copies of a written statement setting forth applicant's reasons
why the use should be certified and documentation of proof that the
use was valid under the Waterford Township Land Use or Zoning
Ordinance in effect at the time the use was created.
(5) Signed escrow agreement.
D. Temporary use. In addition to the required fees as set forth in
§ 176-20F, the following information shall be provided before an
application is deemed complete:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Ten copies of a survey showing block and lot number, street
address, zoning district, and existing conditions of the property.
(3) In the absence of a survey, 10 copies of a written statement listing
block and lot number, street address, zoning district, and one set of
photographs depicting the existing conditions of the property.
(4) Ten copies of a written statement setting forth applicant's reasons
why the temporary use should be approved.
(5) Certification from the Township Tax Collector that taxes are
current.
§ 176-34 WATERFORD CODE § 176-34
168:408
(6) Signed escrow agreement.
E. Variance. In addition to the required fees as set forth in § 176-20E, the
following information shall be provided before an application is deemed
complete:
(1) Application form and 10 copies of a cover sheet outlining the
location, nature, proposed use and extent of variance(s) requested.
(2) Ten copies of a legible plot plan or survey to scale (not less than one
inch equals 100 feet) of the property indicating the relation of the
existing and/or proposed structure with adjoining property and
structures. In addition, this plan shall show, if any, sight triangles,
easements, buffer areas, and wetlands. [Amended 2-25-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-2]
(a) For variance relief sought under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c, the plot
plan or survey shall be dated no later than five years prior to
the date of the submitted application for variance relief.
(b) For variance relief sought under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, the plot
plan or survey shall be dated no later than two years prior to
the date of the submitted application for variance relief.
(3) Ten copies of a scaled drawing (not less than 1/4 inch equals one
foot) of the proposed addition or new construction for which a
variance is sought demonstrating how same is architecturally
consistent with the existing structure and/or the surrounding
area.112
(4) Certification from the Township Tax Collector that taxes are
current.
(5) Certified list of property owners, with copy of notice, affidavit of
personal or certified mail service, and proof of publication.
(6) For use variance applications only, 10 copies of a written statement
delineating the exact proposed use requested and reasons why the
use should be permitted.
(7) Signed escrow agreement.
(8) Signed checklist.
F. Time limit for decisions. The Planning Board shall render a decision in
accordance with the requirements of § 176-18K(5).
G. Power to reverse or modify decision of Zoning Official. In accordance
with § 176-18K(2), the Planning Board may reverse or modify a decision
of the Zoning Official when an appeal is filed under § 176-34B above.
112. Editor's Note: Original § 176-34.5(4), regarding copies not prepared by professional
engineers or architects, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
2-25-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-2.
§ 176-34 INSURANCE § 176-35
168:409
§ 176-35. Planning Board applications.
A. Conditional use review. Conditional uses listed in this chapter and as
defined in § 176-9 are subject to the review procedures specified
herein.
B. Subdivision review. All subdivisions, as defined in § 176-9 (see
definitions of "major subdivision," "minor subdivision" and "subdivision
or resubdivision"), are subject to the review procedures specified
herein.
C. Site plan review. Review by the Planning Board shall be required for
minor site plans and major site plans as defined in § 176-9 (see
definitions of "site plan, minor" and "site plan, major," in Subsections C
and D of the definition of "site plan)," as well as proposals which do not
meet the requirements as defined in § 176-9 for exempt site plans and
administrative site plans (see definitions of "site plan, exempt" and "site
plan, administrative," in Subsections A and B of the definition of "site
plan"). No construction permit shall be issued for any new structure or
for any addition or alteration to an existing structure and no certificate
of occupancy shall be issued for any change of use of an existing
structure until the site plan has been reviewed and approved by the
appropriate Board, except that:
(1) A construction permit for a single-family detached dwelling unit or
a two-family dwelling unit shall not require site plan approval.
(2) A change of use from one permitted category of nonresidential use
to another permitted category of nonresidential use may not
require site plan approval if:
(a) The Administrative Review Committee certifies to the Board, in
writing, that the existing site development meets the
requirements of this chapter for the new use category; and
(b) The new use category does not require an increase in the
number of required parking spaces; and
(c) The Planning Board concurs with the findings of the
Administrative Review Committee.
(3) Permitted accessory buildings to residential and agricultural/
horticultural uses shall not require site plan approval, but may be
subject to administrative review.
(4) Building alterations.
(a) Building alterations shall not require site plan approval if the
following conditions apply:
[1] There is no change in use;
[2] There are no additional parking spaces required;
§ 176-35 WATERFORD CODE § 176-35
168:410
[3] No more than 2,500 square feet of additional building area
is proposed;
[4] No variance or design waivers are required;
[5] There is no major change in circulation proposed, such as
drive-through windows, ingress or egress drives, changes
in internal circulation, loading or unloading, delivery or
pickup of goods and services, or trash collection; and
[6] There are no major changes in a significant site facility or
improvement, such as a drainage facility, buffer or
landscaping features and the like.
[7] The disturbance of ground area is 5,000 square feet or
less.
(b) Such applications shall require administrative review. A
certificate of filing from the Commission shall be required if
the alteration is not to be on an already impervious surface,
exceeds 1,000 square feet of additional space, is not served by
public sewers, or will disturb more than 1,500 square feet of
land.
(5) An applicant may elect to file for preliminary and final site plan
approval simultaneously to expedite the review process. The site
plan shall be prepared according to the requirements stipulated for
final approval. Developers electing to by-pass preliminary approval
stage are doing so at the risk of added expense if changes in design
are required.
D. Informal review by the Planning Board.
(1) At the request of a developer, the Planning Board shall hear one
informal presentation of a conceptual plan for a development for
which the developer intends to prepare and submit an application
for development. The information to be included on a sketch to
scale for a conceptual plan shall be sufficient to enable the
Planning Board and the applicant to comment upon design
concepts, such as building location, ingress and egress, parking,
and major natural features that will have to be recognized or may
influence certain design criteria and the applicant's basic intent for
water, sewerage and storm drainage facilities.
(2) The developer desiring to have a conceptual plan informally
reviewed by the Planning Board shall submit the required
information to the Clerk of the Board at least 20 days prior to the
meeting. The Clerk of the Board shall thereafter confirm to the
developer that the matter is scheduled, setting forth the time and
place of the meeting. No request for informal review shall take
preference on the agenda over, or prior to, a formally submitted
application for development for which time limits are set pursuant
§ 176-35 INSURANCE § 176-35
168:411
§ 176-36. Submission for conditional use permit.
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., and the Planning Board may, prior to
said review, establish a time limit for said informal review.
(3) Submittal requirements:
(a) The developer shall be required to pay the required fees as set
forth in § 176-20D(1) or (2).
(b) Nine copies of the conceptual plan.
(c) Signed escrow agreement if applicable.
(d) Signed checklist.
(4) The developer shall not be bound by any conceptual plan for which
review is requested, and the Planning Board shall not be bound by
any such review. No motion or vote shall take place and no
resolution shall be adopted concerning an informal review.
A. Procedure for submittal.
(1) The applicant shall submit to the Clerk of the Board no later than
30 days preceding the month of the anticipated hearing date:
(a) The fees in accordance with § 176-20O, exclusive of any
additional fees for a subdivision or site plan application
required in conjunction with the application for conditional use
permit.
(b) All other items as required for minor or major site plan
submittal, as the case may be, under § 176-37, 176-40 or
176-42.
(2) The Clerk of the Board shall assign an application number. Once an
application has been assigned a number, that number shall appear
on all papers, maps, plats or plans, review reports and other
documents for processing in conjunction with the application.
B. Site plan required. All conditional uses shall require site plan review
and be subject to the same requirements of minor or major site plan
approval, as the case may be.
C. Review of conditional use application. In addition to the general
requirements of minor or major site plan review, as the case may be, the
Board shall review information regarding the number of employees or
users of the property and shall give due consideration to all reasonable
elements which would affect the public health, welfare, safety, comfort
and convenience of the community. The uses for which conditional use
permits are granted shall be deemed to be permitted uses in their
respective districts, and each conditional use shall be considered as an
individual case. In all requests for approval of conditional use, the
§ 176-35 WATERFORD CODE § 176-36
168:412
§ 176-37. Submission of minor subdivision plats and minor site
plans.
burden of proof shall be on the applicant. Prior to making its decision,
the Board shall be satisfied that the conditional use is reasonably
necessary for the convenience of the public in the location proposed.
A. Procedure for submittal.
(1) The applicant shall submit to the Clerk of the Board no later than
30 days preceding the month of the anticipated hearing date:
(a) The fees in accordance with § 176-20G or 176-20K;
(b) A signed escrow agreement;
(c) A certificate of filing from the Commission;
(d) Twelve copies of the minor plat or plan;
(e) Three completed copies of the appropriate application, which
includes application for any requested design waivers or
variances;
(f) Three copies of any applicable checklists attached to this
chapter with the information required therein, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3;
(g) When required under § 176-37B(3)(v), four copies of the
environmental impact statement and any other requested
studies and reports in accordance with Article X;
(h) Three copies of any protective covenants, easements and/or
deed restrictions applicable to the subject site, whether
recorded or unrecorded;
(i) Certification from the Township Tax Collector that taxes are
current.
(2) The Clerk of the Board shall assign an application number. Once an
application has been assigned a number, that number shall appear
on all papers, maps, plats or plans, review reports and other
documents for processing in conjunction with the application.
B. Details required for minor subdivision plats and minor site plans.
(1) Each minor plat or plan shall be drawn by a professional engineer
and/or land surveyor licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey
and shall bear the signature, seal, license number and telephone
number of such professional; provided, however, that all
engineering data shall be signed and sealed by a professional
engineer and all surveying data shall be signed and sealed by a
professional land surveyor.
§ 176-36 INSURANCE § 176-37
168:413
(2) Each submission shall be drawn at an appropriate scale not less
than one inch equals 100 feet for minor subdivisions and one inch
equals 50 feet for minor site plans and shall be submitted on one of
the following standard sheet sizes: 8 1/2 inches by 13 inches; 15
inches by 21 inches; 24 inches by 36 inches; or 39 inches by 42
inches. With the exception of the 8 1/2 inches by 13 inches size,
sheets shall be folded into eighths with the title block revealed. If
more than one sheet is required to show the entire subdivision or
site plan, a separate composite map shall be drawn showing the
entire subdivision or site plan and the sheets on which the various
sections are shown and each detail sheet shall include a key map
showing its relation to the whole tract.
(3) In addition to meeting the requirements of § 176-14B, each minor
plat or plan shall show the following information as applicable to a
minor subdivision or site plan, unless the municipal reviewing
agency determines, upon request of the applicant, that such
information either is unnecessary or inapplicable to the particular
subdivision or site plan and can be waived:
(a) A key map with north arrow showing the entire tract and its
relation to the surrounding area, including the names of
principal roads, at a scale of one inch equals no more than
2,000 feet.
(b) Title block in accordance with the rules governing title block
for professional engineers (N.J.S.A. 45:8-36) including:
[1] Name of subdivision or development, Township of
Waterford, Camden County, with each sheet specifically
titled with appropriately descriptive words;
[2] Name, title, address and telephone number of subdivider
or developer;
[3] Name, title, address, telephone number, signature, seal
and license number of the professional or professionals
who prepared the plat or plans;
[4] Name, title and address of the owner or owners of record;
[5] Scale (written and graphic);
[6] Date of original preparation and of each subsequent
revision thereof and a list of the specific revisions entered
on each sheet; and
[7] Space for the application number.
(c) Certification that the applicant is the owner of the land or his
properly authorized agent, or that the owner has given his
consent under an option agreement.
§ 176-37 WATERFORD CODE § 176-37
168:414
(d) If the applicant is a corporation or a partnership, the names
and addresses of all partners, or the names and addresses of
all stockholders owning 10% or more of any class of stock of
the corporation.
(e) Approval signature and date lines for the Chairman and
Secretary in all cases, and the Township Engineer in the case
of a minor subdivision plat to be filed, with the signature block
as required by the Map Filing Law and with the location for
signature placed such that the professional seal may be placed
over the signature when requested.
(f) Acreage figures to the nearest tenth of an acre (both with and
without areas within public rights-of-way).
(g) Existing block and lot numbers of the lot, or lots, to be
subdivided or developed as they appear on the Township Tax
Map, and proposed block and lot numbers as provided by the
Township Tax Assessor.
(h) Tract boundary line (heavy solid line).
(i) Zoning districts affecting the tract, including district names
and all area and bulk requirements, with a comparison to the
proposed development.
(j) Certification from the Township Tax Collector that taxes are
current.
(k) The location of existing and proposed property lines (with
bearings, distances, and area and setback lines), streets and
driveways, sight triangles for streets and driveways, structures
(with their numerical dimensions, shortest distance
measurement between any existing and proposed buildings
and existing or proposed lot lines, and an indication as to
whether existing structures will be retained or removed),
parking spaces, loading areas, railroads, bridges, culverts,
drain pipes, and any natural features, both within the tract and
within 300 feet of its boundary.
(l) Existing and proposed uses, existing and proposed wooded
areas, and isolated trees with a diameter of six inches or more
measured five feet above ground level.
(m) The location and width of all existing and proposed utility
easements, the use for which they are intended to be limited,
and the manner in which the easements will be controlled.
(n) Proposed buffer and landscaped areas, including any deedrestricted
buffer, if required.
[1] The location and character of existing vegetation,
including predominant vegetation types.
§ 176-37 INSURANCE § 176-37
168:415
[2] For minor site plans only, the location and identification of
existing vegetation outside of wooded areas and an
indication as to whether existing vegetation is to remain or
to be removed and a planting schedule of proposed
landscaping. Landscaping and planting plans shall
incorporate the elements set forth in § 176-72.
(o) All wetlands, swamps, ponds, streams, intermittent or
otherwise, rivers, lakes and lands subject to flooding within the
tract and within 300 feet thereof, based on field assessment
and Natural Resources Conservation Service data, including:
[1] Direction of flow.
[2] Location of all drainage structures.
[3] Floodplain limits.
[4] Wetlands.
[5] Swamps.
(p) Existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals in areas
with less than 10% slope and two-foot intervals in areas with
10% to 20% slopes. Properties containing slopes in more than
one category shall have those contours at ten-foot intervals
drawn at twice the width as either the two-foot or five-foot
contours. Elevations shall be related to a benchmark noted on
the plan and be based on the USGS mean sea level datum.
(q) The name of all adjacent property owners and adjacent block
and lot numbers as they appear on the most recent tax list
prepared by the Clerk of the appropriate Board.
(r) For minor site plans only:
[1] Lighting details in accordance with the standards of this
chapter.
[2] Freestanding sign details showing location and
dimensions.
[3] Circulation and parking details in accordance with the
standards of this chapter including, sight triangles at
intersections, driveways and aisles; parking spaces;
ingress and egress; loading areas; sidewalks; curbs;
railroad ties; handicapped parking and curb cuts; and
improvement details for the above.
[4] Drainage calculations and any proposed drainage
improvements, including full details.
(s) When a common drive is proposed, the applicant shall show:
§ 176-37 WATERFORD CODE § 176-37
168:416
[1] Sight triangle easement.
[2] Limits for cross easements.
[3] Materials to be used for construction of the common drive.
(t) Concerning minor subdivisions only, existing and proposed
monuments.
(u) Proposals for soil erosion and sediment control as required by
N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and soil limits and information based on
the Camden County Soil Survey prepared by the USDA.
(v) If wetlands are present on or within 300 feet of the subject site,
applications shall be accompanied by an environmental impact
statement in accordance with § 176-107. The applicant may
request a waiver of this requirement, either in whole or in part,
provided that the applicant states, in writing, the basis for the
waiver request. The Board shall act upon the requested waiver
prior to the application being deemed complete.
(w) No minor subdivision or site plan involving any street's
additional right-of-way width as specified in the Master Plan or
Official Map and the street requirements of this chapter shall
be approved unless such additional right-of-way, either along
one or both sides of said street, as applicable, shall be granted
to the Township or other appropriate governmental agency.
(x) Plans of proposed improvements and utility layouts, including
sewers, storm drains and water lines, and feasible connections
to gas, telephone and electrical utility systems. If private
utilities are proposed, they shall comply fully with all
Township, county, state and federal regulations. If service will
be provided by an existing utility company, in lieu of detailed
plans, a letter from that company stating that service will be
available before occupancy will be sufficient. Additionally,
letters from the appropriate county and state agencies
granting approval for the extension of utility services under
their respective jurisdiction shall be submitted with the
application.
[1] The applicant shall show any existing wells and/or septic
systems.
[2] The applicant shall show proposed septic system and/or
well locations.
[3] The applicant shall show the location, size, type and
capacity of the sanitary facility and the results of soil
boring and percolation tests in accordance with N.J.S.A.
58:11-23 et seq.
§ 176-37 INSURANCE § 176-37
168:417
§ 176-38. Action on minor subdivision and/or minor site plan
applications.
[4] The applicant shall show proposed public water and/or
sewer connections.
[5] When public sewer is proposed, the applicant shall supply
one boring for each lot if soil maps indicate that the
seasonal high-water table may exceed this chapter's
standards for a buildable lot.
(y) No minor subdivision or site plan involving any corner lot shall
be approved unless a sight triangle easement shall be granted
as specified in this chapter.
(z) Deed descriptions (including metes and bounds), easements,
covenants, restrictions and roadway dedications shall be
submitted for approval and required signatures as required by
the Map Filing Law prior to filing with the County Recording
Officer. Locations for signatures must be placed so that seals
may be impressed over signatures where required.
(aa) Evidence that a duplicate copy of the application for minor
development has been filed with any other agency (including
but not limited to the Camden County Planning Board, Camden
County Board of Health, and Camden County Soil Conservation
District) having jurisdiction over any aspect of the proposed
development.
(bb) A checklist signed by the applicant's engineer/architect/land
surveyor.
(cc) For applications for development proposing to be served by
public water and/or sewer service, certification from the
County and Municipal Utilities Authorities that such public
water and/or public sewer service is available.
A. Determination of completeness.
(1) The application shall be reviewed for the purpose of determining,
within 45 days of its submission, whether it is complete.
(a) If an application is found to contain all of the information
required by a checklist adopted as part of this chapter, the
Administrative Review Committee shall certify that said
application is complete and direct the application to the
appropriate Board.
§ 176-37 WATERFORD CODE § 176-38
168:418
(b) If an application is found to lack some of the information
required by the checklist113 adopted as part of this chapter, the
Administrative Review Committee shall either:
[1] Cause the applicant to be notified, in writing, that the
application is incomplete, specifying the deficiencies; or
[2] If waivers of checklist items have been specifically
requested by the applicant, immediately refer the
application to the appropriate Board which shall act on the
request for waivers within 45 days of application
submission. If the Board reasonably concludes that the
missing items of information are not necessary to make an
informed decision, the Board may waive the requirement
that such items be supplied as a prerequisite for
completeness and certify the application is complete. If
waivers are granted, the application is complete as long as
all other requirements for submission have been satisfied.
If waivers are denied, the application is incomplete until
the missing information is submitted. At that time, the
application is complete if all other requirements for
submission have been satisfied.
(c) An applicant who has been notified that his application is
incomplete may request waiver of one or more of the
submission requirements set forth in § 176-37B and such
request shall be the subject of a resubmitted application
treated as a new submission, which shall be acted upon in
accordance with § 176-38A(1)(a) and (b) above.
(d) In the event the Administrative Review Committee fails to act
pursuant to § 176-38A(1)(a) or (b) above within 45 days of the
date of submission, said application shall be deemed complete
as of the 46th day following its submission.
(2) On the date the application is certified complete, or on the 46th day
following submission in the event the Administrative Review
Committee fails to make a determination of completeness, as the
case may be, the applicable time period within which the Board
must act upon the application shall commence. In any case, the
applicant is obliged to prove that he is entitled to approval of the
application. The Board may subsequently require correction of any
information found in error, may require submission of additional
information not specified in this chapter, and/or may require
revisions, all as are reasonably necessary to make an informed
decision whether the requirements for approval have been met;
provided, however, that the application shall not be deemed
incomplete for lack of any such additional information or revisions.
113. Editor's Note: Said checklist is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 176-38 INSURANCE § 176-38
168:419
B. Distribution of documents. Immediately after certification of
completeness, the application documents shall be distributed:
(1) The Planning Board shall receive the Administrative Review
Committee's report, nine copies of the minor plat or plan, the
application, any protective covenants, easements and/or deed
restrictions, and any environmental impact statement.
(2) The Planning Board Solicitor shall receive the Administrative
Review Committee's report, one copy of the minor plat or plan, the
application, any protective covenants, easements and/or deed
restrictions, and any environmental impact statement.
(3) The Planning Board Engineer shall receive the Administrative
Review Committee's report, one copy of the minor plat or plan, the
application, any protective covenants, easements and/or deed
restrictions, and any environmental impact statement.
(4) At the direction of the Planning Board, additional copies of the
minor plat or plan and/or other items of submitted information shall
be sent to other Township, county or state agencies and/or to other
professional consultants as may be designated by the Board.
(5) It shall be the applicant's responsibility, unless specifically
provided otherwise in this chapter, to submit the required
application to any agency (including but not limited to Camden
County Planning Board, Camden County Department of Health,
Camden County Soil Conservation District, the Commission and the
NJDEP) having jurisdiction over any aspect of the proposed
development.
C. Notification to Pinelands Commission.
(1) Within seven days following a determination of completeness of an
application for development, or any change to any application for
development which was previously filed, notice of such application
shall be given by the Township, in writing, to the Commission in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.18(b) and § 176-14G(1).
(2) Notice of any final determination approving or denying any
application for development shall be given to the Commission by
the Township, by certified mail, within five days following such
determination in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.18(e) and
§ 176-14G(3).
D. Tolling of time.
(1) In the case of minor subdivision and site plan applications, approval
or denial by the Board must be within 45 days after the application
has been certified complete or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Board to act within the
prescribed time period shall constitute approval of the application,
§ 176-38 WATERFORD CODE § 176-38
168:420
provided that any minor subdivision or minor site plan application
which includes any requested variance pursuant to § 176-30A
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60) shall be acted upon within 120 days or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
(2) The Planning Board shall take action on a minor subdivision or site
plan application under its jurisdiction in the time prescribed in
Subsection D(1) above unless such minor subdivision or site plan
application is being considered by the Planning Board
simultaneously with an application for use variance in accordance
with § 176-18H(12) (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d), in which case the
Planning Board shall act upon all aspects of the application within
120 days after the application has been certified complete, or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Failure of the Board to act within the prescribed time period shall
constitute approval of the application.
(3) The Planning Board's engineer shall read any written reports
submitted concerning the application and shall review the
submission to ascertain its conformity with the requirements of this
chapter. The engineer shall perform a detailed review of the
application and issue a written report, with his recommendations,
to the appropriate Board and the applicant at least seven days prior
to the designated hearing date.
(4) All hearings held on applications for minor site plan approval shall
require public notice of the hearing. The Board shall set the date,
time and place for the public hearing and shall inform the applicant
of this at least 15 days prior to said hearing date. Notice of the
hearing shall be given by the applicant at least 10 days prior to the
date of the hearing. Alternate design submissions will not be
accepted; only one plat design will be accepted for public hearing.
(5) For any application that is heard by the Planning Board and
continued for additional studies, reports, plans, or revisions to
previously submitted material, the new or revised material must be
submitted to the Township at least 21 days prior to the hearing at
which the new material is to be considered.
(6) All conditions for a minor subdivision or minor site plan approval
shall be complied with within 90 days of the meeting at which
conditional approval was granted, otherwise the conditional
approval shall lapse. Any post approval plan revisions shall be
reviewed by the Board Engineer to verify conformity with the
resolution of approval within 30 days after receipt of the revised
submission.
(7) The Clerk of the Board shall forward the applicant a copy of the
resolution, adopted in accordance with § 176-19K, within 10 days
of its adoption by the Board.
E. Required changes and revisions.
§ 176-38 INSURANCE § 176-38
168:421
(1) Any proposed application for development determined by the
Planning Board that creates, imposes, aggravates or leads to the
possibility of adverse effects upon either the property in question
or upon any adjacent properties may be required to be revised to
remove any adverse effects prior to further review or approval by
the Board, in accordance with § 176-32.
(2) If plan revisions are required after a Board hearing and decision,
seven complete sets should be submitted to the Township.
(3) Any substantial plan revision required by an outside reviewing
agency, including the County Planning Board or Commission, after
final action by the Planning Board will require a new substantive
review. Whenever a development application which has been the
subject of a public hearing has been substantially amended for the
layout of improvements or impact on adjoining properties, it shall
be proceeded upon as a new application.
F. Action following approval or disapproval.
(1) Minor site plans and minor subdivision plats shall not be signed
until all conditions are incorporated on the plan or plat.
(2) When a minor subdivision or minor site plan is approved by the
Board, a notation indicating the application's classification and
determination, including the date of the Board's action, shall be
made on at least six prints of the plat or plan and any related deed
descriptions to be filed with the County Recording Officer and such
plat or plan and related deed descriptions shall be signed by the
Board Engineer and the Chairman and Secretary of the Board, or
the Acting Chairman or Secretary where either or both may have
been absent. No further approval of the application shall be
required.
(3) After the final development plans have been approved and signed
by the Board Engineer and by the Chairman and Secretary of the
Board, or Acting Chairman or Secretary where either or both may
have been absent, the plans will be stamped approved and
distributed to:
(a) Township Engineer (In the case of subdivisions only, a Mylar
map of the plat drawn to the Tax Map scale of one inch equals
100 feet or one inch equals 400 feet, as directed by the Board
Engineer).
(b) Township Construction Official.
(c) Township Tax Assessor.
(d) The Commission.
(e) The applicant.
§ 176-38 WATERFORD CODE § 176-38
168:422
(f) Such other Township, county or state agencies and officials as
directed by the Board.
G. Filing required.
(1) Within 190 days from the date on which the resolution of municipal
approval of a minor subdivision is adopted by the Board, a map
drawn in compliance with the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et
seq., or deed description, properly drafted and signed by the
Chairman and Secretary of the Board, or the Acting Chairman or
Secretary where either or both may have been absent, shall be filed
by the applicant with the County Recording Officer, provided that if
an applicant elects to file a deed, such deed shall be accompanied
with a photographically reduced copy of the approved plat. Unless
minor subdivision plats are filed within the 190 days or an
extension for filing is granted by the Board, the approval shall
expire and will require Board approval through a new
application.114
(2) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-54, the County Recording
Officer shall notify the approving authority of the filing of any plat
within seven days of the filing.
(3) The Planning Board may extend the one-hundred-ninety-day period
for filing a minor subdivision plat or deed if the developer proves to
the Board's reasonable satisfaction that:
(a) The developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly,
from filing because of delays in obtaining legally required
approvals from other governmental or quasi-governmental
entities; and
(b) The developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
required approvals.
(4) The length of the extension shall be equal to the period of delay
caused by the wait for the required approvals, as determined by the
Planning Board. The developer may apply for the extension either
before or after the anticipated expiration date.
H. Effect of approval.
(1) The approval of the Township shall not be effective and no
development shall be carried out prior to a determination by the
Commission, pursuant to §§ 176-14H, I and J.
(2) The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions,
whether conditional or otherwise, shall not be changed for a period
of two years after the date of approval by the Board of a minor site
plan, or after the date on which the resolution of approval is
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-38 INSURANCE § 176-38
168:423
§ 176-39. Limit of minor subdivisions.
Minor subdivisions from a parcel in residential zones shall be limited to
one such approval by the Municipal Planning Board in a three-year period
commencing with the date of adoption of this chapter and thereafter from
the date of such minor subdivision approval.
§ 176-40. Submission of preliminary major subdivision plats and
preliminary major site plans.
adopted by the Board for a minor subdivision, provided that the
approved minor subdivision shall have been duly recorded. The
Planning Board shall grant an extension of this period for a period
determined by the Board but not exceeding one year from what
would otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer proves to
the Board's reasonable satisfaction that the developer was barred
or prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the
development because of delays in obtaining legally required
approvals from other governmental entitles and that the developer
applied promptly for and diligently pursued the approvals. A
developer shall apply for this extension before:
(a) What would otherwise be the expiration date; or
(b) The 91st day after the date on which the developer receives the
last of the legally required approvals from the other
governmental entities, whichever occurs first.
A. Procedure for submittal.
(1) The applicant shall submit to the Clerk of the Board no later than
30 days preceding the month of the anticipated hearing date:
(a) The fees in accordance with § 176-20H or 176-20L;
(b) A signed escrow agreement;
(c) A certificate of filing from the Commission;
(d) Twelve copies of the preliminary major plat or plan;
(e) Three completed copies of the appropriate application, which
includes application for any requested design waivers or
variances;
(f) Three copies of any applicable checklists115 attached to this
chapter with the information required therein, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3;
115. Editor's Note: Checklists are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 176-38 WATERFORD CODE § 176-40
168:424
(g) Four copies of the environmental impact statement and any
other required studies and reports in accordance with Article
X;
(h) Three copies of any protective covenants, easements and/or
deed restrictions applicable to the subject site, whether
recorded or unrecorded;
(i) Certification from the Township Tax Collector that taxes are
current.
(2) The Clerk of the Board shall issue an application number. Once an
application has been assigned a number, that number shall appear
on all papers, maps, plats or plans and other documents for
processing in conjunction with the application.
B. Details required for preliminary major subdivision plats and
preliminary major site plans.
(1) Each preliminary plat or plan shall be drawn by a professional
engineer and/or land surveyor licensed to practice in the State of
New Jersey and shall bear the signature, seal, license number and
telephone number of such professional; provided, however, that all
engineering data shall be signed and sealed by a professional
engineer and all surveying data shall be signed and sealed by a
professional land surveyor.
(2) Each submission shall be drawn at an appropriate scale not less
than one inch equals 100 feet for major subdivision plats and one
inch equals 50 feet for major site plans and shall be submitted on
one of four of the following standard sheet sizes - 8 1/2 inches by 13
inches; 15 inches by 21 inches; 24 inches by 36 inches; or 39 inches
by 42 inches. Larger sheets shall be folded into eighths with the
title block revealed. If more than one sheet is required to show the
entire subdivision or site plan, a separate composite map shall be
drawn showing the entire subdivision or site plan and the sheets on
which the various sections are shown, and each detail sheet shall
include a key map showing its relation to the whole tract.
(3) In addition to meeting the requirements of § 176-14E, each
preliminary major plat or plan shall show the following information
as applicable to a major subdivision or site plan, unless the
municipal reviewing agency determines, upon request of the
applicant, that such information either is unnecessary or
inapplicable to the particular subdivision or site plan and can be
waived:
(a) A key map with North arrow showing the entire tract and its
relation to the surrounding area, at a scale of one inch equals
no more than 2,000 feet.
§ 176-40 INSURANCE § 176-40
168:425
(b) Title block in accordance with the rules governing title block
for professional engineers (N.J.S.A. 45:8-36), including:
[1] Name of subdivision or development, Township of
Waterford, Camden County, with each sheet specifically
titled with appropriately descriptive words;
[2] Name, title, address and telephone number of subdivider
or developer;
[3] Name, title, address, telephone number, signature, seal
and license number of the professional or professionals
who prepared the plat or plans;
[4] Name, title and address of the owner or owners of record;
[5] North arrow;
[6] Scale (written and graphic);
[7] Date of original preparation and of each subsequent
revision thereof and a list of the specific revisions entered
on each sheet; and
[8] Space for the application number.
(c) Certification that the applicant is the owner of the land or his
properly authorized agent, or that the owner has given his
consent under an option agreement.
(d) If the applicant is a corporation or a partnership, the names
and addresses of all partners, or the names and addresses of
all stockholders owning 10% or more of any class of stock of
the corporation.
(e) Approval signature and date lines for the Chairman and
Secretary in all cases, and the Township Engineer in the case
of a major subdivision plat to be filed, with the signature block
as required by the Map Filing Law and with the location for
signature placed such that the professional seal may be placed
over the signature when requested.
(f) Acreage figures to the nearest tenth of an acre (both with and
without areas within public rights-of-way).
(g) The names, addresses and lot and block numbers of all
property owners within 200 feet of the extreme limits of the
tract as shown on the most recent tax list prepared by the
Clerk of the Planning Board.
(h) Existing tax sheet number and existing block and lot numbers
of the lot, or lots, to be subdivided or developed as they appear
on the Township Tax Map, and proposed block and lot numbers
as provided by the Township Tax Assessor.
§ 176-40 WATERFORD CODE § 176-40
168:426
(i) Tract boundary line (heavy solid line). Where a portion of the
tract is to be developed, the site in relation to all remaining
contiguous lands in the applicant's or owner's ownership.
(j) Zoning districts and lines affecting the tract, including district
names and all area and bulk requirements, with a comparison
to the proposed development.
(k) Certification from the Township Tax Collector that taxes are
current.
(l) The location of natural and man-made features and
improvements both within the tract and within 300 feet of its
boundary.
(m) The proposed location of all plantings, with a legend listing the
botanical and common names, the sizes at the time of planting,
the total quantity of each plant, and the location of each plant
keyed to the plan or plat. Landscaping and planting plans shall
incorporate the elements set forth in § 176-72.
(n) Existing and proposed streams, lakes, ponds, wetlands and
wetland buffer areas accompanied by the following data:
[1] When a running stream with a drainage area of 1/2 square
mile or greater is proposed for alteration, improvement or
relocation or when a structure or fill is proposed over,
under, in or along a running stream, evidence of approval,
required alterations, lack of jurisdiction, or denial of the
improvement by the New Jersey Division of Water Policy
and Supply shall be supplied.
[2] Cross-sections and profiles of watercourses at an
approximate scale showing the extent of the flood fringe
area, top of bank, normal water level and bottom
elevations at the following locations:
[a] At all watercourses within or adjacent to the
development and at any point where a watercourse
crosses a boundary of the development (cross-sections
and profiles);
[b] At fifty-foot intervals for a distance of 300 feet
upstream and downstream of any existing or proposed
culvert or bridge within the development (cross
section).
[c] At a maximum of one-hundred-foot intervals, but at no
less than two locations, along each watercourse which
runs through or adjacent to the development (cross
sections).
§ 176-40 INSURANCE § 176-40
168:427
[d] When ditches, streams, brooks or watercourses are to
be altered, improved or relocated, the method of
stabilizing slopes and measures to control erosion and
siltation during construction, as well as typical
sections and profiles shall be shown on the plan or
accompany it.
[3] The total upstream acreage in the drainage basin of any
watercourse running through or adjacent to a
development, including the distance and average slope
upstream to the basin ridge line, where applicable. For
flowing streams, small-scale watershed maps developed
from USGS sheets shall be submitted.
[4] The total acreage in the drainage basin to the nearest
downstream drainage structure and the acreage in that
portion of the development which drains to the structure,
including the distance and average slope downstream to
the structure and final disposition of the surface waters.
[5] The location and extent of all existing or proposed
drainage and conservation easements and stream
encroachment lines.
[6] The location, extent and water level elevation of all
existing or proposed lakes or ponds on or within 300 feet
of the development.
[7] When the property to be subdivided or developed is
located along a stream or lake, the applicant shall submit
stream test results as specified in § 176-91.
(o) Drainage facilities shall comply with the stormwater runoff
provisions of this chapter. The location, construction details,
and type of adequate drainage provisions shall be designed to
reasonably reduce and minimize exposure to flood damage.
Plans and computations for any storm drainage systems shall
include the following:
[1] All existing or proposed storm sewer lines, with plans and
profiles, within or adjacent to the tract showing size and
slope of the lines, the pipe material type, the strength class
or thickness, direction of flow and the location of each
catch basin, inlet, manhole, culvert and headwall.
[2] The location and extent of any proposed dry wells,
groundwater recharge basins, detention basins, flood
control devices, sedimentation basins or other water
conservation devices.
[3] The results of soil borings and percolation tests performed
in any locations listed in Subsection B(3)(o)[2] above.
§ 176-40 WATERFORD CODE § 176-40
168:428
[4] A map drawn to scale at a minimum of one inch equals 100
feet showing the contributing area to each inlet or cross
drain.
[5] Computations.
(p) Existing and proposed contours, with intervals of one foot. All
contour information shall refer to a known datum. Existing
contours shall be shown as a dashed line; finished grades shall
be shown as a solid line. Existing and proposed contours shall
extend to at least 200 feet beyond the limit of the property.
Proposed grading shall be shown by spot elevations sufficient
to stakeout of site plan proposals. Slopes 15% or more in grade
shall be shaded.
(q) Soil tests:
[1] Test boring, percolation rates and water levels shall be
obtained in accordance with N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 and the
following standards:116
Size of Site
(acres) Number of Test Holes
Up to 2 1
2 3
3 6
5 to 10 8
11 to 40 10
41 to 100 16
Over 100 20
[2] These borings shall be distributed over the tract to
adequately represent site conditions and shall be to a
minimum depth of 10 feet and shall be taken in accordance
with § 176-90.
(r) Existing and proposed street and lot layout with dimensions
correct to scale accuracy, showing that portion proposed for
development in relation to the entire tract, and existing lot
lines to be eliminated.
(s) The location of all existing structures and their uses, both
within the tract and within 200 feet of its boundary, with an
indication of existing and proposed front, rear, side yard and
building setback distances and lines and whether the existing
structures and uses will be retained or removed.
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-40 INSURANCE § 176-40
168:429
(t) Size, height and location of all proposed structures, including,
but not limited to, signs, fences and lighting facilities, and of all
proposed buildings.
(u) All dimensions necessary to confirm conformity to this chapter,
such as the size of the tract to the nearest one hundredth of an
acre and any proposed lots to the nearest one tenth of an acre,
the number of lots being created, structure setbacks, structure
heights, yard areas, existing and proposed building coverage
and impervious lot coverage (both in square feet and as a
percentage of the lot area) and floor area ratios. All tract and
lot sizes shall be expressed in acres and square feet and shall
include bearings and distances.
(v) The proposed locations, angle, height, reflection and direction
of illumination, power and type of proposed outdoor lighting,
including details of lighting poles and luminaries, which
information shall be shown on the plat or plan for each light
(See § 176-73).
(w) The existing and proposed screening, buffering and
landscaping, including a landscaping plan, a planting schedule,
areas to be seeded or sodded and existing individual trees with
a diameter of six inches or more measured five feet above
ground level outside of the wooded areas.
(x) The location and design of any off-street parking and loading
area, showing size and location of bays, spaces, aisles and
barriers, curbing and paving specifications.
(y) All means of vehicular access and egress to and from the site
onto public streets, showing the site and the dimension and
location to streets, fire lanes, driveways and curb cuts within
200 feet, including the possible utilization of traffic signals,
channelization, acceleration and deceleration lanes, sight
triangle easements, additional width and other proposed
devices necessary to prevent a difficult traffic situation.
(z) The location of existing utility structures, such as water and
sewer mains, utility structures, gas transmission lines and high
tension power lines on the tract and within 200 feet of its
boundaries.
(aa) Plans and profiles of proposed improvements and utility
layouts, including sewers, storm drains and water lines, and
feasible connections to gas, telephone and electrical utility
systems. The plans and profiles of water and sewer layouts,
whether on-site, off-site or off-tract, shall show size and type of
pipes and mains, slope, pumping stations, fire hydrants,
standard details and trench repair details for street crossings.
All utilities shall be installed underground. If private utilities
are proposed, they shall comply fully with all Township, county,
§ 176-40 WATERFORD CODE § 176-40
168:430
state and federal regulations. If service will be provided by
an existing utility company, in lieu of detailed plans, a letter
from that company stating that service will be available before
occupancy will be sufficient.
(bb) The method of sewage treatment and solid waste disposal shall
be shown. A determination of adequacy by the Board of Health
shall be included where septic tanks and leaching fields are
permitted and are proposed. Such plans shall be reviewed by
the Board of Health or Municipal Engineer, as applicable, with
recommendations to the approving authority. All public
services shall be connected to an approved public utilities
system where one exists.
(cc) Plans, typical cross sections, grades, and construction details,
horizontal and vertical alignments of the center line of all
proposed streets and of all existing streets abutting the tract
within 200 feet. The horizontal scale shall be not less than one
inch equals 50 feet for all existing and proposed streets. The
vertical alignments shall be based on USGS vertical datum or a
more specified datum supplied by the Board Engineer, and
shall include curbing, sidewalks, bicycle routes, storm drains,
drainage structures and cross sections every half and full
station of all proposed streets and of all existing streets
abutting the tract. Sight triangles, the radius of curblines and
street sign locations shall be clearly indicated at the
intersections.
(dd) Any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to the
land being developed shall be submitted with the application
and/or indicated on the submitted plat or plan. All easements
acquired or required on the tract and across adjacent
properties shall be shown, and copies of legal documentation
that support the granting of an easement by an adjoining
property owner shall be included.
(ee) The names, locations and width of all existing and proposed
rights-of-way and easements, the use for which they are
intended to be limited, and the manner in which the easements
will be controlled.
(ff) The proposed permanent monuments shall be shown, in
accordance with the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq.,
with two permanent benchmarks based on USGS datum, all
elevations to relate to benchmarks.117
(gg) Concerning site plans only, a written description of the
proposed use and operation of the buildings, including
emission of noise, glare, vibration, heat, odor, air and water
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-40 INSURANCE § 176-40
168:431
pollution, safety hazards, expected truck and tractor trailer
traffic and the proposed number of shifts to be worked, the
maximum number of employees on each shift, and the hours of
operation.
(hh) Identification of any lot or area to be reserved or dedicated to
public use, showing all improvements such as landscaping,
grading, walkways, bicycle paths and recreational facilities.
(ii) Recreational facilities in accordance with § 176-82, including
full specifications of any paving, fencing, seeding and
equipment.
(jj) A boundary survey by a licensed New Jersey land surveyor,
certified on a date within six months of the date of submission.
(kk) A traffic impact statement in accordance with the provisions of
§ 176-47.
(ll) A municipal services and utilities impact statement analyzing
the probable impact on municipal services, including:
[1] Feasibility of providing potable water to the site to meet
the required demand for the intended use without
degrading either all or a portion of the entire system.
Consideration shall be given to the adequacy of any
existing storage and distribution system.
[2] Stormwater management calculations.
[3] Feasibility of conveying and treating the sewage
generated by the proposed development within an existing
system.
[4] Schools.
[5] Police, fire and ambulance services and protection.
[6] Road and traffic, specifically with reference to any
Township circulation plan.
[7] Sanitation and trash disposal.
[8] Supporting data to show how conclusions were
determined.
(mm) Composite environmental constraints map at the same scale
as the preliminary plat. The applicant shall, from specific and
detailed review of the site and any other available information,
present a plan indicating:
[1] The features for preservation.
§ 176-40 WATERFORD CODE § 176-40
168:432
[2] Features which represent any constraints for
development, generally indicating the area most suitable
for development, the area least suitable for development
and various degrees of suitability between these two
extremes.
(nn) All preliminary major subdivision and/or preliminary major site
plan applications shall be accompanied by an environmental
impact statement in accordance with § 176-107. The applicant
may request a waiver of this requirement, either in whole or in
part, provided that the applicant states in writing the basis for
the waiver request. The Board shall act upon the requested
waiver prior to declaring an application complete.
(oo) Concerning site plans only, signed and sealed, scaled
elevations by a licensed New Jersey architect of the front, side
and rear of any structure to be erected or modified, floor plans
and expansion plans incorporated into the building design.
(pp) A cultural resource survey in accordance with § 176-106.
(qq) In the case of any subdivision or site plan submission of a
planned development, the applicant shall be required to submit
all of the required information for all of the properties
comprising the planned development, regardless of whether
the applicant is seeking approval of the whole or a section of
the planned development; specifically, the applicant shall be
required to show the interrelationship of each portion of the
project with the whole of the project considering land use,
traffic, open space, buffering, drainage and surface water
management, sewerage, potable water supply and any other
specific planning considerations as may be of particular
relevance to a particular planned development.
(rr) Evidence that duplicate copies of the application for major
development has been filed with any other agency (including,
but not limited to, the Camden County Planning Board,
Camden County Soil Conservation District and Camden County
Department of Health) having jurisdiction over any aspect of
the proposed development.
(ss) A checklist signed by the applicant's engineer/architect/land
surveyor.
(tt) For applications for development proposing to be served by
public water and/or public sewer service, a certification from
the Camden County and Waterford Township Municipal
Utilities Authorities that such public water and/or public sewer
service is available.
(uu) The Board reserves the right to require additional information
before granting preliminary approval when unique
§ 176-40 INSURANCE § 176-40
168:433
§ 176-41. Action by Township on preliminary major subdivision
plats and preliminary major site plans.
circumstances affect the tract and/or when the application
for development poses special problems for the tract and
surrounding area, provided however, that no such application
shall be declared incomplete for the lack of such additional
information.
A. Determination of completeness. The process for determining if an
application is complete shall be the same as that provided under
§ 176-38A.
B. Distribution of documents. Distribution of documents shall be the same
as that provided under § 176-38B.
C. Notification to Pinelands Commission. Notification to the Commission
shall be required as set forth under § 176-38C.
D. Tolling of time.
(1) The Planning Board shall take action on a preliminary major site
plan application involving 10 acres of land or less and 10 dwelling
units or less and/or a preliminary major subdivision application
involving 10 lots or less within 45 days after the application has
been certified complete, or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Board to act within the
prescribed time period shall constitute approval of the application;
provided that any major subdivision and/or site plan application
which includes any requested variance pursuant to § 176-30A
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60) shall be acted upon within 120 days or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
(2) The Planning Board shall take action on a preliminary major site
plan application involving more than 10 acres of land or more than
10 dwellings and/or a preliminary major subdivision application
involving more than 10 lots within 95 days after the application has
been certified complete or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Board to act within the
prescribed time period shall constitute approval of the application,
provided that any major subdivision and/or site plan application
which includes any requested variance pursuant to § 176-30A
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60) shall be acted upon within 120 days or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
(3) The Board of Adjustment shall take action on a preliminary major
subdivision or site plan application under its jurisdiction in the time
prescribed in Subsection D(1) and (2) above unless such
preliminary major subdivision or site plan application is being
considered by the Planning Board simultaneously with an
application for use variance in accordance with § 176-18H12)
§ 176-40 WATERFORD CODE § 176-41
168:434
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d), in which case the Planning Board shall act
upon all aspects of the application within 120 days after the
application has been certified complete, or within such further time
as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Board to act
within the prescribed time period shall constitute approval of the
application.
(4) The Planning Board's Engineer shall read any written reports
submitted concerning the application and shall review the
submission to ascertain its conformity with the requirements of this
chapter. The Engineer shall perform a detailed review of the
application and issue a written report, with his recommendations,
to the appropriate Board and the applicant at least 15 days prior to
the designated hearing date.
(5) All hearings held on applications for preliminary major subdivision
or site plan approval shall require public notice of the hearing. The
Board shall set the date, time and place for the public hearing and
shall inform the applicant of this at least 15 days prior to said
hearing date. Notice of the hearing shall be given by the applicant
at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. Alternate design
submissions will not be accepted; only one plat design will be
accepted for public hearing.
(6) For any application that is heard by the Planning Board and
continued for additional studies, reports, plans, or revisions to
previously submitted material, the new or revised material must be
submitted to the Township at least 21 days prior to the hearing at
which the new material is to be considered.
(7) Should minor revisions or additions to the plat or plan be deemed
necessary, the Board may grant preliminary approval subject to
specified conditions and receipt of revised plans within 30 days
from the date of said approval. Revised plans will be reviewed by
the Board Engineer to verify conformity with the resolution of
preliminary approval within 30 days after receipt of the revised
submission.
(8) The Clerk of the Board shall forward the applicant a copy of the
approved resolution, adopted in accordance with § 176-19K, within
10 days of its adoption by the Board.
(9) If the Board, after consideration and discussion of the preliminary
plat or plan, determines that it is unacceptable, a notation shall be
made by the Chairman of the Board to that effect on the plat or plan
and a resolution adopted, in accordance with § 176-19K, setting
forth the reasons for such rejection. The Clerk of the Board shall
forward one copy of the plat or plan and resolution to the applicant
within 10 days following adoption of said resolution.
(10) If all conditions of preliminary approval are not complied with
within 180 days from the date of the hearing rendering a decision
§ 176-41 INSURANCE § 176-41
168:435
on the application, the conditional approval shall lapse and the
applicant shall be promptly notified by the Clerk of the Board.
E. Required changes and revisions.
(1) Any proposed application for development determined by the
Planning Board that creates, imposes, aggravates or leads to the
possibility of adverse effects upon either the property in question
or upon any adjacent properties, may be required to be revised to
remove any adverse effects prior to further review or approval by
the Board, in accordance with § 176-32.
(2) In the case of planned developments only, the Board shall find the
following facts and conclusions prior to granting approval:
(a) That departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property
conform to the zoning provisions of this chapter pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65c.
(b) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common space are reliable, and the amount, location and
purpose of the common open space are adequate.
(c) That provisions through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, and the amenities of light and air, recreation
and visual enjoyment are adequate.
(d) That the proposed planned development will not have an
unreasonably adverse impact upon the area in which it is
proposed to be established.
(e) In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and
conditions intended to protect the interests of the public and of
the residents, occupancy and owners of the proposed
development in the total completion of the development are
adequate.
(3) If plan revisions are required after a Board hearing and decision,
seven complete sets should be submitted to the Township.
(4) Any substantial plan revision required by an outside reviewing
agency, including the County Planning Board or Commission, after
final action by the Planning Board will require a new substantive
review. Whenever a development application which has been the
subject of a public hearing has been substantially amended for the
layout of improvements or impact on adjoining properties, it shall
be proceeded upon as a new application.
F. Action following approval or disapproval.
§ 176-41 WATERFORD CODE § 176-41
168:436
(1) Preliminary major site plans and subdivision plats shall not be
signed until all conditions are incorporated on the plan or plat.
(2) If the Board acts favorably on the preliminary plat or plan, the
Board Engineer and the Chairman and Secretary of the Board, or
Acting Chairman or Secretary where either or both may have been
absent, shall affix their signatures to at least 10 copies of each page
of the plat or plan with the notification that it has been approved.
The applicant shall furnish such copies to the Board.
G. Effect of approval.
(1) The approval of the Township shall not be effective and no
development shall be carried out prior to a determination by the
Commission, pursuant to § 176-14H, I and J.
(2) Preliminary approval shall confer upon the applicant the following
rights for a three-year period from the date on which the resolution
of preliminary approval is granted:
(a) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including, but not
limited to: use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions; and offtract
improvements; and in the case of a site plan, any
requirements peculiar to site plan approval; except that
nothing therein shall be construed to prevent the municipality
from modifying by ordinance such general terms and
conditions of preliminary approval as relate to public health
and safety;
(b) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before
the expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a
section or sections of the preliminary plat.
(c) That the applicant may apply for, and the approving authority
may grant, extensions on such preliminary approval for
additional periods of at least one year, but not to exceed a total
extension of two years, provided that if the design standards
have been revised by ordinance, such revised standards may
govern.
(3) In the case of a subdivision or site plan for an area 50 acres or
more, upon application by the developer, the Planning Board may
grant the rights referred to in § 176-41G(2) above for such period
of time, longer than three years, as shall be determined by the
Board to be reasonable taking into consideration:
(a) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under preliminary approval;
§ 176-41 INSURANCE § 176-41
168:437
§ 176-42. Submission of final major subdivision plats and final
major site plans.
(b) The potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area of the section or sections awaiting final approval;
(c) Economic conditions;
(d) The comprehensiveness of the development; and
(e) Provided that if the design standards have been revised by
ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
H. Extension of preliminary approval.
(1) The Planning Board shall grant an extension of preliminary
approval for a period determined by the Board but not exceeding
one year from what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the
developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that
the developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining
legally required approvals from other governmental entities and
that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
approvals.
(2) A developer shall apply for this extension before what would
otherwise be the expiration date or the 91st day after the date on
which the developer receives the last of the legally required
approvals from the other governmental entities, whichever occurs
later. An extension granted pursuant to this section shall not
preclude the Planning Board from granting an extension pursuant
to § 176-41G(2)(c) and G(3) above.
(3) Whenever the Planning Board grants an extension of preliminary
approval pursuant to § 176-41G(2)(c) or 176-41G(3) and
preliminary approval has expired before the date on which the
extension is granted, the extension shall begin on what would
otherwise be the expiration date. The developer shall apply for the
extension either before or after what would otherwise be the
expiration date.
A. Procedure for submitting final major subdivision plats and final major
site plans. A final plat or plan shall be submitted to the Clerk of the
Board within three years after the date of the preliminary approval or
any authorized extension thereof. The applicant shall submit to the
Clerk of the Board no later than 30 days preceding the month of the
anticipated hearing date:
(1) The fees in accordance with § 176-20I or 176-20M as the case may
be;
(2) A signed escrow agreement;
§ 176-41 WATERFORD CODE § 176-42
168:438
(3) One Mylar (in the case of subdivisions: two Mylars) and 12 paper
prints of the final plat;
(4) Three completed copies of the appropriate application, which
includes application for any requested design waivers or variances;
(5) Three copies of any applicable checklists118 attached to this
chapter with the information required therein, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10.3;
(6) The application number on all papers, maps, plats or plans and
other documents for processing in conjunction with the application;
(7) When applicable, the developer shall provide evidence of PDC
ownership to secure the same proportion of lots or residential units
as was approved for PDC use in the preliminary approval.
B. Details required for final major subdivision plats and final major site
plans. The following information shall be submitted:
(1) All details stipulated in § 176-40B.
(2) All additional details required at the time of preliminary approval
shall be submitted.
(3) A section or staging plan, if proposed, indicating the portion of the
tract to be considered for final approval as part of the current
application and the relationship of the portion of the tract to the
remaining land area, including all applicable comparisons, such as
parking spaces building coverage, lot coverage, open space areas
and number of lots.
(4) Detailed architectural and engineering data, including:
(a) An architect's design drawing of each building and sign or a
typical building and sign showing front, side and rear
elevations.
(b) Cross-sections, plans, profiles and established grades of all
streets, aisles, lanes and driveways, including center line
geometry and horizontal alignments with bearings, radii and
tangents.
(c) Plans and profiles of all storm and sanitary sewers and water
mains.
(d) All dimensions of the exterior boundaries of any subdivision
shall be balanced and closed to a precision of one to 5,000 and
the dimensions of all lot lines to within one to 10,000. All
dimensions, angles and bearings must be tied to at least one
permanent monument not less than 300 feet apart and all
118. Editor's Note: The checklists are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 176-42 INSURANCE § 176-42
168:439
information shall be indicated on the plat. At least one corner
of the subdivision shall be tied horizontally to the New Jersey
State Grid Coordinate System and vertically to the U.S.
Geodetic Survey System, with the data on the plat as to how
the bearings were determined.
(5) A copy of the signed preliminary plat or plan in conformance with
the resolution of approval.
(6) Notification of the Commission review of the preliminary approved
plat.
(7) Evidence that a duplicate copy of the application for development
has been filed with any other agency (including, but not limited to,
the Camden County Planning Board, Camden County Board of
Health and Camden County Soil Conservation District) having
jurisdiction over any aspect of the proposed development.
(8) Proposals for soil erosion and sediment control as required by
N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
(9) The final submission shall be accompanied by the following
documents:
(a) Certification from the Township Tax Collector that taxes are
current.
(b) A street numbering plan by the Township Tax Assessor.
(c) Letters directed to the Chairman of the Board and signed by a
responsible official of the lighting agency, water company,
sewer utility and any other company or governmental authority
or district which provides accessory utility service and has
jurisdiction in the area, approving each proposed utility
installation design and stating who will construct the facility so
that service will be available prior to occupancy. The designing
engineer(s) shall certify to the Board that the existing crosssection(
s) and profile(s) have been run in the field and the field
notes shall be forwarded to the Township Engineer.
(d) The applicant shall certify, in writing, to the Board that he has:
[1] Installed all improvements in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and preliminary plat approval
with a maintenance guarantee accompanying the final
plat; and/or
[2] Posted a performance guarantee in accordance with
§ 176-22; and
[3] Provided a construction schedule for all improvements yet
to be installed which establishes the scheduling and timing
of installation of all improvements covered by the
§ 176-42 WATERFORD CODE § 176-42
168:440
§ 176-43. Action by Township on final major subdivision plats and
final major site plans.
performance guaranty. The approved schedule shall be
required for the protection of the interests of the public
and residents, occupants and owners of the proposed
development in the total completion of the project. The
schedule shall be a part of the resolution granting final
approval, and completion of the improvements in
accordance with the schedule shall be a condition of
approval.
(e) A statement from the Township Engineer that all
improvements installed prior to the final application have been
inspected as provided in § 176-22, and that such improvements
installed prior to final application approval that do not meet or
exceed Township standards shall be factored into the required
performance guarantee.
A. Determination of completeness. The process for determining if an
application is complete shall be the same as that provided under
§ 176-38A.
B. Distribution of documents. Distribution of documents shall be the same
as that provided under § 176-38B.
C. Notification to Pinelands Commission. Notification to the Commission
shall be required as set forth under § 176-38C.
D. Tolling of time.
(1) The Planning Board shall take action of final site plan and final
subdivision applications within 45 days after the application has
been certified complete, or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Board to act within the
prescribed time period shall constitute approval of the application.
(2) The Planning Board's Engineer shall read any written reports
submitted concerning the application and shall review the
submission to ascertain its conformity with the requirements of this
chapter. The Engineer shall perform a detailed review of the
application and issue a written report, with his recommendations,
to the appropriate Board and the applicant at least seven days prior
to the designated hearing date.
(3) For any application that is heard by the Planning Board and
continued for additional studies, reports, plans, or revisions to
previously submitted material, the new or revised material must be
submitted to the Township at least 21 days prior to the hearing at
which the new material is to be considered.
§ 176-42 INSURANCE § 176-43
168:441
(4) If plan revisions are required after a Board hearing and decision,
plans will then be reviewed by the Board Engineer and Planner to
verify conformity with the resolution of approval within 30 days
after receipt of the revised submission.
E. Required changes and revisions. Any substantial plan revision required
by an outside reviewing agency, including the Camden County Planning
Board or the Commission, after final action by the Planning Board, will
require a new substantive review. Whenever a development application
which has been the subject of a public hearing has been substantially
amended for the layout of improvements or impact on adjoining
properties, it shall be proceeded upon as a new application.
F. Action following approval or disapproval.
(1) Major site plans and major subdivision plats shall not be signed
until all conditions are incorporated on the plan or plat and all
performance bonds and guarantees have been filed with the
Municipal Clerk.
(2) If the Board acts favorably on the final plat or plan, the Board
Engineer and the Chairman and Secretary of the Board, or the
acting Chairman or Secretary where either or both may be absent,
shall affix their signatures to at least six paper copies of the final
plat or plan, including all required revisions, with the notification
that it has been approved. The applicant shall furnish such copies
to the Board for signing. Moreover, in the case of final subdivisions
only, the applicant shall include for signing at least two Mylar
copies of the approved plat in addition to the six paper copies.
(3) After approval of the final plat or plan by the Board, the Clerk of the
Board shall retain one paper copy of the signed plat or plan and
shall furnish other copies to each of the following within 10 days
from the date of the adoption of a resolution in accordance with
§ 176-19K:
(a) Township Engineer (1 paper copy and, in the case of
subdivisions only, 1 Mylar copy drawn to the Tax Map scale of
one inch equals 100 feet or one inch equals 400 feet, as
directed by the Board Engineer).
(b) The Pinelands Commission (one paper copy).
(c) The applicant (one paper copy and, in the case of subdivision
only, one Mylar copy).
(d) Such other Township, county or state agencies and officials as
directed by the Board.
(4) If the Board, after consideration and discussion of the final plat or
plan, disapproves the submission, a notation to that effect shall be
made by the Chairman of the Board on the plat or plan. The Clerk of
§ 176-43 WATERFORD CODE § 176-43
168:442
the Board, within 10 days of such adoption, shall notify the
applicant of such disapproval and forward the applicant a copy
of the adopted resolution setting forth the reasons for the
disapproval.
G. Filing required.
(1) Within 95 days from the date of signing of the final subdivision plat,
the subdivider shall file a copy of same with the Camden County
Clerk. In the event of failure to file within said 95 days, the
approval of the major subdivision shall expire and any further
proceedings shall require the filing of a new application as in the
first instance. The Board, for good cause shown, may extend the
filing for an additional 95 days.
(2) The Board may extend the 95 days to a maximum of 190 days if the
developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board, that
the developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
filing because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals
from other governmental or quasi-governmental entities; and that
the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
required approvals. The length of the extension shall be equal to
the period of delay caused by the wait for the required approvals,
as determined by the Board. The developer may apply for the
extension either before or after the anticipated expiration date.
H. Effect of approval of major subdivision plat and major site plans.
(1) The approval of the Township shall not be effective and no
development shall be carried out prior to a determination by the
Pinelands Commission pursuant to § 176-14H, I and J.
(2) Final approval of a major subdivision or major site plan shall confer
upon the applicant the following rights for a period of two years
from the date on which the resolution of final approval is adopted:
(a) The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary
approval first granted and all other rights conferred upon the
developer shall not be changed.
(b) If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final
approval, the Board may extend such period of protection for
extensions of one year each, not exceeding three extensions.
(3) Granting of rights; extension of final approval.
(a) In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned
development or residential cluster of 50 acres or more, or in
the case of a conventional subdivision or site plan of 150 acres
or more, the Board may grant the rights referred to in
§ 176-43H(2)(a) above for such period of time, longer than two
§ 176-43 INSURANCE § 176-43
168:443
years, as shall be determined by the Board to be reasonable
taking into consideration:
[1] The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under final approval;
[2] Economic conditions; and
[3] The comprehensiveness of the development.
(b) The developer may apply for thereafter, and the Board may
thereafter grant, an extension to final approval for such
additional period of time as shall be determined by the Board
to be reasonable taking into consideration:
[1] The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under final approval;
[2] The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
remaining to be developed;
[3] Economic conditions; and
[4] The comprehensiveness of the development.
(4) Whenever the Board grants an extension of final approval pursuant
to § 176-43H(2)(b) or H(3) above and final approval has expired
before the date on which the extension is granted, the extension
shall begin on what would otherwise be the expiration date. The
developer may apply for the extension either before or after what
would otherwise be the expiration date.
I. Extension of final approval.
(1) The Board shall grant an extension of final approval for a period
determined by the Board but not exceeding one year from what
would otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer proves to
the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the developer was
barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with
the development because of delays in obtaining legally required
approvals from other governmental entities and that the developer
applied promptly for and diligently pursued the approvals. A
developer shall apply for this extension before:
(a) What would otherwise be the expiration date; or
(b) The 91st day after the date on which the developer receives the
last of the legally required approvals from the other
governmental entities, whichever occurs later.
(2) An extension granted pursuant to this section shall not preclude
the Planning Board from granting an extension pursuant to
§ 176-43H(2)(b) or H(3) above.
§ 176-43 WATERFORD CODE § 176-43
168:444
ARTICLE VIII
General Provisions and Design Standards
§ 176-44. Accessory buildings, structures and uses.
A. Accessory buildings as part of principal buildings.
(1) Any accessory building attached to a principal building shall
adhere to the yard requirements of the particular district in which
it is located.
(2) Porches, raised decks and accessory structures attached to the
principal building shall adhere to the yard requirements for the
principal building.
B. Location.
(1) Swimming pools, tennis courts, other accessory structures not
attached to the principal building, paved areas except driveways
and other open air uses shall comply with § 176-118D, except that,
if erected on a corner lot, the accessory building or structure shall
be set back from any side street to comply with the setback line
applying to the principal building for that side street.
(2) In the case of a principal structure not a corner lot, but with more
than one street frontage, accessory structures shall be set back
from the rear lot line as prescribed in § 176-118D.
(3) If a detached accessory building is located in the front yard, it shall
be set back at least the same distance from the street line as
required for the principal building.
(4) Accessory buildings shall be on the same lot as the principal
building. The Zoning Official may approve an exception if an
undeveloped lot is contiguous, does not meet the minimum lot size
standards for development, and is in common ownership with the
lot that contains the principal building.
C. Garages and carports in residential districts. Garages and carports for
not more than three vehicles may be constructed on a lot. Not more
than one commercial registered vehicle owned or used by the resident
shall be permitted in a residential zone. This provision shall not be
deemed to limit the number of commercial cars or trucks used in
conjunction with a permitted agricultural use. A residential garage
shall not be used for commercial purposes.
D. Satellite dish antennas.
(1) For purposes hereof, a "satellite dish antenna" is defined in § 176-9,
and includes but is not limited to such structures commonly known
as "home video earth stations," "satellite dishes" or "satellite earth
stations."
§ 176-44 INSURANCE § 176-44
168:445
(2) Satellite dish antennas are hereby permitted only as an accessory
use to an otherwise permitted use in the Township, subject to the
following conditions:
(a) There shall be only one satellite dish antenna per lot which
shall be a maximum height of 12 feet, with the exception of
those eligible for roof mounting.
(b) A satellite dish antenna shall be ground mounted, except for
dishes less than one meter in diameter, which may be roof
mounted.
(c) A satellite dish antenna shall not be located in a front yard and
the minimum setback from side and rear property lines shall be
the same as for other accessory buildings and structures, in
accordance with § 176-118D.
(d) A satellite dish antenna shall be screened from view so that the
dish shall not be visible from any street or adjoining or
adjacent property at ground level.
(e) Only one satellite dish antenna shall be permitted for each
apartment complex, townhouse complex, shopping center or
other multifamily or multitenant residential or nonresidential
property or complex. In the case of such property or complex,
the one permitted satellite dish antenna may be placed in any
common area, subject to the other provisions of this section
and chapter.
(3) No satellite dish antenna shall be constructed, erected or installed
except in conformance with all provisions of this chapter and only
after a zoning permit is obtained from the Zoning Official and a
construction permit is obtained from the Construction Official. The
application for the zoning permit shall include the following
information:
(a) The owner and the address of the property where the satellite
dish antenna is to be constructed.
(b) The name and address of the company or person installing the
dish.
(c) A sketch or plan of the satellite dish antenna.
(d) A plot plan or survey of the property showing the proposed
location of the dish and the screening details as required in
Subsection D(2) above.
(4) Notwithstanding any other provision herein, the approving
authority shall not impose on, or prevent, reception of satellite
delivered signals by such antenna. The approving authority shall
consider the necessity of a direct "line of sight" between the
satellite and the antenna in its deliberations.
§ 176-44 WATERFORD CODE § 176-44
168:446
E. Sustainable energy facilities. [Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-13]
(1) For purposes here, "sustainable energy facilities," as defined in
§ 176-9, include solar and small wind generating systems designed
to:
(a) Provide all or a portion of the electrical power requirements to
provide power for the principal use of the property where said
system is to be located and shall not be for the generation of
power for commercial purposes, although this provision shall
not be interpreted to prohibit the sale of excess power
generated from time to time from a small wind or solar energy
system designed to meet the energy needs of the principal use.
For the purposes of this subsection, the sale of excess power
shall be limited so that in no event an energy system is
generating more energy for sale than what is otherwise
necessary to power the principal use on the property.
(b) Small wind and solar energy systems shall only be permitted as
an accessory use on the same lot as the principal use. All
energy systems require approval from the Zoning Officer and
Construction Office prior to installation. Applications for an
energy system shall include information demonstrating
compliance with the provisions of this subsection. In the event
that the Zoning Officer or Construction Office does not believe
the provisions of this subsection will be satisfied, an applicant
may request a variance from the Planning Board.119
(2) General conditions.
(a) Small wind and solar energy systems shall not be used for
displaying any advertising except for reasonable identification
of the manufacturer or operator of the system. In no case shall
any identification be visible from a property line.
(b) The design of small wind or solar energy systems shall, to the
extent reasonably possible, use materials, colors, textures,
screening and landscaping that will blend the facility into the
natural setting and existing environment.
(c) All applications for a small wind or solar energy system shall
limit all clearing and soil disturbance to that which is
necessary to accommodate the wind or solar energy system.
(d) An applicant shall locate a small wind or solar energy system
so that tree removal is not required to the maximum extent
practical.
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-44 INSURANCE § 176-44
168:447
(e) The installation of a small wind or solar system shall conform
to the National Electric Code as adopted by the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs.
(f) The installation of a small wind or solar energy system is
subject to all of the local technical requirements for purveyor's
interconnection.
(g) Other provisions shall not apply to small wind and solar energy
systems with regard to height. Wind and solar energy systems
shall conform to the height restrictions provided in this
subsection.
(3) Small wind generating systems, designed as an accessory use, are
permitted in all zoning districts subject to the following
requirements:
(a) Minimum lot size: one acre, provided the lot size provides the
ability of the wind turbine system to conform to the bulk
requirements listed below.
(b) Minimum setbacks. All wind turbines shall be set back from all
property lines a distance equal to 100% of the height of the
structure, including the blades.
(c) Maximum height. The maximum height for a wind turbine shall
not exceed 80 feet on lots of one to three acres; on lots of three
acres or more the maximum height, including blades, shall be
150 feet above the ground surface at its highest point.
(d) Wind turbines shall not be permitted in a front yard.
(e) No more than one wind turbine shall be permitted per
property.
(f) Wind turbines shall not be permitted as a rooftop installation.
(g) Noise. All wind energy systems shall comply with the following:
[1] In a residential use or zone, sound levels of the wind
energy system shall not exceed 55 dBA at a common
property line or 50 dBA at the closest occupied structure.
[2] In all other cases at a common property line, sound levels
of the wind energy system shall not exceed 65 dBA.
[3] These levels may be exceeded during short-term events
such as utility outages and/or severe windstorms.
[4] Wind turbines shall be designed with an automatic brake
or other similar device to prevent overspeeding and
excessive pressure on the tower structure.
§ 176-44 WATERFORD CODE § 176-44
168:448
[5] Wind energy systems shall not be artificially lighted,
except to the extent required by the FAA or other
applicable authority.
[6] All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall
be labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access.
[7] The tower shall be designed and installed so as not to
provide step bolts, a ladder or other publicly accessible
means of climbing the tower, for a minimum height of eight
feet above the ground.
[8] All moving parts of the wind energy system shall be a
minimum of 10 feet above ground level.
[9] The blades on the wind energy system shall be constructed
of a corrosive-resistant material.
[10] All guy wires or any part of the wind energy system shall
be located on the same lot as the energy system.
[11] Tower construction shall be in accordance with the
appropriate sections of the Uniform Construction Code as
adopted by the State of New Jersey, and any future
amendments and/or revisions to same.
[12] Electromagnetic interference (EMI). Wind energy
conversion system generators and alternators shall be
filtered and/or shielded so as to prevent the emission of
radio frequency energy which would cause any harmful
interference with radio and/or television broadcasting or
reception and shall comply with the provisions of Section
47 of the Federal Code of Regulations, Part 15, and
subsequent revisions governing said emissions.
[13] The structural design shall be signed and sealed by a
professional engineer, licensed in the State of New Jersey,
certifying that the structural design complies with all of
the standards set forth for safety and stability in all
applicable codes then in effect in the State of New Jersey
and all sections referred to hereinabove.
[14] The design calculations shall include a soil boring at the
tower location and a soils analysis. If the soils of the site
are not satisfactory for the intended construction, the
plans shall be designed to eliminate or overcome the poor
soil conditions.
(4) Solar energy systems as accessory uses.
(a) Solar panels shall be permitted as a rooftop installation in any
zoning district. The solar panels shall not exceed a height of 16
inches from the rooftop. In no event shall the placement of the
§ 176-44 INSURANCE § 176-44
168:449
solar panels result in a total height, including the building and
solar panels, that exceeds the maximum height permitted for
the principal building in the zoning district.
(b) Solar panels shall be permitted as ground arrays in any zoning
district in accordance with the following standards:
[1] All ground arrays shall be set back a minimum distance of
20 feet from all property lines in a residential zoning
district or in conformance with the bulk standards for
accessory structures in commercial districts and be
shielded from view to the maximum extent practicable
without compromising operational efficiency.
[2] Ground arrays shall not be permitted in a front yard.
[3] Ground arrays shall not occupy more than 30% of the
designated rear or side yard area of the subject lot.
[4] Ground arrays shall be located so that any glare is
minimized on adjoining properties.
[5] Ground arrays shall not exceed a height of 15 feet above
the natural ground surface.
(5) Abandonment.
(a) A small wind energy system or solar energy system that is out
of service for a continuous twelve-month period will be deemed
to have been abandoned.
(b) The Zoning Officer may issue a notice of abandonment to the
owner. The notice shall be sent via regular and certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the owner of record.
(c) The owner shall have the right to respond to the notice of
abandonment within 30 days from notice receipt date.
(d) If the owner provides information that demonstrates the small
wind energy or solar energy system has not been abandoned,
the Zoning Officer shall withdraw the notice of abandonment
and notify the owner that the notice has been withdrawn.
(e) Any abandoned system shall be removed at the owner's sole
expense within six months after the owner receives the notice
of abandonment from the Township. If the system is not
removed within the six months of receipt of notice from the
Township notifying the owner of such abandonment, the
Township may remove the system as set forth below.
(f) When an owner of a wind or solar energy system has been
identified to remove same and has not done so six months after
receiving said notice, then the Township may remove such
§ 176-44 WATERFORD CODE § 176-44
168:450
§ 176-45. Agriculture.
§ 176-46. Air conditioning.
All apartment, townhouse or condominium units must have central heating
and air-conditioning systems with independent controls for each unit. If
central air conditioning is not feasible, application may be made to the
Planning Board for approval of individual units.
system and place a lien upon the property for the cost of the
removal. If removed by the owner, a demolition permit shall
be obtained and the facility shall be removed. Upon removal,
the site shall be cleaned, restored and revegetated to blend
with the existing surrounding vegetation at the time of
abandonment.
(6) Limitations for principal solar energy systems/facilities. [Added
3-13-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-1]
(a) Solar energy systems or facilities shall be permitted in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, provided that
public service infrastructure necessary to support the solar
energy facility is available, or can be provided without any offsite
development in the Preservation Area District or a forest
area.
(b) Should the development of new or expansion of existing on-site
or off-site infrastructure be necessary to accommodate a
principal solar energy system or facility, clearing shall be
limited to that which is necessary to accommodate the use in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.23. New rights-of-way shall be
limited to a maximum width of 20 feet, unless additional width
is necessary to address specific safety or reliability concerns.
A. All agricultural activities and fish and wildlife management activities,
including the preparation of land and the planting, nurturing and
harvesting of crops, shall be carried out in accordance with
recommended management practices established for the particular
agricultural activity by the New Jersey Department of Agricultural, the
Natural Resources Conservation Service, and the New Jersey
Agricultural Experimental Station at Rutgers University.
B. In the Agricultural District a resource conservation plan shall be
submitted in accordance with § 176-108.
C. Right to farm. All agricultural operations in the AG District shall be
exempt from any ordinance or regulation which inhibits efficient crop
production, including, but not limited to, ordinances and regulations
imposing time limits on operation, dust limits and odor restrictions,
except those ordinances and regulations that are strictly necessary for
the maintenance of public health.
§ 176-44 INSURANCE § 176-47
168:451
§ 176-47. Air quality.
§ 176-48. Animals.
A. All development shall adhere to the relevant air quality standards of
N.J.A.C. 7:27 et seq. Adherence to the standards of this section shall be
determined by means of an air quality simulation model approved by
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:27-18.3.
B. Any application for a proposed development that will generate
substantial vehicular traffic or space heating emissions, in addition to
the submission requirements of Article VII, shall submit a traffic study
and air quality report in accordance with § 176-109, containing
information relative to the impact of the proposed development on air
quality, to ensure that all state ambient air quality standards in N.J.A.C.
7:27 et seq. for carbon monoxide shall not be exceeded at places of
maximum concentration and at sensitive receptors.
C. No smoke shall be emitted from any chimney or other source visible
gray greater than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart as published
by the U.S. Bureau of Mines. Smoke of a shade not darker than No. 2 on
the Ringelmann Chart may be emitted for not more than four minutes in
any thirty-minute time period. These provisions, applicable to visible
gray smoke, also shall apply to visible smoke of a different color, but
with an equivalent apparent opacity.
D. No emission of dust, dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors and gases shall be made
which can cause any damage to health, animals or vegetation or other
forms of property or which can cause any noticeable soiling at point. No
emission of liquid or solid particles from any chimney, etc., shall exceed
0.3 grains per cubic foot of the covering gas at any point. For
measurement of the amount of particles in gases resulting from
combustion, standard correction shall be applied to a stack
temperature of 500° and 50% excess air.
A. Agricultural animals. Agricultural animals, such as poultry, beef cattle,
swine, and dairy animals may be kept, harbored and maintained only if
all of the following conditions are met:
(1) The lot on which the agricultural animals are to be located is at
least five acres.
(2) The lot on which the agricultural animals are to be located is
qualified, pursuant to the Farmland Assessment Act of 1964 (Laws
of 1964, Chapter 48; N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1), as land actively devoted to
agricultural use.
(3) A farm management plan prepared in accordance with the
guidelines of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service, is filed with the Township.
§ 176-47 WATERFORD CODE § 176-48
168:452
(4) The use of the animals directly relates to the agricultural use for
which the farmland assessment has been granted.
(5) Appropriate shelter shall be provided for all livestock.
(6) No shipping container, crate, truck body, van or any similar
enclosure shall be utilized for the housing of the animals.
B. Horses. Horses are permitted on residential lots of one acre or more,
exclusive of buffers, easements, and other specific restrictions, if the
following conditions herein and under Chapter 94, Animals, Article II,
Horses, §§ 94-26 through 94-30, of the Municipal Code, are met:
(1) There shall be no more than two horses on a one-acre parcel, with
an additional 10,000 square feet of land required for each
additional horse.
(2) No parcel of less than five acres shall be used for a commercial
boarding stable.
C. General requirements.
(1) All animals and animal quarters shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition and maintained to eliminate objectionable odors.
(2) Fencing shall be provided and maintained to prevent the animals
from leaving the premises on which they are maintained.
(3) Shelters for animals shall not be located closer than 50 feet to any
property line. Shelters for animals shall not be located in the front
yard.
(4) Minimum stall size for horses: 100 square feet (10 feet by 10 feet)
for a box stall and 31 square feet (four feet by eight feet) for
straight or tie stall.
(5) Manure shall be removed daily from all interior housing. Once
manure is removed it should be handled in one of the following
manners:
(a) Used immediately by incorporation into the soil of a garden or
by spreading on neighboring fields. If manure is to be spread
on neighboring fields, application is not to exceed 10 tons per
acre or the latest recommendations from the state's land grant
college.
(b) Incorporated into a composting procedure so that odors and
flies do not become a problem. A manure pile does not qualify
as a composting procedure.
(c) Stored in a rain free, well drained, screened and fly free
storage area located 50 feet or more from the property line,
until the manure can be handled in any of the above
alternatives.
§ 176-48 INSURANCE § 176-49
168:453
§ 176-49. Apartments, condominiums and townhouses.
No apartment, condominium or townhouse dwelling unit shall be
constructed unless the dwelling is part of an approved site plan and unless
the following minimum standards are met in addition to the other applicable
requirements of this chapter:
A. General requirements.
(1) Each complex of buildings shall have an architectural theme with
appropriate variations in design to provide attractiveness and
compatibility with adjacent land uses. Such variations in design
shall result from the use of landscaping and the orientation of
buildings to the natural features of the site and to other buildings,
as well as from varying unit widths, using different exterior
materials, changing roof lines and roof designs, varying building
heights and changing window types, shutters, doors, porches and
exterior colors. Architectural elevations shall be submitted to the
Board for review and approval.
(2) All dwelling units shall be connected to approved and functioning
water and sanitary sewer systems prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
(3) There shall be a parking area set aside on the same site as the
building and located within 150 feet of the nearest entrance of the
building.
(4) Dwelling units shall have access to a master television antenna
system and individual units may not erect individual external
television antennas.
(5) Waste management (§ 176-99) and recycling (§ 176-83)
requirements shall be met.
(6) Buffer requirements of § 176-52 and landscaping requirements of
§ 176-72 shall be met.
(7) Open space shall be set aside, with access from a public right-ofway
for the use and enjoyment of the residents. Such open space
may be dedicated to and accepted by the Township; put into
common ownership pursuant to the Condominium Act of 1970; or
transferred to a homeowners' or open space association
representing the owners of the individual lots. Nothing herein shall
be construed to require the Township to accept a dedication of
property to the Township.
(8) Each one-bedroom dwelling unit shall contain not less than 850
square feet of usable space; each two-bedroom dwelling unit shall
contain not less than 1,000 square feet of usable space; each
efficiency dwelling unit shall contain not less than 600 square feet
of usable space; any dwelling unit having more than two-bedrooms
§ 176-49 WATERFORD CODE § 176-49
168:454
shall require 200 additional square feet per additional bedroom.
Such measurement may not include stairwells, but may include
halls.
(9) Each dwelling unit shall be provided with 600 cubic feet of storage
space, which space may be located in the basement.
(10)No floor area of a room having more than 1/2 of its height below the
average finished grade immediately adjacent to the structure shall
be accountable toward meeting the minimum floor area
requirement for dwelling units.
(11)No commercial, industrial, business or professional use shall be
permitted in any apartment building, condominium or townhouse
unless approved by the Planning Board that such use is compatible
with the general residential nature of the building and compatible
with the appropriate use of adjoining lands.
B. Apartments and condominiums.
(1) Multifamily residential projects that include buildings with four or
more dwelling units in a single structure must provide one barrierfree
unit for every four units developed.
(2) No apartment or condominium building shall have more than 16
units.
C. Townhouses.
(1) No townhouse unit shall be less than 20 feet wide. No more than six
units per townhouse building shall be permitted.
(2) The front facade of any structure shall not continue on the same
plane for a distance of more than the width of two adjacent
dwelling units. Offset between front facade planes shall be at least
four feet and not more than 20 feet.
(3) Each dwelling unit shall consist of at least two stories.
(4) Every dwelling unit shall have direct access to the private area that
is provided for that dwelling unit.
(5) All units shall be offered, on a non-rental basis by the original
developer or sponsor, so that each individual dwelling unit, when
initially built, shall be for sale.
(6) Under no circumstances shall the arrangement of townhouse lots
require the crossing of one lot in order to achieve access to
another.
(7) Fire walls for townhouse units shall be provided in accordance with
the definitions and requirements specified in the most current
edition of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.120
§ 176-49 INSURANCE § 176-50
168:455
§ 176-50. Bikeways.
Bikeways shall be required at the Board's discretion, depending on the
probable volume of bicycle traffic, the site's location with relation to other
populated areas, or its location with respect to any overall bike route
planning adopted by the Township. Bicycle traffic shall be separated from
motor vehicle and pedestrian traffic as much as possible.
§ 176-51. Blocks.
Block length and width, or acreage within bounding roads, shall be
designed to accommodate density and bulk requirements of a particular
zoning district and to provide for convenient access, circulation and control.
When an application involves the creation of new blocks and lots, it will not
be deemed complete unless the blocks and lots shown on any subdivision or
site plan have been certified true and correct by the Township Tax Assessor
in writing.
§ 176-52. Buffers, screening and scenic setbacks.
A. Bicycle lanes, where provided, shall be placed in the outside lane of a
roadway, adjacent to the curb or shoulder. When on-street parking is
permitted, the bicycle lane shall be between the parking lane and the
outer lane of moving vehicles. Lanes shall be delineated with markings,
preferably striping. Raised reflector or curbs shall not be used.
B. Dimensions and construction specifications of bicycle paths shall be
determined by the number and type of users and the location and
purpose of the bicycle path. A minimum of eight feet paved width
should be provided for two-way bicycle traffic and a five feet width for
one-way traffic.
(1) Choice of surface materials, including bituminous mixes, concrete,
gravel, soil cement, stabilized earth and wood planking, shall
depend on use and users of the path.
(2) Gradients of bike paths should generally not exceed a grade of 5%,
except for short distances.
C. Bicycle lanes shall be four feet wide, or wide enough to allow safe
passage of bicycles and motorists.
D. Bicycle-safe drainage grates shall be used in the construction of all
residential streets.
A. Function and materials. Buffering shall provide a year round visual
screen in order to minimize adverse impacts from a site on an adjacent
property or from adjacent areas. It may consist of fencing, a mixture of
deciduous trees and evergreens, berms, rocks, boulders, mounds, or
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-50 WATERFORD CODE § 176-52
168:456
combinations to achieve the stated objectives. Any required
landscaping in a buffer area shall comply with the vegetation standards
specified in § 176-72.
B. When required.
(1) Buffering shall be required when topographical or other barriers do
not provide reasonable screening and when the Planning Board
determines there is a need to shield the site from adjacent
properties and to minimize adverse impacts, such as incompatible
land uses, noise, glaring light, and traffic. No drainage basin shall
be located within the required landscaped portion of any buffer
area. In small lot developments, when building design and
placement do not provide privacy, the Planning Board may require
landscaping, fences, or walls to ensure privacy and screen dwelling
units.
(2) Where required, buffers shall be measured from side and rear
property lines, excluding access driveways, and shall not be
counted as part of any required front yard area. Buffers may be
counted as part of any required side or rear yard area conditioned
that no deviation shall occur to the type, size and width of the
buffer.
C. Dimensions.
(1) Where more intensive land uses abut less intensive uses a
landscaped buffer strip of 50 feet, but not to exceed 10% of the lot
area, in width shall be required.
(2) Lots with rear yards abutting a street shall have a landscaped
buffer strip of 15 feet, but not to exceed 10% of the lot area.
Fencing may be placed in this buffer strip.
(3) Garbage collection, recycling and utility areas, and loading and
unloading areas shall be screened around their perimeter by a
landscaped buffer strip a minimum of five feet wide. Such
screening shall be by an extension of the building, a fence, berm,
wall, evergreen planting, or combination thereof, and shall not be
less than four feet in height.
(4) Where residential subdivisions abut higher order streets, adjacent
lots should front on lower order streets, and a landscaped buffer
area shall be provided along the property line abutting the road.
The buffer strip shall be a minimum of 15 feet wide, but not exceed
10% of the lot area, and include both trees and shrubs.
(5) Parking area perimeters shall be buffered from adjoining
residential uses or zones by twenty-five-foot-wide landscaped
buffer areas that include both trees and shrubs.
§ 176-52 INSURANCE § 176-52
168:457
D. Design. Arrangement of plantings in buffers shall provide maximum
protection to adjacent properties and avoid damage to existing plant
material. Possible arrangements include planting in parallel,
serpentine, or broken rows. If planted berms are used, the minimum top
width shall be four feet and the maximum side slope shall be 2:1.
E. Planting specifications. Plant materials shall be sufficiently large and
planted in such a fashion that a screen at least eight feet in height shall
be produced within three growing seasons. All plantings shall be
installed according to accepted horticultural standards.
(1) The preservation of natural wooded tracts shall be an integral part
of all site plans and subdivisions and may be calculated as part of
the required buffer area, provided that the growth is of a density
and the area is of a width to serve the purpose of a buffer.
(2) Shrubs and hedges used in screen planting shall be at least three
feet in height when planted and shall be of such density to obscure,
throughout the full course of the year, the glare of automobile
headlights emitted from the premises.
(3) Except for existing preserved or transplanted vegetation,
evergreen species shall be at least six feet in height at the time of
planting. Deciduous trees shall be at least 2 1/2 inches caliper and
a minimum of 10 feet in height at the time of planting.
(4) Screen plantings shall be placed in accordance with § 176-60B and
shall be no closer than 10 feet from any street or five feet from any
interior property line at maturity.
(5) All vegetation contained within a landscaped buffer shall be deed
restricted against removal, destruction or any modification other
than that normally required for maintenance.
F. Maintenance. Plantings shall be watered regularly and in a manner
appropriate for the specific plant species through the first growing
season. Dead or dying plants shall be replaced by the developer or
owner during the next planting season. No buildings, structures,
storage of materials, or parking shall be permitted within the
landscaped buffer area; buffer areas shall be maintained and kept free
of all debris, rubbish, weeds, and tall grass.
G. Scenic corridors.
(1) No buildings shall be located within 200 feet of any river, lake,
pond, or stream.
(2) All structures within 1,000 feet of the center line of the Mullica
River from Medford Road to Sandy Causeway Road shall be
designed to avoid visual impacts as viewed from the river.
(3) No buildings shall be located within 200 feet of the center line of
any public paved road in the Preservation, Rural Residential and
§ 176-52 WATERFORD CODE § 176-52
168:458
Recreation/Conservation Districts, except for those roads which
provide for internal circulation within residentially developed
areas.
(4) No approval or permit shall be issued for development along the
scenic corridors as designated above, other than for establishments
for the sale of agricultural products, unless the applicant
demonstrates that all buildings are set back at least 200 feet from
the center line of the scenic corridor, except that:
(a) If compliance with the two-hundred-foot setback is constrained
by environmental or other physical considerations, such as
wetlands or active agricultural operations, the building shall
be set back as close to 200 feet as practical; provided, however,
that the location of the building conforms to the requirements
for wetlands as specified in § 176-103, and the site shall be
landscaped to provide screening between the building and the
corridor.
(b) If an applicant for development approval demonstrates that
more than 50% of the existing development patterns of the
corridor are such that buildings are set back less than 200 feet
within 1,000 feet of the site proposed for development, then a
setback shall be established for the proposed development that
is consistent with the established development pattern,
provided the site is landscaped to provide screening between
the building and the corridor.
(5) The requirements of Subsection G(3) and (4) above shall not apply
to residential cluster developments which comply with the
standards of § 176-136. [Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
H. Screening.
(1) No more than 10 automobiles, trucks or other motor vehicles,
whether or not they are in operating condition, shall be stored on
any lot unless such motor vehicles are adequately screened from
adjacent residential uses and scenic corridors. Where permitted,
all vehicles not in operating condition shall be stored only if the
gasoline tanks of such vehicles are drained. This section shall not
apply to vehicles that are in operating condition and maintained for
agricultural purposes on an agriculturally used parcel.
(2) Each off-street parking lot area shall have a minimum area
equivalent to one parking space for every 30 spaces landscaped
with approximately 1/2 of said area having shrubs no higher than
three feet and the other half having trees with branches no lower
than seven feet. Such landscaped areas shall be distributed
throughout the parking area in order to break the view of parked
cars in a manner not impairing visibility. All areas between the
§ 176-52 INSURANCE § 176-52
168:459
§ 176-53. Capital improvements.
parking area(s) and the building(s) shall be landscaped. Shade
trees shall be planted at a rate of one tree per five parking stalls.
A. The capital improvement program in each year's annual municipal
budget, as mandated by N.J.S.A. 40A:4-43, is incorporated herein as the
annual capital improvement program for the Township.
B. Where available, in the discretion of the Planning Board and subject to
the requirements of § 176-28, in order to promote the public health,
safety and welfare in potable water and safe water supply, all
developments approved after the effective date of this chapter shall,
where available, use public water in lieu of individual wells. If individual
wells are used, they shall be a minimum of 100 feet in depth, unless the
well penetrates an impermeable clay aquiclude, in this case the well
shall be drilled and cased to at least 50 feet. All private wells shall be
designed and installed in accordance with the standards of the
Township, county or state agency having jurisdiction.
C. In order to provide for sufficient residentially zoned property to be
eligible for an increase in density to accommodate transferred
development credits and to ensure sufficient revenues to provide for
the repayment of Township obligations for capital improvements and
infrastructure necessary to accommodate said increased densities; to
promote compliance with the energy conservation standards in
§ 176-63; to regulate growth so development occurs on lands suitable
for development based on analysis of the natural resource inventory
and considering the cumulative impact on developable lands as a result
of construction; to encourage the desired growth and densities only in
areas where the Master Plan anticipates development and the growth
of services to serve said development; and to achieve a sufficient
variation in the quality and type of tax rebates among residential,
commercial and industrial development to reduce the demand on
various Township services, including schools occasioned by
predominately residential development, the following standards shall
apply with regard to public sewer:
(1) Unless otherwise permitted by this chapter, no extension of the
public sewer system will be permitted outside the regional growth
area of the Township, and any extension shall be consistent with
the latest revision of the Waterford Township Wastewater
Management Plan.
(2) Any increase in available public sewer capacity obtained or
achieved after the effective date of this chapter shall be allocated
as follows:
(a) Residential development: 25%.
(b) Nonresidential development: 75%.
§ 176-52 WATERFORD CODE § 176-53
168:460
§ 176-54. Cleaning agents, chemicals and herbicides.
(3) At the time of approval of any development proposed to utilize
public sewer, the Township Administrator, or his designee, in
conjunction with calculations to be supplied by the Township
Engineer and the Municipal Utilities Authority, shall provide the
approving authority an estimate of the then remaining sewer
capacity and the effect of approval of the development on the
limitations established above. The Township Committee shall
monitor approvals utilizing public sewer in accordance with the
above limitations and may periodically revise the allocations above
based on actual experience with developments proposed to be
serviced by public sewer.
(4) Provided that the design and performance standards of this
chapter are met and provided further that the minimum lot size,
density, open space and zoning requirements for the district in
which the development is located are met, proposed developments
utilizing public sewer may still be approved by the Board if the
limitations specified in § 176-53C(2) hereinabove are exceeded, if a
variance is applied for and granted by the Planning Board. The
Board shall be guided by the goals set forth in this subsection when
making said determination and, as long as the committed capacity
is not exceeded, variances for this subsection shall be granted to
residential developments that have increased densities by the
utilization of PDCs.
A. No person shall apply any herbicide to any road or public utility right-ofway
within the Township unless necessary to protect an adjacent
agricultural activity.
B. Use of the following substances is prohibited in the Township to the
extent that such use will result in direct or indirect introduction of such
substances to any surface or groundwater or surface of any land:
(1) Septic tank cleaners; and
(2) Waste oil.
C. All storage facilities for deicing chemicals shall be lined to prevent
leaking into the soil and shall be covered with an impermeable surface
that shields the facility from precipitation.
D. In accordance with the CMP, no hazardous, toxic, chemical, petroleum
(including oil spill pollutants), septic or nuclear waste shall be stored,
discharged or disposed of on any land within the Township. Liquid or
dewatered sludge may only be applied as a part of a land application
program for agricultural purposes when also approved by the NJDEP.
E. No use, activity, operation or device concerned with the utilization or
storage of radioactive materials shall be established, modified,
constructed or used without there having first been obtained valid
§ 176-53 INSURANCE § 176-54
168:461
§ 176-55. Local communication facilities.
Local communication facilities, where permitted under Article XI, shall
comply with the following conditions:
permits and certificates from the Office of Radiation Protection, New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. Proof of compliance
with this requirement shall be the submission of duplicate copies of said
permits and certificates.
A. There must be a demonstrated need for the facility to serve the local
communication needs of the Pinelands, including those related to public
health and safety, as well as a demonstrated need to locate the facility
in the Pinelands in order to provide adequate service to meet these
needs.
B. The supporting structure shall be designed to accommodate the needs
of any other local communications provider which has identified a need
to locate a facility within an overlapping service area.
C. The antenna shall utilize an existing communications or other suitable
structure to the extent practicable.
D. If an existing communications or other suitable structure cannot be
utilized, the antenna and any necessary supporting structure shall be
located such that it:
(1) Meets technical operating requirements;
(2) Minimizes visual impacts as viewed from publicly dedicated roads
and highways and from other areas frequented by the public by, in
order of decreasing priority:
(a) Avoiding, to the maximum extent practicable, any direct line of
sight from low intensive recreation facilities and campgrounds;
and
(b) Minimizing the length of time that an antenna structure is
visible from publicly dedicated roads and highways.
(3) Avoids, to the maximum extent practicable, visual impacts as
viewed from any river, lake, pond, or stream.
(4) Minimizes visual impacts from existing residential dwellings
located on contiguous parcels through adherence to the buffer and
setback requirements in § 176-52.
(5) The antenna and any supporting structure does not exceed 200 feet
in height but, if of a lesser height, shall be designed so that its
height can be increased to 200 feet if necessary to accommodate
other local communications facilities in the future.
§ 176-54 WATERFORD CODE § 176-55
168:462
§ 176-56. Conformance requirements and general standards.
(6) The location of any antenna shall not interfere with any air traffic
lane for Philadelphia International, Atlantic City International, or
any other airport within proximity.
A. Applicability. All development in Waterford Township shall demonstrate
conformance to the design and performance standards of this article.
The streets, drainage, rights-of-way, school sites, public parks,
playgrounds and playfields, scenic areas, historic sites and flood control
basins shown on the Master Plan shall be considered in the approval of
all development. To the extent consistent with the reasonable utilization
of land, site design shall promote the conservation of energy through
the use of planning practices designed to reduce energy consumption
and to provide for maximum utilization of renewable energy sources.
B. Approvals required.
(1) No use shall be made of any lands or buildings in the Township until
all required approvals are obtained through an application for
development for a subdivision, site plan, planned development,
conditional use, zoning variance or direction for the issuance of a
permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or 40:55D-36, or until the
applicant has obtained written certification from the Zoning Official
that the proposed use is either an exempt site plan or exempt
subdivision as defined in this chapter or that no approvals are
otherwise necessary.
(2) No construction or other physical alteration of any lands or
buildings in the Township shall be made without compliance with
the preconditions to commencement of construction and the
obtaining of all required permits required pursuant to Article II and
the Uniform Construction Code. No use shall be made of any lands
or buildings in the Township pending any appeal pursuant to
§ 176-18K and L.
(3) No building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed,
demolished, altered or restored, no use shall be made of any land,
and no development shall be approved, unless the building,
structure, use or development meets the design and performance
standards specified in this chapter for all developments and the
design and performance standards specified in this chapter for the
specific type or class of use proposed, and meets the applicable
zoning requirements specified in this chapter unless a zoning
variance is granted in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 and
§ 176-105D.
(4) In addition to each and every other approval requirement of this
chapter, no person shall carry out any development until an
application for such development has been submitted to the
Commission and a certificate of filing has been issued by the
§ 176-55 INSURANCE § 176-56
168:463
§ 176-57. Cultural housing.
Commission. This requirement shall not apply to the development
of single-family homes on existing lots of record pursuant to
§ 176-14C or to those activities listed in § 176-14A(2).
C. Planning studies. On occasion the Township Committee may authorize
the Planning Board to complete specialized planning studies in
conjunction with the Master Plan. Upon adoption of any such study into
the Master Plan by resolution of the Planning Board, the standards,
goals and recommendations of said planning study shall be considered
by the approving authority in evaluating any application for
development proposed for the area or zone covered by such studies,
and the applicant shall address such standards, goals and
recommendations of the study in the application for development.
D. Character of the land. Land which the approving authority finds to be in
areas having severe or moderate soil characteristics, particularly as the
land relates to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes soil
conditions, adverse topography or other features which can reasonably
be expected to be harmful to the health, safety and general welfare of
present or future inhabitants of the development and/or its surrounding
areas shall not be subdivided, and site plans shall not be approved
unless adequate and acceptable methods are formulated by the
developer to solve the problems by methods meeting the requirements
of this chapter.
E. Plats straddling municipal boundaries. Whenever a development abuts
or crosses a municipal boundary, access to those lots within the
Township shall be from within the Township as the general rule.
Whenever access to a development is required across land in an
adjoining municipality as the exception, the approving authority shall
require documentation that such access is legally established and that
the access road is adequately improved, conforms to sound planning
principles, and will not create a hardship upon the furnishing of
municipal services, such as police and fire protection, snow removal,
school bus service, and trash collection.
A. Residential dwelling units on 3.2 acre lots are permitted in the
Recreation/Conservation, Agricultural and Preservation Districts,
provided that:
(1) The dwelling unit will be the principal residence of the property
owner or a member of the immediate family of the property owner;
(2) The individual whose principal residence the dwelling unit will be
has not developed a dwelling unit under this section within the
previous five years; and
(3) The parcel of land on which the dwelling is to be located has been
in continuous ownership since February 7, 1979, of the person
§ 176-56 WATERFORD CODE § 176-57
168:464
§ 176-58. Curbs and gutters.
whose principal residence the dwelling unit will be, a member of
that person's immediate family, or a partnership or corporation in
which members of that person's immediate family collectively own
more than a majority interest in such partnership or corporation.
(4) The person whose principal residence the dwelling unit will be has
resided in the Pinelands for at least five years and that person or
one or more members of that person's immediate family has
resided in the Pinelands for a total of at least 20 years.
B. Residential dwelling units on lots of 1.0 acre are permitted in the
Recreation/Conservation, Agricultural and Preservation Districts,
provided that:
(1) The applicant satisfies all of the requirements set forth in
§ 176-57A above.
(2) The lot to be developed existed as of February 8, 1979, or was
created as a result of an approval granted by the Pinelands
Development Review Board or by the Commission pursuant to the
interim rules and regulations prior to January 14, 1981.
(3) The applicant qualifies for and receives a variance, from the
Township, from the 3.2 acre lot size requirement set forth in
§ 176-57A above.
(4) The applicant purchases and redeems 0.25 PDC.
(5) Any PDCs allocated to the lot to be developed are reduced pursuant
to § 176-15A(2)(c).
A. Concrete curb and gutter, concrete curb, or bituminous concrete curb
shall be installed along every street within a development; at all
intersections with Township roads, state and county highways; where
stormwater velocities exceed the erosion velocities specified in the
"New Jersey Soil Erosion and Sediment Control" standards; and for
traffic channelization and control. The standard curb section to be used
shall not be more than 20 feet in length, with a scored joint every 10
feet, and shall be set in accordance with approved lines and grades.
B. Where curbing is not required, edge definition and stabilization shall be
furnished for safety reasons, and to prevent pavement unraveling.
C. Where drainage inlets are constructed but curbs are not required,
curbing must be provided at least 10 feet on each side of the inlet, set
back one foot from the extension of the pavement.
D. Radial curbs shall be formed in an arc segment, in a smooth curve.
Chord segments are prohibited.
§ 176-57 INSURANCE § 176-58
168:465
§ 176-59. Stormwater control. [Amended 1-6-2007 by Ord. No.
2006-19]
E. All curbing shall be eight inches at the base by 18 inches in height and
six inches at the top with a six inches reveal. Concrete used shall be
Class B concrete having a twenty-eight-day compressive strength of
4,500 pounds per square inch and shall be air entrained.
F. Depressed curb ramps for the handicapped shall be installed at all radii
in accordance with the requirements of New Jersey Public Laws
Chapter 5, Sections 200 and 201, and requirements set forth in Title 23,
United States Code, "Highways", Section 402, Paragraph (b)(I)(F).
A. Scope and purpose.
(1) Purpose.
(a) It is hereby determined that:
[1] Land development projects and associated disturbance of
vegetation and soil and changes in land cover, including
increases in impervious cover, alter the hydrologic
response of local watersheds and increase stormwater
runoff rates and volumes. If inadequately or improperly
managed, this stormwater runoff can deplete groundwater
resources and increase flooding, stream channel erosion,
and sediment transport and deposition.
[2] This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities
of waterborne pollutants.
[3] Increases of stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollutants have occurred in the past as a result of
land development, and contribute to the degradation of
the water resources of the Township of Waterford.
[4] All lands of the Township of Waterford lie within the
Pinelands Area, and therefore, development in the
Township of Waterford is subject to the requirements of
the Pinelands Protection Act (N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 et seq.)
and the implementing regulations and minimum standards
contained in the Pinelands Comprehensive Management
Plan (N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et seq.) (CMP). The purpose and
intent of these regulations and standards is to promote
orderly development of the Pinelands so as to preserve and
protect the significant and unique natural, ecological,
agricultural, archaeological, historical, scenic, cultural
and recreational resources of the Pinelands.
[5] Pinelands Area resources are to be protected in
accordance with Pinelands Comprehensive Management
Plan at N.J.A.C. 7:50 et seq., New Jersey's Stormwater
§ 176-58 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:466
Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.1 et seq., and New
Jersey's surface water quality antidegradation policies
contained in the New Jersey Surface Water Quality
Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.1 et seq. Permitted uses shall
maintain the ecological character and quality of the
Pinelands, including good water quality and natural rates
and volumes of flow.
[6] Increased stormwater rates and volumes and the
sediments and pollutants associated with stormwater
runoff from future development projects within the
Pinelands Area have the potential to adversely affect the
Township of Waterford's streams and water resources and
the streams and water resources of downstream
municipalities.
[7] Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source
pollution can be controlled and minimized through the
regulation of stormwater runoff from development sites.
[8] It is in the public interest to regulate the discharge of
stormwater runoff from major development projects, as
defined in Subsection G of this section, conducted within
the Pinelands Area, as provided in this section, in order to
control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates
and volumes, to maintain groundwater recharge, and to
control and minimize soil erosion, stream channel erosion
and nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater
runoff.
(b) Therefore, it is the purpose of this section to establish
minimum stormwater management requirements and controls
for major development, consistent with the statewide
stormwater requirements at N.J.A.C. 7:8, the regulations and
standards contained in the Pinelands CMP, and the provisions
of the adopted Master Plan and land use ordinances of the
Township of Waterford.
(2) Goals and techniques.
(a) Through this section, the Township of Waterford has
established the following goals for stormwater control:
[1] To reduce flood damage, including damage to life and
property;
[2] To minimize any increase in stormwater runoff from new
development;
[3] To reduce soil erosion from any development or
construction project;
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:467
[4] To assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts
and bridges, and other in-stream structures;
[5] To maintain groundwater recharge;
[6] To minimize any increase in nonpoint pollution;
[7] To maintain the integrity of stream channels for their
biological functions, as well as for drainage;
[8] To restore, protect, maintain and enhance the quality of
the streams and water resources of the Township of
Waterford and the ecological character and quality of the
Pinelands Area;
[9] To minimize pollutants in stormwater runoff from new and
existing development in order to restore, protect, enhance
and maintain the chemical, physical and biological
integrity of the surface and groundwaters of the Township
of Waterford, to protect public health and to enhance the
domestic, municipal, recreational, industrial and other
uses of water; and
[10] To protect public safety through the proper design and
operation of stormwater management basins.
(b) In order to achieve the goals for stormwater control set forth in
this section, the Township of Waterford has identified the
following management techniques:
[1] Implementation of multiple stormwater management best
management practices (BMPs) may be necessary to
achieve the performance standards for stormwater runoff
quantity and rate, groundwater recharge, erosion control,
and stormwater runoff quality established through this
section.
[2] Compliance with the stormwater runoff quantity and rate,
groundwater recharge, erosion control, and stormwater
runoff quality standards established through N.J.A.C.
7:8-1.1 et seq., and this section shall be accomplished to
the maximum extent practicable through the use of
nonstructural BMPs, before relying on structural BMPs.
Nonstructural BMPs are also known as low impact
development (LID) techniques.
[3] Nonstructural BMPs shall include both environmentally
sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being
exposed to stormwater.
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:468
[4] Source control plans shall be developed based upon
physical site conditions and the origin, nature and the
anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants.
[5] Structural BMPs, where necessary, shall be integrated
with nonstructural stormwater management strategies
and proper maintenance plans.
[6] When using structural BMPs, multiple stormwater
management measures, smaller in size and distributed
spatially throughout the land development site, shall be
used wherever possible to achieve the performance
standards for water quality, quantity and groundwater
recharge established through this section before relying
on a single, larger stormwater management measure to
achieve these performance standards.
(3) Applicability. This section shall apply to:
(a) All site plans and subdivisions for major developments
occurring within the Pinelands Area that require preliminary
or final site plan or subdivision review; and
(b) All major development projects undertaken by the Township of
Waterford.121
(4) Procedures. In addition to other development review procedures
set forth in the Code of the Township of Waterford, major
developments located within the Pinelands Area shall comply with
the stormwater management requirements and specifications set
forth in this section. New agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development in Subsection G of this section
shall be submitted to the appropriate Soil Conservation District for
review and approval in accordance with the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.4(b).
(5) Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
(a) Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans
pursuant to this section are to be considered an integral part of
development approvals under the subdivision and site plan
review process and do not relieve the applicant of the
responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other applicable ordinance, code,
rule, regulation, statute, act or other provision of law.
(b) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
section shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
121. This clause is intended to provide consistency with DEP's stormwater management
requirements. As per normal practice, all development within the Pinelands Area which is
undertaken by a Pinelands Area municipality shall comply with all of the requirements of
the CMP.
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:469
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
This section is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or
annul any other ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or
other provision of law except that, where any provision of
this section imposes restrictions different from those imposed
by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision
of law, the more restrictive or stringent provisions or higher
standards shall control.
(c) In the event that a regional stormwater management plan(s) is
prepared and formally adopted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.1 et
seq. for any drainage area(s) or watershed(s) of which the
Township of Waterford is a part, the stormwater provisions of
such a plan(s) shall be adopted by the Township of Waterford
within one year of the adoption of a regional stormwater
management plan (RSWMP) as an amendment to an Areawide
Water Quality Management Plan. Local ordinances proposed to
implement the RSWMP shall be submitted to the Commission
for certification within six months of the adoption of the
RSWMP per N.J.A.C. 7:8 and the Pinelands CMP (N.J.A.C. 7:50).
B. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
(1) Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(a) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a site
development that is subject to this section, the applicant shall
submit all of the required components of the checklist for the
site development stormwater plan at § 176-59B(3) below as
part of the applicant's application for subdivision or site plan
approval. These required components are in addition to any
other information required under any provisions of Chapter
176, Land Use, Development and Zoning, or by the Pinelands
Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et seq.
(b) The applicant shall demonstrate that the site development
project meets the standards set forth in this section.
(c) The applicant shall submit three copies of the materials listed
in the checklist for site development stormwater plans in
accordance with § 176-59C(3) of this chapter.
(2) Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development stormwater plan shall be reviewed as a part of the
subdivision or site plan review process by the municipal board or
official from which municipal approval is sought. That municipal
board or official shall consult the engineer retained by the Planning
Board to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set
forth in this section.122
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:470
(3) Checklist requirements. Any application for approval of a major
development shall include at least the following information. All
required engineering plans shall be submitted to the Township of
Waterford and the Pinelands Commission in CAD format 15 or
higher, registered and rectified to NJ State Plane Feet NAD 83 or
Shape Format NJ State Plan Feet NAD 83, and all other documents
shall be submitted in both paper and commonly used electronic file
formats such as PDF, word processing, database or spreadsheet
files. Three copies of each item shall be submitted.
(a) Topographic base map. The applicant shall submit a
topographic base map of the site which extends a minimum of
300 feet beyond the limits of the proposed development, at a
scale of one inch equals 200 feet or greater, showing one-foot
contour intervals. The map shall indicate the following:
existing surface water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils,
highly erodible soils, perennial or intermittent streams that
drain into or upstream of any Category One or Pinelands
waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing surface and subsurface humanmade
structures, roads, bearing and distances of property
lines, and significant natural and man-made features not
otherwise shown. The Township of Waterford or the Pinelands
Commission may require upstream tributary drainage system
information as necessary.
(b) Environmental site analysis. The applicant shall submit a
written description along with the drawings of the natural and
human-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include:
[1] A discussion of environmentally critical areas, soil
conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways and vegetation on
the site. Particular attention should be given to unique,
unusual or environmentally sensitive features and to those
that provide particular opportunities for or constraints on
development; and
[2] Detailed soil and other environmental conditions on the
portion of the site proposed for installation of any
stormwater BMPs, including, at a minimum: soils report
based on on-site soil tests; locations and spot elevations in
plan view of test pits and permeability tests; permeability
test data and calculations; and any other required soil data
(e.g., mounding analyses results) correlated with location
and elevation of each test site; cross-section of proposed
stormwater BMP with side-by-side depiction of soil profile
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:471
drawn to scale and seasonal high water table elevation
identified; and any other information necessary to
demonstrate the suitability of the specific proposed
structural and nonstructural stormwater management
measures relative to the environmental conditions on the
portion(s) of the site proposed for implementation of those
measures.
(c) Project description and site plan(s). The applicant shall submit
a map (or maps) at the scale of the topographical base map
indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings,
roads, parking areas, utilities, structural facilities for
stormwater management and sediment control, and other
permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show areas
where alterations will occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan
and justification for proposed changes in natural conditions
shall also be provided.
(d) Land use planning and source control plan.
[1] The applicant shall submit a detailed land use planning
and source control plan which provides a description of
how the site will be developed to meet the erosion control,
groundwater recharge and stormwater runoff quantity and
quality standards at § 176-59D through use of
nonstructural or low-impact development techniques and
source controls to the maximum extent practicable before
relying on structural BMPs. The land use planning and
source control plan shall include a detailed narrative and
associated illustrative maps and/or plans that specifically
address how each of the following nine nonstructural
strategies identified in Subchapter 5 of the NJDEP
Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:8-5) and set
forth below Subsection B(3)(d)[1][a] through [i] will be
implemented to the maximum extent practicable to meet
the standards at Subsection D of this section on the site. If
one or more of the nine nonstructural strategies will not be
implemented on the site, the applicant shall provide a
detailed rationale establishing a basis for the contention
that use of the strategy is not practicable on the site.
[a] Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or
areas particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment
loss;
[b] Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or
disconnect the flow of runoff over impervious
surfaces;
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:472
[c] Maximize the protection of natural drainage features
and vegetation;
[d] Minimize the decrease in the predevelopment time of
concentration;
[e] Minimize land disturbance, including clearing and
grading;
[f] Minimize soil compaction and all other soil
disturbance;
[g] Provide low-maintenance landscaping that provides
for the retention and planting of native plants and
minimizes the use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides,
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.24;
[h] Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
and
[i] Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize
the use or exposure of pollutants at the site in order to
prevent or minimize the release of those pollutants
into stormwater runoff. These source controls shall
include, but are not limited to:
[i] Site design features that help to prevent
accumulation of trash and debris in drainage
systems;
[ii] Site design features that help to prevent
discharge of trash and debris from drainage
systems;
[iii] Site design features that help to prevent and/or
contain spills or other harmful accumulations of
pollutants at industrial or commercial
developments; and
[iv] Applying fertilizer in accordance with the
requirements established under the Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq., and implementing rules, when establishing
vegetation after land disturbance.
[2] For sites where stormwater will be generated from high
pollutant loading areas or where stormwater will be
exposed to source material, as defined in Subsection G of
this section, the applicant shall also demonstrate in the
land use planning and source control plan that the
requirements of Subsection D have been met.
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:473
[3] The use of nonstructural strategies to meet the
performance standards in Subsection D of this section is
not required for development sites creating less than one
acre of disturbance. However, each application for major
development and any other application where the
Township of Waterford otherwise requires a landscaping
plan shall contain a landscaping or revegetation plan in
accordance with the CMP standards at N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.24(c). In addition, the applicant shall demonstrate
that, at a minimum, existing trees and vegetation on the
development site will be preserved and protected
according to the minimum standards established by
provisions of Chapter 176, Land Use, Development and
Zoning, or by conditions of zoning or variance approval.
(e) Stormwater management facilities map. The applicant shall
submit a map, at the same scale as the topographic base map,
depicting the following information:
[1] The total area to be disturbed, paved and/or built upon,
proposed surface contours, land area to be occupied by the
stormwater management facilities and the type of
vegetation thereon, and details of the proposed plan to
manage and dispose of stormwater; and
[2] Details of all stormwater management facility designs,
during and after construction, including discharge
provisions, discharge capacity for each outlet at different
levels of detention (if applicable) and emergency spillway
provisions with maximum discharge capacity of each
spillway.
(f) Calculations (groundwater recharge and stormwater runoff
rate, volume and quality). The applicant shall submit
comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and post-development conditions for
the design storms specified in Subsection C. The standards for
groundwater recharge and stormwater runoff rate, volume and
quality required by Subsection D shall be met using the
methods, calculations and assumptions provided in Subsection
C.
(g) Inspection, maintenance and repair plan. The applicant shall
submit a detailed plan describing how the proposed
stormwater management measure(s) shall meet the
maintenance and repair requirements of Subsection F of this
section. Said plan shall include, at a minimum, the following
elements:
[1] The frequency with which inspections will be made;
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:474
[2] The specific maintenance tasks and requirements for each
proposed structural and nonstructural BMP;
[3] The name, address and telephone number for the entity
responsible for implementation of the maintenance plan;
[4] The reporting requirements; and
[5] Copies of the inspection and maintenance reporting
sheets.
(h) Exception from submission requirements. An exception may be
granted from submission of any of these required components
[except Subsection B(3)(g) above, Inspection, maintenance,
and repair plan] if its absence will not materially affect the
review process. However, items required pursuant to the
application requirements in the Pinelands CMP [N.J.A.C.
7:50-4.2(b)] shall be submitted to the NJ Pinelands Commission
unless the Executive Director waives or modifies the
application requirements.
C. Methodologies for the calculation of stormwater runoff rate and
volume, stormwater runoff quality, and groundwater recharge.
(1) Method of calculating stormwater runoff rate and volume.
(a) In complying with the stormwater runoff quantity and rate
standards in subsection D(2), the design engineer shall
calculate the stormwater runoff rate and volume using the
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Runoff
Equation, Runoff Curve Numbers, and Dimensionless Unit
Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS National Engineering
Handbook Part 630, Hydrology and Technical Release 55,
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, incorporated herein
by reference, as amended and supplemented. Alternative
methods of calculation may be utilized, provided such
alternative methods are at least as protective as the NRCS
methodology when considered on a regional stormwater
management basis.
(b) In calculating stormwater runoff using the NRCS methodology,
the design engineer shall separately calculate and then
combine the runoff volumes from pervious and directly
connected impervious surfaces within each drainage area
within the parcel.
(c) Calculation of stormwater runoff from unconnected impervious
surfaces shall be based, as applicable, upon the two-Step
method described in the current New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual or the NRCS methodology.
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:475
(d) In calculating stormwater runoff using the NRCS methodology,
the design engineer shall use appropriate twenty-four-hour
rainfall depths as developed for the project site by the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, available online at
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/index.html.
(e) When calculating stormwater runoff for predeveloped site
conditions, the design engineer shall use the following criteria:
[1] When selecting or calculating runoff curve numbers (CNs)
for predeveloped project site conditions, the project site's
land cover shall be assumed to be woods in good condition.
However, another land cover may be used to calculate
runoff coefficients if:
[a] Such land cover has existed at the site or portion
thereof without interruption for at least five years
immediately prior to the time of application; and
[b] The design engineer can document the character and
extent of such land cover through the use of
photographs, affidavits, and/or other acceptable land
use records.
[2] If more than one land cover has existed on the site during
the five years immediately prior to the time of application,
the land cover with the lowest runoff potential shall be
used for the computations.
[3] All predeveloped land covers shall be assumed to be in
good hydrologic condition and, if cultivated, shall be
assumed to have conservation treatment.
[4] In calculating predeveloped site stormwater runoff, the
design engineer shall include the effects of all land
features and structures, such as ponds, wetlands,
depressions, hedgerows, and culverts, that affect
predeveloped site stormwater runoff rates and/or volumes.
[5] Where tailwater will affect the hydraulic performance of a
stormwater management measure, the design engineer
shall include such effects in the measure's design.
(2) Method of calculating stormwater runoff quality.
(a) In complying with the stormwater runoff quality standards in
Subsection D(6)(a), the design engineer shall calculate the
stormwater runoff rate and volume using the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Runoff Equation,
Runoff Curve Numbers, and Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph,
as described in the NRCS National Engineering Handbook Part
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:476
630, Hydrology and Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds, as amended and supplemented.
(b) The design engineer shall also use the NJDEP Water Quality
Design Storm, which is 1.25 inches of rainfall falling in a
nonlinear pattern in two hours. Details of the water quality
design storm are shown in Table 1.
(c) Calculation of runoff volumes, peak rates, and hydrographs for
the water quality design storm may take into account the
implementation of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution1
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
1 Source: N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(a).
(d) Total suspended solids (TSS) reduction calculations.
[1] If more than one stormwater BMP in series is necessary to
achieve the required 80% TSS reduction for a site, the
applicant shall utilize the following formula to calculate
TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (A x B)/100
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:477
Where:
R = Total TSS percent load removal from
application of both BMPs;
A = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the
first BMP; and
B = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the
second BMP.
[2] If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the 80%
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless
the runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which
case the removal rate can be demonstrated through a
calculation using a weighted average.
(e) TSS removal rates for stormwater BMPs.
[1] For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2
presents the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs
designed in accordance with the New Jersey BMP Manual.
The BMP Manual may be obtained from the address
identified in Subsection K or found on the NJDEP's website
at www.njstormwater.org. TSS reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in
Table 2.
[2] Alternative stormwater management measures, removal
rates and methods of calculating removal rates may be
used if the design engineer provides documentation
demonstrating the capability of these alternative rates and
methods to the Township of Waterford. Any alternative
stormwater management measure, removal rate or
method of calculating the removal rate shall be subject to
approval by the Township of Waterford and a copy shall be
provided to the following:
[a] The Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, PO Box 418,
Trenton, NJ, 08625-0418; and
[b] The New Jersey Pinelands Commission, PO Box 7,
New Lisbon, NJ, 08064.
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:478
Table 2: Pollutant Removal Rates for BMPs1
Best
Management
Practice
TSS
Percent
Removal
Rate
Total
Phosphorus
Percent
Removal
Rate
Total
Nitrogen
Percent
Removal
Rate
Bioretention
systems
90 60 30
Constructed
stormwater
wetland
90 50 30
Extended
detention
basin
40 to 60
(final rate
based upon
detention
time; see
New Jersey
BMP
Manual,
Ch. 9)
20 20
Infiltration
basin
80 60 50
Manufactured
treatment
device
Pollutant
removal
rates as
certified by
NJDEP; see
§ 176-59C
Pollutant
removal
rates as
certified by
NJDEP; see
§ 176-59C
Pollutant
removal
rates as
certified by
NJDEP; see
§ 176-59C
Pervious
paving systems
80 (porous
paving)
60 50
80
(permeable
pavers with
storage
bed)
0 - volume
reduction
only
(permeable
pavers
without
storage
bed)
0 - volume
reduction
only
(permeable
pavers
without
storage
bed)
0 - volume
reduction
only
(permeable
pavers
without
storage
bed)
Sand filter 80 50 35
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:479
Table 2: Pollutant Removal Rates for BMPs1
Best
Management
Practice
TSS
Percent
Removal
Rate
Total
Phosphorus
Percent
Removal
Rate
Total
Nitrogen
Percent
Removal
Rate
Vegetative
filter strip (for
filter strips
with multiple
vegetated
covers, the
final TSS
removal rate
should be
based upon a
weighted
average of the
adopted rates
shown in Table
2, based upon
the relative
flow lengths
through each
cover type)
60 (turf
grass)
30 30
70 (native
grasses,
meadow
and
planted
woods)
80
(indigenous
woods)
Wet pond/
retention basin
50 to 90
(final rate
based upon
pool
volume and
detention
time; see
NJ BMP
Manual)
50 30
1 Source: 7:8-5.5(c) and New Jersey BMP Manual
Chapter 4.
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:480
(f) Nutrient removal rates for stormwater BMPs. For purposes of
post-development nutrient load reduction calculations, Table 2
presents the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs
designed in accordance with the New Jersey BMP Manual. If
alternative stormwater BMPs are proposed, the applicant shall
demonstrate that the selected BMPs will achieve the nutrient
removal standard required in Subsection D(6).
(3) Methods of calculating groundwater recharge.
(a) If complying with the groundwater recharge standards
contained in Subsection D(3)(a)[1], the design engineer may
calculate groundwater recharge in accordance with the New
Jersey Groundwater Recharge Spreadsheet (NJGRS) computer
program incorporated herein by reference as amended and
supplemented. Information regarding the methodology is
available in Subsection J(1) or from the New Jersey BMP
Manual.
(b) Alternative groundwater recharge calculation methods to meet
these requirements may be used upon approval by the
Municipal Engineer.
(c) If complying with the groundwater recharge standards
contained in Subsection D(3)(a)[2], the design engineer shall:
[1] Calculate stormwater runoff volumes in accordance with
the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
(NRCS) methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation
and Runoff Curve Numbers, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Part 630, Hydrology and
Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, as amended and supplemented; and
[2] Use appropriate two-year, twenty-four-hour rainfall depths
as developed for the project site by the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration, available online at
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/index.html.
(d) When calculating groundwater recharge or stormwater runoff
for predeveloped site conditions, the design engineer shall use
the following criteria:
[1] When selecting land covers or calculating runoff curve
numbers (CNs) for predeveloped project site conditions,
the project site's land cover shall be assumed to be woods.
However, another land cover may be used to calculate
runoff coefficients if:
[a] Such land cover has existed at the site or portion
thereof without interruption for at least five years
immediately prior to the time of application; and
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:481
[b] The design engineer can document the character and
extent of such land cover through the use of
photographs, affidavits, and/or other acceptable land
use records.
[2] If more than one land cover, other than woods, has existed
on the site during the five years immediately prior to the
time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff
potential (including woods) shall be used for the
computations.
[3] All predeveloped land covers shall be assumed to be in
good hydrologic condition and, if cultivated, shall be
assumed to have conservation treatment.
D. Stormwater management performance standards for major
development.
(1) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(a) To the maximum extent practicable, the performance
standards in Subsection D for major development shall be met
by incorporating the nine nonstructural strategies identified in
Subchapter 5 of the NJ Stormwater Management Rules
(N.J.A.C. 7:8-5), and set forth in Subsection B(3)(d)[1], into the
design. The applicant shall identify within the land use
planning and source control plan required by Subsection
B(3)(d) of this section how each of the nine nonstructural
measures will be incorporated into the design of the project to
the maximum extent practicable.
(b) If the applicant contends that it is not practical for
engineering, environmental or safety reasons to incorporate
any of the nine nonstructural strategies into the design of a
particular project, the applicant shall provide a detailed
rationale establishing a basis for the contention that use of the
strategy is not practical on the site. This rationale shall be
submitted in accordance with the checklist requirements
established by Subsection B to the Township of Waterford. A
determination by the Township of Waterford that this rationale
is inadequate or without merit shall result in a denial of the
application unless one of the following conditions are met:
[1] The land use planning and source control plan is amended
to include a description of how all nine nonstructural
measures will be implemented on the development site,
and the amended plan is approved by the Township of
Waterford;
[2] The land use planning and source control plan is amended
to provide an alternative nonstructural strategy or
measure that is not included in the list of nine
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:482
nonstructural measures, but still meets the performance
standards in Subsection D, and the amended plan is
approved by the Township of Waterford; or
[3] The land use planning and source control plan is amended
to provide an adequate rationale for the contention that
use of the particular strategy is not practical on the site,
and the amended plan is approved by the Township of
Waterford.
(c) In addition to all other requirements of this section, each
applicant shall demonstrate that, at a minimum, existing trees
and vegetation on the development site will be preserved,
protected and maintained according to the minimum standards
established by provisions of Chapter 176, Land Use,
Development and Zoning, or by conditions of zoning or
variance approval. Existing trees and vegetation shall be
protected during construction activities in accordance with the
"Standard for Tree Protection During Construction" provided
in the NJ State Soil Conservation Committee Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, which is
incorporated herein by reference as amended and
supplemented.
(d) In addition to all other requirements of this section, each
application for major development, and any other application
where the Township of Waterford otherwise requires a
landscaping plan, shall contain a landscaping or revegetation
plan in accordance with the Pinelands CMP standards at
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.24(c).
(e) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater
management measure to meet the performance standards in
Subsection D shall be dedicated to a government entity; shall
be subjected to a conservation easement filed with the
appropriate County Clerk's office; or shall be subjected to an
equivalent form of restriction approved by the Township of
Waterford that ensures that that measure or equivalent
stormwater management measure is maintained in perpetuity,
as detailed in Subsection F of this section.
(f) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management
strategies is available in the New Jersey BMP Manual, which
may be obtained from the address identified in Subsection K(1)
or found on the NJDEP's website at www.njstormwater.org.
(g) Exception for major development sites creating less than one
acre of disturbance. The use of nonstructural strategies to
meet the performance standards in Subsection D of this
section is not required for major development creating less
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:483
than one acre of disturbance. However, the following
requirements shall be met:
[1] Each application for major development and any other
application where the Township of Waterford otherwise
requires a landscaping plan shall contain a landscaping or
revegetation plan prepared in accordance with the
Pinelands CMP standards [N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.24(c)];
[2] Each applicant shall demonstrate that, at a minimum,
existing trees and vegetation on the development site will
be preserved and protected according to the minimum
standards established by provisions of Chapter 176, Land
Use, Development and Zoning, or by conditions of zoning
or variance approval; and
[3] Existing trees and vegetation shall be protected during
construction activities in accordance with the "Standard
for Tree Protection During Construction" provided in the
NJ State Soil Conservation Committee Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, which is
incorporated herein by reference as amended and
supplemented.
(2) Stormwater runoff quantity and rate standards.
(a) There shall be no direct discharge of stormwater runoff from
any point or nonpoint source to any wetland, wetlands
transition area or surface water body. In addition, stormwater
runoff shall not be directed in such a way as to increase the
volume and/or rate of discharge into any surface water body
from that which existed prior to development of the site.
(b) To the maximum extent practical, there shall be no direct
discharge of stormwater runoff onto farm fields so as to protect
farm crops from damage due to flooding, erosion and long-term
saturation of cultivated crops and cropland.
(c) For all major developments, the total runoff volume generated
from the net increase in impervious surfaces by a ten-year,
twenty-four-hour storm shall be retained and infiltrated on site.
(d) In addition, the design engineer, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations contained in Subsection C, shall either:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that the post-developed stormwater runoff hydrographs
from the project site for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storms do not exceed, at any point in time, the site's
predeveloped runoff hydrographs for the same storms;
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:484
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that under post-developed site conditions:
[a] There is no increase in predeveloped stormwater
runoff rates from the project site for the two-, ten-, and
one-hundred-year storms; and
[b] Any increased stormwater runoff volume or change in
stormwater runoff timing for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storms will not increase flood damage at
or downstream of the project site. When performing
this analysis for predeveloped site conditions, all offsite
development levels shall reflect existing
conditions. When performing this analysis for postdeveloped
site conditions, all off-site development
levels shall reflect full development in accordance
with current zoning and land use ordinances; or
[3] Demonstrate that the peak post-developed stormwater
runoff rates from the project site for the two-, ten-, and
one-hundred-year storms are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the site's peak predeveloped stormwater
runoff rates for the same storms. Peak outflow rates from
on-site stormwater measures for these storms shall be
adjusted where necessary to account for the discharge of
increased stormwater runoff rates and/or volumes from
project site areas not controlled by the on-site measures.
These percentages do not have to be applied to those
portions of the project site that are not proposed for
development at the time of application, provided that such
areas are:
[a] Protected from future development by imposition of a
conservation easement, deed restriction, or other
acceptable legal measures; or
[b] Would be subject to review under these standards if
they are proposed for any degree of development in
the future.
(e) In tidal flood hazard areas, a stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection D(2)(d)[1], [2] and [3]
above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
(f) The standards for stormwater runoff quantity and rate
required by this section shall be met using the methods,
calculations and assumptions provided in Subsection C.
(3) Groundwater recharge standards.
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:485
(a) For all major developments, with the exception of those
described in Subsection D(3)(d), below, the design engineer,
using the assumptions and factors for stormwater runoff and
groundwater recharge calculations contained in Subsection C,
shall either:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that the post-developed project site maintains 100% of the
site's predeveloped average annual groundwater recharge
volume; or
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that any increase in the project site's stormwater runoff
volume for the two-year, twenty-four-hour storm from
predeveloped to post-developed conditions is infiltrated on
site.
(b) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on the
groundwater table and design the project site and all site
groundwater recharge measures so as to avoid adverse
hydraulic impacts. Adverse hydraulic impacts include, but are
not limited to: raising the groundwater table so as to cause
surface ponding; flooding of basements and other subsurface
structures and areas; preventing a stormwater infiltration
basin from completely draining via infiltration within 72 hours
of a design storm event; and interference with the proper
operation of subsurface sewage disposal systems and other
surface and subsurface facilities in the vicinity of the
groundwater recharge measure.
(c) The standards for groundwater recharge required by this
section shall be met using the methods, calculations and
assumptions provided in Subsection C.
(d) Exceptions.
[1] The preceding groundwater recharge standards shall not
apply to sites that create less than one acre of disturbance.
[2] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas in industrial and commercial
developments where solvents and/or petroleum
products are loaded/unloaded, stored or applied;
areas where hazardous materials are expected to be
present in greater than reportable quantities as
defined by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; areas
recharge would be inconsistent with department
approved remedial action work plan or landfill closure
plan and areas with high risks for spills of toxic
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:486
materials, such as gas stations and vehicle
maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrials
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery,
fuels, and lubricants; solvents and detergents that are
related to process, manufacturing, or other industrial
activities that are exposed to stormwater.
(4) Erosion control standards. The minimum design and performance
standards for erosion control are those established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and its
implementing regulations, N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.1 through 1.4.
(5) Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(a) There shall be no direct discharge of stormwater runoff from
any point or nonpoint source to any wetland, wetland
transition area or surface water body.
(b) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to
reduce the total suspended solids (TSS) load in the stormwater
runoff from the post-developed site by 80% expressed as an
annual average.
(c) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce the nutrient load in the stormwater runoff from the
post-developed site by the maximum extent practicable. In
achieving this reduction, the design of the development site
shall include nonstructural and structural stormwater
management measures that optimize nutrient removal while
still achieving the groundwater recharge, runoff quantity and
rate, and TSS removal standards in this section.
(d) The standards for stormwater runoff quality required by this
section shall be met using the methods, calculations,
assumptions and pollutant removal rates provided in
Subsection C.
(e) Exceptions.
[1] The preceding stormwater runoff quality standards shall
not apply to the following major development sites:
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:487
[a] Major development sites where less than 0.25 acre of
additional impervious surface is proposed; or
[b] Major residential development sites that create less
than one acre of disturbance.
[2] The TSS reduction requirement in Subsection D(6)(b) shall
not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge
regulated under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS
imposed under the NJPDES rules (N.J.A.C. 7:14A) or in a
discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit
from this requirement.
[3] The stormwater runoff quantity and rate standards in
Subsection D(2) shall still be met for all major
development sites.
(6) Additional stormwater quality standards for high pollutant loading
areas and areas where stormwater runoff is exposed to source
material.
(a) This subsection applies to the following areas of a major
development as defined in Subsection G of this section:
[1] High pollutant loading areas (HPLAs); and
[2] Areas where stormwater is exposed to source material.
(b) For a major development in areas described in Subsection
D(6)(a)[1] or [2] above, in addition to the infiltration
requirements specified in Subsection D(2)(b) and the
groundwater recharge requirements specified in Subsection
D(3), the applicant shall demonstrate in the land use planning
and source control plan required in Subsection B(3)(d) that the
following requirements have been met:
[1] The extent of the areas described in Subsection D(6)(a)[1]
and [2] above have been minimized on the development
site to the maximum extent practicable;
[2] The stormwater runoff from the areas described in
Subsection D(6)(a)[1] and [2] above is segregated to the
maximum extent practicable from the stormwater runoff
generated from the remainder of the site such that
commingling of the stormwater runoff from the areas
described in Subsection D(6)(a)[1] and [2] above and the
remainder of the site will be minimized;
[3] The amount of precipitation falling directly on the areas
described in Subsection D(6)(a)[1] and [2] above is
minimized to the maximum extent practicable by means of
a canopy, roof or other similar structure that reduces the
generation of stormwater runoff; and
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:488
[4] The stormwater runoff from or commingled with the areas
described in Subsection D(6)(a)[1] and [2] above for the
water quality design storm, defined in Subsection C(2),
Table 1, shall be subject to pretreatment by one or more of
the following stormwater BMPs, designed in accordance
with the New Jersey BMP Manual to provide 90% TSS
removal:
[a] Bioretention system;
[b] Sand filter;
[c] Wet ponds which shall be hydraulically disconnected
by a minimum of two feet of vertical separation from
the seasonal high water table and shall be designed to
achieve a minimum 80% TSS removal rate;
[d] Constructed stormwater wetlands; and/or
[e] Media filtration system manufactured treatment
device with a minimum 80% TSS removal as verified
by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced
Technology and as certified by NJDEP.
[5] If the potential for contamination of stormwater runoff by
petroleum products exists on site, prior to being conveyed
to the pretreatment BMP required in Subsection D(4)(b)[4]
above, the stormwater runoff from the areas described in
Subsection D(6)(a)[1] and [2] above shall be conveyed
through an oil/grease separator or other equivalent
manufactured filtering device to remove the petroleum
hydrocarbons. The applicant shall provide the reviewing
agency with sufficient data to demonstrate acceptable
performance of the device.
(7) Threatened and endangered species and associated habitat
standards. Stormwater management measures shall address the
impacts of the development on habitat for threatened and
endangered species, in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.2(c),
7:50-6.27, 7:50-6.33 and 7:50-6.34.
(8) Exceptions and mitigation requirements.
(a) Exceptions from strict compliance from the groundwater
recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff
quality requirements established by this section may be
granted, at the discretion of the Township of Waterford, and
subject to approval by the Pinelands Commission, provided
that all of the following conditions are met:
[1] The exception is consistent with that allowed by the
Township of Waterford;
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:489
[2] The Township of Waterford has an adopted an effective
municipal stormwater management plan in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 7:8-4.4, which includes a mitigation plan in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:8-4.2(c)11, and is also certified
by the Pinelands Commission. The mitigation plan shall
identify what measures are necessary to offset the deficit
created by granting the exception and the municipality
shall submit a written report to the county review agency
and the NJDEP describing the exception and the required
mitigation. Guidance for developing municipal stormwater
management plans, including mitigation plans, is available
from the NJDEP, Division of Watershed Management, and
the New Jersey BMP Manual.
[3] The applicant demonstrates that mitigation, in addition to
the requirements of mitigation plan discussed in
Subsection D(8)(a)[2] above, will be provided consistent
with one of the following options:
[a] Mitigation may be provided off site, but within the
Pinelands Area and within the same drainage area as
the development site, and shall meet or exceed the
equivalent recharge, quality or quantity performance
standard which is lacking on the development site due
to the exception; or
[b] In lieu of the required mitigation, a monetary in lieu
contribution may be provided by the applicant to the
Township of Waterford in accordance with the
following:
[i] The amount of the in lieu contribution shall be
determined by the Township of Waterford, but the
maximum in lieu contribution required shall be
equivalent to the cost of implementing and
maintaining the stormwater management
measure(s) for which the exception is granted;
[ii] The in lieu contribution shall be used to fund an
off-site stormwater control mitigation project(s)
located within the Pinelands Area, within the
same drainage area as the development site, and
shall meet or exceed the equivalent recharge,
quality or quantity performance standards which
is lacking on the development site. Such
mitigation project shall be identified by the
Township of Waterford in the Township of
Waterford's adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. The stormwater control
project to which the monetary contribution will be
applied shall be identified by the Township of
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:490
Waterford at the time the exception is granted.
The applicant shall amend the project description
and site plan required in Subsection B(3)(c) to
incorporate a description of both the standards
for which an on-site exception is being granted
and of the selected off-site mitigation project.
[iii] The Township of Waterford shall expend the in
lieu contribution to implement the selected offsite
mitigation project within five years from the
date that payment is received. Should the
Township of Waterford fail to expend the in lieu
contribution within the required time frame, the
mitigation option provided in Subsection
D(8)(a)[3][b] shall be void and the Township of
Waterford shall be prohibited from collecting in
lieu contributions.
(b) An exception from strict compliance granted in accordance
with Subsection D(8)(a) above shall not constitute a waiver of
strict compliance from the requirements of the Pinelands
Comprehensive Management Plan at N.J.A.C. 7:50. An
applicant should contact the Pinelands Commission to
determine whether a waiver of strict compliance is also
required in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50, Subchapter 4, Part
V.
E. Design, construction, and safety standards for structural stormwater
management measures.
(1) General design and construction standards.
(a) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to meet the standards established in this subsection.
These standards have been developed to protect public safety,
conserve natural features, create an aesthetically pleasing site
and promote proper on-site stormwater management. Where
directed by the Township of Waterford, the applicant shall be
required to retrofit any existing substandard basin directly
impacted by the proposed development in order to comply with
the standards outlined in this subsection.
(b) The following structural stormwater management measures
may be utilized as part of a stormwater management system at
a major land development in the Pinelands, provided that the
applicant demonstrates that they are designed, constructed
and maintained so as to meet the standards and requirements
established by this subsection. If alternative stormwater
management measures are proposed, the applicant shall
demonstrate that the selected measures will achieve the
standards established by this subsection.
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:491
[1] Bioretention systems;
[2] Constructed stormwater wetlands;
[3] Extended detention basins;
[4] Infiltration basins;
[5] Vegetated filter strips;
[6] Infiltration basins and trenches;
[7] Wet ponds with suitable liners;
[8] Pervious paving systems; and
[9] Manufactured treatment devices, provided their pollutant
removal rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation
for Advanced Technology and certified by the NJDEP.
(c) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to take into account the existing site conditions,
including environmentally critical areas, wetlands, flood-prone
areas, slopes, depth to seasonal high water table, soil type,
permeability and texture, and drainage area and drainage
patterns.
(d) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed and constructed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant (measures that are consistent with the relevant
portions of the residential site improvement standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 7.4, and 7.8 shall be deemed to meet this
requirement); to minimize and facilitate maintenance and
repairs; and to ensure proper functioning.
(e) For all stormwater management measures at a development
site, each applicant shall submit a detailed inspection,
maintenance and repair plan consistent with the requirements
of Subsection E of this section.
(f) To the maximum extent practicable, the design engineer shall
design structural stormwater management measures on the
development site in a manner that:
[1] Limits site disturbance, maximizes stormwater
management efficiencies, and maintains or improves
aesthetic conditions;
[2] Utilizes multiple stormwater management measures,
smaller in size and distributed spatially throughout the
land development site, instead of a single larger structural
stormwater management measure;
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:492
[3] Incorporates pretreatment measures. Pretreatment can
extend the functional life and increase the pollutant
removal capability of a structural stormwater management
measure. Pretreatment measures may be designed in
accordance with the New Jersey BMP Manual or other
sources approved by the Municipal Engineer.
(g) Stormwater management basins shall be designed in a manner
that complements and mimics the existing natural landscape,
including, but not limited to, the following design strategies:
[1] Use of natural, nonwetland wooded depressions for
stormwater runoff storage; and
[2] Establishment of attractive landscaping in and around the
basin that mimics the existing vegetation and incorporates
native Pinelands plants, including, but not limited to, the
species listed in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25 and 6.26.
(h) Stormwater management basins shall be designed with gently
sloping sides. The maximum allowable basin side slope shall be
five horizontal to one vertical.
(i) Guidance on the design and construction of structural
stormwater management measures may be found in the New
Jersey BMP Manual. Other guidance sources may also be used
upon approval by the Municipal Engineer.
(j) After all construction activities and required field testing have
been completed on the development site, as-built plans
depicting design and as-built elevations of all stormwater
management measures shall be prepared by a licensed land
surveyor and submitted to the Municipal Engineer. Based upon
the Municipal Engineer's review of the as-built plans, all
corrections or remedial actions deemed by the Municipal
Engineer to be necessary due to the failure to comply with the
standards established by this section and/or any reasons of
public health or safety, shall be completed by the applicant. In
lieu of review by the Municipal Engineer, the Township of
Waterford reserves the right to engage a professional engineer
to review the as-built plans. The applicant shall pay all costs
associated with such review.
(2) Design and construction standards for stormwater infiltration
BMPs.
(a) Stormwater infiltration BMPs, such as bioretention systems
with infiltration, dry wells, infiltration basins, pervious paving
systems with storage beds, and sand filters with infiltration,
shall be designed, constructed and maintained to completely
drain the total runoff volume generated by the basin's
maximum design storm within 72 hours after a storm event.
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:493
Runoff storage for greater times can render the BMP
ineffective and may result in anaerobic conditions, odor and
both water quality and mosquito breeding problems.
(b) Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall be designed, constructed
and maintained to provide a minimum separation of at least
two feet between the elevation of the lowest point of the
bottom of the infiltration BMP and the seasonal high water
table.
(c) A stormwater infiltration BMP shall be sited in suitable soils
verified by field testing to have permeability rates between one
and 20 inches per hour. If such site soils do not exist or if the
design engineer demonstrates that it is not practical for
engineering, environmental or safety reasons to site the
stormwater infiltration BMP(s) in such soils, then the
stormwater infiltration BMP(s) may be sited in soils verified by
field testing to have permeability rates in excess of 20 inches
per hour, provided that a bioretention system, designed,
installed and maintained in accordance with the New Jersey
BMP Manual, is installed to meet one of the following
conditions:
[1] The bioretention system is constructed as a separate
measure designed to provide pretreatment of stormwater
and to convey the pretreated stormwater into the
infiltration BMP; or
[2] The bioretention system is integrated into and made part
of the infiltration BMP and, as such, does not require an
underdrain system. If this option is selected, the
infiltration BMP shall be designed and constructed so that
the maximum water depth in the bioretention system
portion of the BMP during treatment of the stormwater
quality design storm is 12 inches in accordance with the
New Jersey BMP Manual.
(d) The minimum design permeability rate for the soil within a
BMP that relies on infiltration shall be 0.5 inch per hour. A
factor of safety of two shall be applied to the soil's field-tested
permeability rate to determine the soil's design permeability
rate. For example, if the field-tested permeability rate of the
soil is four inches per hour, its design permeability rate would
be two inches per hour. The minimum design permeability rate
for the soil within a stormwater infiltration basin shall also be
sufficient to achieve the minimum seventy-two-hour drain time
described in Subsection E(2)(a) above. The maximum design
permeability shall be 10 inches per hour.
(e) A soil's field tested permeability rate shall be determined in
accordance with the following:
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:494
[1] The predevelopment field test permeability rate shall be
determined according to the methodologies provided in
Subsection J(3)(c);
[2] The results of the required field permeability tests shall
demonstrate a minimum tested infiltration rate of one inch
per hour;
[3] After all construction activities have been completed on
the site and the finished grade has been established in the
infiltration BMP, post-development field permeability tests
shall also be conducted according to the methodologies
provided in Subsection J(3)(c) of this section;
[4] If the results of the post-development field permeability
tests fail to achieve the minimum required design
permeability rates in five above utilizing a factor of safety
of two, the stormwater infiltration BMP shall be renovated
and retested until such minimum required design
permeability rates are achieved; and
[5] The results of all field permeability tests shall be certified
by a professional engineer and transmitted to the
Municipal Engineer.
(f) To help ensure maintenance of the design permeability rate
over time, a six-inch layer of K5 soil shall be placed on the
bottom of a stormwater infiltration BMP. This soil layer shall
meet the textural and permeability specifications of a K5 soil as
provided at N.J.A.C. 7:9A, Appendix A, Figure 6, and be
certified to meet these specifications by a professional
engineer licensed in the State of New Jersey. The depth to the
seasonal high water table shall be measured from the bottom
of the K5 sand layer.
(g) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on the
groundwater table and design the project site and all
stormwater infiltration basins so as to avoid adverse hydraulic
impacts. Adverse hydraulic impacts include, but are not limited
to: raising the groundwater table so as to cause surface
ponding; flooding of basements and other subsurface
structures and areas; preventing a stormwater infiltration
basin from completely draining via infiltration within 72 hours
of a design storm event; and interference with the proper
operation of subsurface sewage disposal systems and other
surface and subsurface structures in the vicinity of the
stormwater infiltration basin.
(h) The design engineer shall conduct a mounding analysis, as
defined in Subsection G, of all stormwater infiltration BMPs.
The mounding analysis shall be conducted in accordance with
the requirements in Subsection J(3)(c)[1]. Where the mounding
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:495
analysis identifies adverse impacts, the stormwater infiltration
BMP shall be redesigned or relocated, as appropriate.
(i) Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall be constructed in
accordance with the following:
[1] To avoid sedimentation that may result in clogging and
reduce the basin's permeability rate, stormwater
infiltration basins shall be constructed according to the
following:
[a] Unless the conditions in Subsection E(2)[1][b] below
are met, a stormwater infiltration BMP shall not be
placed into operation until its drainage area is
completely stabilized. Instead, upstream runoff shall
be diverted around the BMP and into separate,
temporary stormwater management facilities and
sediment basins. Such temporary facilities and basins
shall be installed and utilized for stormwater
management and sediment control until stabilization
is achieved in accordance with the standards for soil
erosion and sediment control in New Jersey, which is
incorporated herein by reference as amended and
supplemented.
[b] If the design engineer determines that, for
engineering, environmental or safety reasons,
temporary stormwater management facilities and
sediment basins cannot be constructed on the site, the
stormwater infiltration basin may be placed into
operation prior to the complete stabilization of its
drainage area, provided that the basin's bottom
during this period is constructed at a depth at least
two feet higher than its final design elevation. All
other infiltration BMP construction requirements in
this subsection shall be followed. When the drainage
area is completely stabilized, all accumulated
sediment shall be removed from the infiltration BMP,
which shall then be excavated to its final design
elevation in accordance with the construction
requirements of this subsection and the performance
standards in Subsection D.
[2] To avoid compaction of subgrade soils of BMPs that rely on
infiltration, no heavy equipment, such as backhoes, dump
trucks or bulldozers, shall be permitted to operate within
the footprint of the BMP. All excavation required to
construct a stormwater infiltration BMP shall be
performed by equipment placed outside the BMP. If this is
not possible, the soils within the excavated area shall be
renovated and tilled after construction is completed to
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:496
reverse the effects of compaction. In addition, postdevelopment
soil permeability testing shall be performed
in accordance with Subsection E(2)(e) of this section.
[3] Earthwork associated with stormwater infiltration BMP
construction, including excavation, grading, cutting or
filling, shall not be performed when soil moisture content
is above the lower plastic limit.
(3) Safety standards for structural stormwater management measures.
(a) If a structural stormwater management measure has an outlet
structure, escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the
structure. Escape provisions means the permanent installation
of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features that provide readily
accessible means of ingress and egress from the outlet
structure.
(b) A trash rack is a device intended to intercept runoff-borne
trash and debris that might otherwise block the hydraulic
openings in an outlet structure of a structural stormwater
management measure. Trash racks shall be installed upstream
of such outlet structure openings as necessary to ensure
proper functioning of the structural stormwater management
measure in accordance with the following:
[1] The trash rack should be constructed primarily of bars
aligned in the direction of flow with one inch spacing
between the bars to the elevation of the water quality
design storm. For elevations higher than the water quality
design storm, the bars shall be spaced no greater than 1/3
the width of the hydraulic opening it is protecting or six
inches, whichever is less. Transverse bars aligned
perpendicular to flow should be sized and spaced as
necessary for rack stability and strength.
[2] The trash rack shall not adversely affect the hydraulic
performance of either the outlet structure opening it is
protecting or the overall outlet structure.
[3] The trash rack shall have sufficient net open area under
clean conditions to limit the peak design storm velocity
through it to a maximum of 2.5 feet per second.
[4] The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be
designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300
pounds per square foot.
(c) An overflow grate is a device intended to protect the opening in
the top of a stormwater management measure outlet structure.
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:497
If an outlet structure has an overflow grate, such grate shall
meet the following requirements:
[1] The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure
but removable for emergencies and maintenance;
[2] The overflow grate spacing shall be no more than two
inches across the smallest dimension; and
[3] The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be
designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300
pounds per square foot.
(d) The maximum side slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or
berm shall not be steeper than five horizontal to one vertical.
(e) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
structural stormwater management measures having a
permanent pool of water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety
ledges shall be comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four
feet to six feet in width. One step shall be located
approximately 2 1/2 feet below the permanent water surface,
and the second step shall be located one to 1 1/2 feet above the
permanent water surface. See Subsection E(3)(e)[1] below, for
an illustration of safety ledges in a stormwater management
basin.
[1] Illustration of safety ledges.
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:498
Source: N.J.A.C. 7:8-6 Appendix A.
F. Inspection, maintenance and repair of stormwater management
measures.
(1) Applicability. Projects subject to review pursuant to Subsection
A(3) of this section shall comply with the requirements of
Subsection F(2) and (3) below.
(2) General inspection, maintenance and repair plan.
(a) The design engineer shall prepare an inspection, maintenance
and repair plan for the stormwater management measures,
including both structural and nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of a major development. This plan
shall be submitted as part of the checklist requirements
established in Subsection B(3). Inspection and maintenance
guidelines for stormwater management measures are available
in the New Jersey BMP Manual.
(b) The inspection, maintenance and repair plan shall contain the
following:
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:499
[1] Accurate and comprehensive drawings of the site's
stormwater management measures;
[2] Specific locations of each stormwater management
measure identified by means of longitude and latitude as
well as block and lot number;
[3] Specific preventative and corrective maintenance tasks
and schedules for such tasks for each stormwater BMP;
[4] Cost estimates, including estimated cost of sediment,
debris or trash removal; and
[5] The name, address and telephone number of the person or
persons responsible for regular inspections and
preventative and corrective maintenance (including repair
and replacement). If the responsible person or persons is a
corporation, company, partnership, firm, association,
municipality or political subdivision of this state, the name
and telephone number of an appropriate contact person
shall also be included.
(c) The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair
identified under Subsection F(2)(b) above shall maintain a
detailed log of all preventative and corrective maintenance
performed for the site's stormwater management measures,
including a record of all inspections and copies of all
maintenance-related work orders in the inspection,
maintenance and repair plan. Said records and inspection
reports shall be retained for a minimum of five years.
(d) If the inspection, maintenance and repair plan identifies a
person other than the developer (for example, a public agency
or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
inspection and maintenance, the plan shall include
documentation of such person's agreement to assume this
responsibility, or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management measure to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation.
(e) If the person responsible for inspection, maintenance and
repair identified under Subsection F(2)(c) above is not a public
agency, the maintenance plan and any future revisions based
on Subsection F(2)(f) below shall be recorded upon the deed of
record for each property on which the maintenance described
in the maintenance plan shall be undertaken.
(f) The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair
identified under Subsection F(2)(b) above shall evaluate the
effectiveness of the inspection, maintenance and repair plan at
least once per year and update the plan and the deed as
needed.
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:500
(g) The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair
identified under Subsection F(2)(b) above shall submit the
updated inspection, maintenance and repair plan and the
documentation required by Subsection F(2)(b) and (c) above to
the Township of Waterford once per year.
(h) The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair
identified under Subsection F(2)(b) above shall retain and
make available, upon request by any public entity with
administrative, health, environmental or safety authority over
the site the inspection, maintenance and repair plan and the
documentation required by Subsection F(2)(b) and (c) above.
(3) Responsibility for inspection, repair and maintenance shall not be
assigned or transferred to the owner or tenant of an individual
property in a residential development or project, unless such owner
or tenant owns or leases the entire residential development or
project.
(4) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including, but not limited to: repairs or replacement to any
associated appurtenance of the measure; removal of sediment,
debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice removal;
fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation; repair or
replacement of linings; and restoration of infiltration function.
(5) Stormwater management measure easements shall be provided by
the property owner as necessary for facility inspections and
maintenance and preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance,
infiltration, and detention areas and facilities. The purpose of the
easement shall be specified in the maintenance agreement.
(6) In the event that the stormwater management measure becomes a
public health nuisance or danger to public safety or public health,
or if it is in need of maintenance or repair, the Township of
Waterford shall so notify the responsible person in writing. Upon
receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have 14 days to
effect maintenance and repair of the facility in a manner that is
approved by the Municipal Engineer or the Municipal Engineer's
designee. The Township of Waterford, at its discretion, may extend
the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for good
cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform such
maintenance and repair within the allowable time, the Township of
Waterford may immediately proceed to do so with its own forces
and equipment and/or through contractors. The costs and expenses
of such maintenance and repair by the Township of Waterford shall
be entered on the tax roll as a special charge against the property
and collected with any other taxes levied thereon for the year in
which the maintenance and repair was performed.
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:501
(7) Requirements for inspection, maintenance and repair of
stormwater BMPs that rely on infiltration. If a stormwater
infiltration BMP is incorporated into the design of a major
development, the applicant shall include the following
requirements in its inspection, maintenance and repair plan:
(a) Once per month (if needed): mow side slopes, remove litter and
debris, stabilize eroded banks, repair erosion at inflow
structure(s);
(b) After every storm exceeding one inch of rainfall: ensure that
infiltration BMPs drain completely within 72 hours after the
storm event. If stored water fails to infiltrate 72 hours after the
end of the storm, corrective measures shall be taken. Raking or
tilling by light equipment can assist in maintaining infiltration
capacity and break up clogged surfaces;
(c) Four times per year (quarterly): inspect stormwater infiltration
BMPs for clogging and excessive debris and sediment
accumulation within the BMP, remove sediment (if needed)
when completely dry;
(d) Two times per year: inspect for signs of damage to structures,
repair eroded areas, check for signs of petroleum
contamination and remediate;
(e) Once per year: inspect BMPs for unwanted tree growth and
remove, if necessary, disc or otherwise aerate bottom of
infiltration basin to a minimum depth of six inches; and
(f) After every storm exceeding one inch of rainfall: inspect and, if
necessary, remove and replace K5 sand layer and accumulated
sediment, to restore original infiltration rate;
(g) Additional guidance for the inspection, maintenance and repair
of stormwater infiltration BMPs can be found in the New Jersey
BMP Manual.
(8) Maintenance guarantee.
(a) The applicant shall provide a maintenance guarantee in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 to ensure that all
stormwater management measures required under the
provisions of this section will be maintained in accordance with
the specifications established herein.
(b) Additionally, for those stormwater management measures that
are to be inspected, maintained and repaired by a public
agency, the Township of Waterford shall collect an prepaid fee
from the applicant in the amount the Township of Waterford
determines is needed to provide long-term inspection,
maintenance and repair of all stormwater management
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:502
measures. This prepaid fee shall be placed in a dedicated
cash management account and expended by the Township of
Waterford for the sole purpose of conducting inspection,
maintenance and repair activities for all stormwater
management measures required under the applicant's major
development application approval. The calculation of the fee
shall be based upon the inspection, maintenance and repair
plan (plan) required to be prepared by the applicant and
approved by the Township of Waterford. The plan shall include
an estimate of the present value of the cost to inspect, maintain
and repair the stormwater management measure(s) in
accordance with the plan for the useful life of those
measure(s). The Township of Waterford shall furnish the
applicant their published hourly rates as prescribed by their
Salary Ordinance for public works' and other personnel having
responsibilities associated with stormwater management.
Added to this fee shall be an amount mutually determined by
the Township of Waterford and the applicant to account for
the reconstruction/reconditioning of stormwater management
measures that are based on the reasonable life expectancies
of those facilities. After an agreed number of years, depending
on the type of measure(s), the measure(s) will need to be
reconstructed/reconditioned. The amount shall be based on
the future value of the measure(s) being reconstructed/
reconditioned. Both inflation rates and bank interest rates
shall be based on the ten-year average published in the Wall
Street Journal or other approved publication. Interest accruing
in the account must also be accounted for at an agreed upon
interest rate, to arrive at an amount. The costs for
reconstructing/reconditioning the measure(s) shall be taken
from the engineer's probable cost estimate that is utilized to
determine the amount of the required performance guarantee.
It is acceptable to attach a percentage of failure to certain line
items in the estimate.
(c) Additionally, for those stormwater management measures that
are to be inspected, maintained and repaired by a
homeowners' association, condominium association or some
other form of nonpublic ownership, no fee shall be collected by
the Township of Waterford. Instead, the ownership entity shall
establish and maintain a fund for the annual inspection and
testing program, annual maintenance and repair program and
annual contribution to a contingency fund for long-term
reconstruction/reconditioning. The initial costs agreed to for
the annual inspection and testing program and annual
maintenance and repair program shall be based upon actual
itemized proposals offered to the applicant by prospective
vendors. The annual cost expended on inspection, testing and
maintenance shall be reported to the Township of Waterford to
verify that maintenance is not being deferred and to inform the
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:503
Township of Waterford on the magnitude of those services. The
contingency fund shall require sufficient funds to be committed
for long-term reconstruction/reconditioning of the stormwater
management measure(s). Major reconstruction/reconditioning
activities will necessitate proper financial planning. After an
agreed number of years, depending on the type of measure(s),
the measure(s) will need to be reconstructed/reconditioned.
The contingency fund in the financial schedule shall be based
on the future value of the measure being reconstructed/
reconditioned. Both inflation rates and bank interest rates
shall be based on the ten-year average published in the Wall
Street Journal or other approved publication. Interest accruing
in the account must also be accounted for at an agreed upon
interest rate, to arrive at an annual contribution amount.
G. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in
this section shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they
have in common usage and to give this section its most reasonable
application. When used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them:
AQUACULTURE — The propagation, rearing and subsequent
harvesting of aquatic organisms in controlled or selected environments,
and their subsequent processing, packaging and marketing, including,
but not limited to, activities to intervene in the rearing process to
increase production such as stocking, feeding, transplanting and
providing for protection from predators.
CERTIFICATION — Either a written statement signed and sealed by a
licensed New Jersey professional engineer attesting that a BMP design
or stormwater management system conforms to or meets a particular
set of standards or to action taken by the Commission pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:50-3, Part II or Part IV. Depending upon the context in which
the term is use, the terms "certify" and "certified" shall be construed
accordingly.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density caused by subjecting
soil to greater-than-normal loading. Compaction can also decrease soil
infiltration and permeability rates.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, erection, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion, demolition, removal or equipping of buildings,
structures or components of a stormwater management system,
including, but not limited to, collection inlets, stormwater piping,
swales and all other conveyance systems, and stormwater BMPs.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County
Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinance(s). The county review
agency may either be:
(1) A county planning agency; or
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:504
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly
licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may
include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project
requirements, creation and development of project design and
preparation of drawings and specifications.
DESIGN PERMEABILITY — The tested permeability rate with a factor
of safety of two applied to it (e.g., if the tested permeability rate of the
soils is four inches per hour, the design rate would be two inches per
hour).
DEVELOPMENT —
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
(2)
The change of or enlargement of any use or disturbance of any
land, the performance of any building or mining operation, the
division of land into two or more parcels, and the creation or
termination of rights of access or riparian rights including, but not
limited to:
(a) A change in type of use of a structure or land;
A reconstruction, alteration of the size, or material change in
the external appearance of a structure or land;
(b)
A material increase in the intensity of use of land, such as
an increase in the number of businesses, manufacturing
establishments, offices or dwelling units in a structure or on
land;
(c)
Commencement of resource extraction or drilling or
excavation on a parcel of land;
(d)
(e) Demolition of a structure or removal of trees;
(f) Commencement of forestry activities;
Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste or fill on a parcel of
land;
(g)
In connection with the use of land, the making of any material
change in noise levels, thermal conditions, or emissions of
waste material; and
(h)
Alteration, either physically or chemically, of a shore, bank,
or floodplain, seacoast, river, stream, lake, pond, wetlands or
artificial body of water.
(i)
(1)
In the case of development on agricultural land, i.e., lands used
for an agricultural use or purpose as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:50-2.11,
(2)
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:505
DEVELOPMENT, MAJOR — Any division of land into five or more lots;
any construction or expansion of any housing development of five or
more dwelling units; any construction or expansion of any commercial
or industrial use or structure on a site of more than three acres; or any
development, grading, clearing or disturbance of an area in excess of
5,000 square feet. "Disturbance" for the purpose of this section is the
placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement of soil
or bedrock or clearing, cutting or removing of vegetation.
DEVELOPMENT, MINOR — All development other than major
development.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a BMP, a stormwater
management system, a particular receiving water body or a particular
point along a receiving water body.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA — An area or feature which
is of significant environmental value, including, but not limited to:
stream corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered
or threatened animal species; threatened or endangered plants of the
Pinelands pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:5-6.27(a); large areas of contiguous
open space or upland forest; steep slopes; and well head protection
and groundwater recharge areas. T & E habitat constitutes habitat
that is critical for the survival of a local population of threatened and
endangered species or habitat that is identified using the Department's
Landscape Project as approved by the Department's Endangered and
Nongame Species Program, whichever is more inclusive. Threatened
and endangered wildlife shall be protected in conformance with N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.33.
EXCEPTION — The approval by the approving authority of a variance or
other material departure from strict compliance with any section, part,
phrase or provision of this section. An exception may be granted only
under certain specific, narrowly defined conditions described herein
and does not constitute a waiver of strict compliance with any section,
part, phrase or provision of the Pinelands Comprehensive Management
Plan (N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et seq.).
EXTENDED DETENTION BASIN — A facility constructed through
filling and/or excavation that provides temporary storage of stormwater
runoff. It has an outlet structure that detains and attenuates runoff
inflows and promotes the settlement of pollutants. An extended
detention basin is normally designed as a multistage facility that
provides runoff storage and attenuation for both stormwater quality
and quantity management. The term "stormwater detention basin" shall
have the same meaning as "extended detention basin."
"development" means any activity that requires a state permit; any
activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Boards (CAB) and the
State Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and municipal
review of any activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act,
N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:506
FINISHED GRADE — The elevation of the surface of the ground after
completion of final grading, either via cutting, filling or a combination
thereof.
GRADING — Modification of a land slope by cutting and filling with the
native soil or redistribution of the native soil which is present at the
site.
GROUNDWATER — Water below the land surface in a zone of
saturation.
GROUNDWATER MOUNDING ANALYSIS — A test performed to
demonstrate that the groundwater below a stormwater infiltration
basin will not mound up, encroach on the unsaturated zone, break the
surface of the ground at the infiltration area or downslope, and create
an overland flow situation.
HEAVY EQUIPMENT — Equipment, machinery, or vehicles that exert
ground pressure in excess of eight pounds per square inch.
HIGH POLLUTANT LOADING AREA — An area in an industrial or
commercial development site where solvents and/or petroleum
products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or applied; where pesticides are
loaded/unloaded or stored; where hazardous materials are expected to
be present in greater than "reportable quantities" as defined by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4;
where recharge would be inconsistent with NJDEP-approved remedial
action work plan or landfill closure plan; and/or where a high risk
exists for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and vehicle
maintenance facilities. The term "HPLA" shall have the same meaning
as "high pollutant loading area."
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which precipitation enters the soil
through its surface.
IN LIEU CONTRIBUTION — A monetary fee collected by the Township
of Waterford in lieu of requiring strict on-site compliance with the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity and/or stormwater
runoff quality standards established in this section.
INSTALL — To assemble, construct, put in place or connect components
of a stormwater management system.
MITIGATION — Acts necessary to prevent, limit, remedy or compensate
for conditions that may result from those cases where an applicant
has demonstrated the inability or impracticality of strict compliance
with the stormwater management requirements set forth in N.J.A.C.
7:8, in an adopted regional stormwater management plan, or in a local
ordinance which is as protective as N.J.A.C. 7:8, and an exception from
strict compliance is granted by the Township of Waterford and the
Pinelands Commission.
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:507
NEW JERSEY STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
MANUAL — Guidance developed by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, in coordination with the New Jersey
Department of Agriculture, the New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs, the New Jersey Department of Transportation, Municipal
Engineers, County Engineers, consulting firms, contractors, and
environmental organizations to address the standards in the New
Jersey Stormwater Management Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:8. The BMP manual
provides examples of ways to meet the standards contained in the
rule. An applicant may demonstrate that other proposed management
practices will also achieve the standards established in the rules. The
manual, and notices regarding future versions of the manual, are
available from the Division of Watershed Management, NJDEP, PO Box
418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; and on the NJDEP's website,
www.njstormwater.org. The term "New Jersey BMP Manual" shall have
the same meaning as "New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual."
NJDEP — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
NJPDES — The New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System as
set forth in N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq. and in N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the NJDEP pursuant to the
authority of the Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.,
and N.J.A.C. 7:14A for a discharge of pollutants.
NONPOINT SOURCE — Any human-made or human-induced activity,
factor, or condition, other than a point source, from which pollutants
are or may be discharged; Any human-made or human-induced activity,
factor, or condition, other than a point source, that may temporarily or
permanently change any chemical, physical, biological, or radiological
characteristic of waters of the state from what was or is the natural,
pristine condition of such waters, or that may increase the degree of
such change; or any activity, factor, or condition, other than a point
source, that contributes or may contribute to water pollution. The term
"NPS" shall have the same meaning as "nonpoint source."
NONSTRUCTURAL BMP — A stormwater management measure,
strategy or combination of strategies that reduces adverse stormwater
runoff impacts through sound site planning and design. Nonstructural
BMPs include such practices as minimizing site disturbance, preserving
important site features, reducing and disconnecting impervious cover,
flattening slopes, utilizing native vegetation, minimizing turf grass
lawns, maintaining natural drainage features and characteristics and
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants closer to the source. The
term "low-impact development technique" shall have the same meaning
as "nonstructural BMP."
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:508
PERMEABILITY — The rate at which water moves through a saturated
unit area of soil or rock material at hydraulic gradient of one,
determined as prescribed in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.2 (Tube Permeameter Test),
N.J.A.C. 6.5 (Pit Bailing Test) or N.J.A.C. 6.6 (Piezometer Test).
Alternative permeability test procedures may be accepted by the
approving authority, provided the test procedure attains saturation of
surrounding soils, accounts for hydraulic head effects on infiltration
rates, provides a permeability rate with units expressed in inches per
hour and is accompanied by a published source reference. Examples
of suitable sources include hydrogeology, geotechnical, or engineering
text and design manuals, proceedings of American Society for Testing
and Materials (ASTM) symposia, or peer-review journals. Neither a soil
permeability class rating test, as described in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.3, nor a
percolation test, as described in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.4, are acceptable tests
for establishing permeability values for the purpose of complying with
this section.
PERMEABLE — Having a permeability of one inch per hour or faster.
The terms "permeable soil," "permeable rock" and "permeable fill" shall
be construed accordingly.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, municipality or political subdivision of this state subject to
municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
PINELANDS COMMISSION or COMMISSION — The Commission
created pursuant Section 5 of the Pinelands Protection Act, N.J.S.A.
13:18A-5.
PINELANDS CMP — The New Jersey Pinelands Comprehensive
Management Plan (N.J.A.C. 7:50 1.1 et seq).
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit,
well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal
feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel, or other
floating craft, from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This
term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes,
radioactive substances (except those regulated under the Atomic
Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.), thermal
waste, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, suspended solids,
cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and construction waste
or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or indirectly to the land,
groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or to a domestic treatment
works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and nonhazardous
pollutants.
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:509
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — A person licensed to practice
professional engineering in the State of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A.
48:8-27 et seq.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates
into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
REPLICATE — One of two or more soil samples or tests taken at the
same location (within five feet of each other) and depth, within the
same soil horizon or substratum. In the case of fill material, replicate
tests are tests performed on subsamples of the same bulk sample
packed to the same bulk density.
SAND — A particle size category consisting of mineral particles which
are between 0.05 and 2.0 millimeters in equivalent spherical diameter.
Also, a soil textural class having 85% or more of sand and a content
of silt and clay such that the percentage of silt plus 1.5 times the
percentage of clay does not exceed 15, as shown in Subsection J(3)(a)
(USDA Soil Textural Triangle).
SEASONALLY HIGH WATER TABLE — The upper limit of the shallowest
zone of saturation which occurs in the soil, identified as prescribed in
N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.8.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension,
is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air,
water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or
has occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin
which is not a rock substratum, including sediments below the
biologically active and/or weathered zones.
SOURCE MATERIAL — Any material(s) or machinery, located at an
industrial facility that is directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which could be a source
of pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to groundwater.
Source materials include, but are not limited to, raw materials;
intermediate products; final products; waste materials; by-products;
industrial machinery and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other industrial activities
that are exposed to stormwater.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or
drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER INFILTRATION BMP — A basin or other facility
constructed within permeable soils that provides temporary storage
of stormwater runoff. An infiltration BMP does not normally have a
structural outlet to discharge runoff from the stormwater quality design
storm. Instead, outflow from an infiltration BMP is through the
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:510
surrounding soil. The terms "infiltration measure" and "infiltration
practice" shall have the same meaning as "stormwater infiltration
basin."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater
recharge of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater
discharges into stormwater conveyances. This includes, but is not
limited to, structural and nonstructural stormwater best management
practices described in the New Jersey BMP Manual and designed to
meet the standards for stormwater control contained within this
section. The terms "stormwater best management practice" and
"stormwater BMP" shall have the same meaning as "stormwater
management measure."
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or
in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
SUITABLE SOIL — Unsaturated soil, above the seasonally high water
table, which contains less than 50% by volume of coarse fragments and
which has a tested permeability rate of between one and 20 inches per
hour.
SURFACE WATER — Any waters of the state which are not
groundwater.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may
be influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is
primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION — The time it takes for runoff to travel
from the hydraulically most distant point of the drainage area to the
point of interest within a watershed.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The insoluble solid matter suspended
in water and stormwater that is separable by laboratory filtration in
accordance with the procedure contained in the "Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" prepared and published
jointly by the American Public Health Association, American Water
Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. The
term "TSS" shall have the same meaning as "total suspended solids."
TOWNSHIP OF WATERFORD — The Planning Board or other board,
agency or official of the Township of Waterford with authority to
approve or disapprove subdivisions, site plans, construction permits,
building permits or other applications for development approval. For
the purposes of reviewing development applications and ensuring
compliance with the requirements of this section, the Township of
Waterford may designate the Municipal Engineer or other qualified
designee to act on behalf of the Township of Waterford.123
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:511
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams and bodies of surface and groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WATER TABLE — The upper surface of a zone of saturation.
WELL — A bored, drilled or driven shaft, or a dug hole, which extends
below the seasonally high water table and which has a depth which is
greater than its largest surface dimension.
WETLANDS — Those lands which are inundated or saturated by water
at a magnitude, duration and frequency sufficient to support the growth
of hydrophytes. Wetlands include lands with poorly drained or very
poorly drained soils as designated by the National Cooperative Soils
Survey of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United
States Department of Agriculture. Wetlands include coastal wetlands
and inland wetlands, including submerged lands. The "New Jersey
Pinelands Commission Manual for Identifying and Delineating
Pinelands Area Wetlands: A Pinelands Supplement to the Federal
Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands," dated
January 1991, as amended, may be utilized in delineating the extent
of wetlands based on the definitions of wetlands and wetlands soils
contained in this section, N.J.A.C. 7:50 2.11, 6.4 and 6.5. The term
"wetland" shall have the same meaning as "wetlands."
WET POND — A stormwater facility constructed through filling and/
or excavation that provides both permanent and temporary storage of
stormwater runoff. It has an outlet structure that creates a permanent
pool and detains and attenuates runoff inflows and promotes the
settling of pollutants. A stormwater retention basin can also be
designed as a multistage facility that also provides extended detention
for enhanced stormwater quality design storm treatment and runoff
storage and attenuation for stormwater quantity management. The
term "stormwater retention basin" shall have the same meaning as "wet
pond."
H. Penalties. Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts,
maintains, or uses any building, structure or land in violation of this
section shall be subject to the penalties in § 176-13A.124
I. Effective date. This section shall take effect immediately upon the
following:
(1) Certification by the Pinelands Commission in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 7:50 Subchapter 3; and
(2) Approval by the county review agency.
123. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:512
J. Appendices.
(1) Methods for calculating groundwater recharge.
(a) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32: A Method
for Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey.
Available at http://www.njgeology.org/geodata/dgs99-2.htm.
(b) The New Jersey Groundwater Recharge Spreadsheet (NJGRS).
Available in the New Jersey BMP Manual, Chapter 6, at
http://www.njstormwater.org/bmp_manual2.htm.
(2) NJDEP nonstructural strategies point system. The New Jersey
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.2(a), and
Subsection D(1) of this section require nonstructural stormwater
management strategies to be incorporated into the site design of a
major development. A total of nine strategies are to be used to the
maximum extent practical to meet the groundwater recharge,
stormwater quality and stormwater quantity requirements of the
rules prior to utilizing structural stormwater management
measures. The New Jersey Nonstructural Stormwater Management
Strategies Point System (NSPS) provides a tool to assist planners,
designers and regulators in determining that the strategies have
been used to the maximum extent practical at a major development
as required by the rules. Refer online to
http://www.njstormwater.org for information on the NSPS.
(3) Soils.
(a) USDA Soil Textural Triangle.
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:513
Source: US Department of Agriculture.
(b) Definitions. For the purposes of this Appendix, the following
terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them.
A-HORIZON — The uppermost mineral horizon in a normal soil
profile. The upper part of the A-horizon is characterized by
maximum accumulation of finely divided, dark colored organic
residues, known as humus, which are intimately mixed with the
mineral particles of the soil.
ARTESIAN ZONE OF SATURATION — A zone of saturation
which exists immediately below a hydraulically restrictive
horizon, and which has an upper surface which is at a pressure
greater than atmospheric, either seasonally or throughout the
year.
CHROMA — The relative purity or strength of a color, a
quantity which decreases with increasing grayness. Chroma is
one of the three variables of soil color as defined in the Munsell
system of classification.
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:514
CLAY — A particle size category consisting of mineral particles
which are smaller than 0.002 millimeters in equivalent
spherical diameter. Also, a soil textural class having more than
40% clay, less than 45% sand, and less than 40% silt, as shown
in Subsection J(3)(a) (USDA Soil Textural Triangle).
CLAY LOAM — A soil textural class having 27% to 40% clay
and 20% to 45% sand, as shown in Subsection J(3)(a) (USDA
Soil Textural Triangle).
COARSE FRAGMENT — A rock fragment contained within
the soil which is greater than two millimeters in equivalent
spherical diameter or which is retained on a two-millimeter
sieve.
COUNTY SOIL SURVEY REPORT — A report prepared by the
United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service, which includes maps showing the
distribution of soil mapping units throughout a particular
county together with narrative descriptions of the soil series
shown and other information relating to the uses and
properties of the various soil series.
DIRECT SUPERVISION — Control over and direction of work
carried out by others with full knowledge of and responsibility
for such work.
EQUIVALENT SPHERICAL DIAMETER — Of a particle means
the diameter of a sphere which has a volume equal to the
volume of the particle.
EXCESSIVELY COARSE HORIZON — A horizon of limited
thickness within the soil profile which provides inadequate
removal of pollutants from stormwater due to a high-coarse
fragment content, excessively coarse texture and/or
excessively rapid permeability.
EXCESSIVELY COARSE SUBSTRATUM — A substratum below
the soil profile which extends beyond the depth of soil profile
pits and borings and which provides inadequate removal of
pollutants from stormwater due to a high-coarse fragment
content, excessively coarse texture and/or excessively rapid
permeability.
EXTREMELY FIRM CONSISTENCE — A type of soil material
whose moist aggregated mass crushes only under very strong
pressure; cannot be crushed between the thumb and forefinger
and shall be broken apart bit by bit.
FIRM CONSISTENCE — A type of soil material whose moist
aggregated mass crushes under moderate pressure between
the thumb and forefinger but resistance is distinctly
noticeable.
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:515
HARD CONSISTENCE — A type of soil material whose dry
aggregated mass is moderately resistant to pressure, can be
broken in the hands without difficulty but is barely breakable
between the thumb and forefinger.
HUE — The dominant spectral color, one of the three variables
of soil color defined within the Munsell system of classification.
HYDRAULICALLY RESTRICTIVE HORIZON — A horizon
within the soil profile which slows or prevents the downward
or lateral movement of water and which is underlain by
permeable soil horizons or substrata. Any soil horizon which
has a saturated permeability less than one inch per hour is
hydraulically restrictive.
HYDRAULICALLY RESTRICTIVE SUBSTRATUM — A
substratum below the soil profile which slows or prevents the
downward or lateral movement of water and which extends
beyond the depth of profile pits or borings or to a massive
substratum. A substratum which has a saturated permeability
less than one inch per hour is hydraulically restrictive.
LOAMY SAND — A soil textural class, as shown in Subsection
J(3)(a) (USDA Soil Textural Triangle), that has a maximum of
85% to 90% sand with a percentage of silt, plus 1.5 times
the percentage of clay not in excess of 15; or a minimum of
70% to 85% sand with a percentage of silt, plus 1.5 times the
percentage of clay not in excess of 30.
LOWER PLASTIC LIMIT — The moisture content
corresponding to the transition between the plastic and
semisolid states of soil consistency. This corresponds to the
lowest soil moisture content at which the soil can be molded in
the fingers to form a rod or wire, 1/8 inch in thickness, without
crumbling.
MOTTLING — A color pattern observed in soil consisting of
blotches or spots of contrasting color. The term "mottle" refers
to an individual blotch or spot. The terms "color variegation,"
"iron depletion" and "iron concentration" are equivalent to the
term "mottling." Mottling due to redoximorphic reactions is an
indication of seasonal or periodic and recurrent saturation.
MUNSELL SYSTEM — A system of classifying soil color
consisting of an alphanumeric designation for hue, value and
chroma, such as "7.5 YR 6/2," together with a descriptive color
name, such as "strong brown."
O-HORIZON — A surface horizon, occurring above the Ahorizon
in some soils, which is composed primarily of
undecomposed or partially decomposed plant remains which
have not been incorporated into the mineral soil.
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:516
PERCHED ZONE OF SATURATION — A zone of saturation
which occurs immediately above a hydraulically restrictive
horizon and which is underlain by permeable horizons or
substrata which are not permanently or seasonally saturated.
PIEZOMETER — A device consisting of a length of metal or
plastic pipe, open at the bottom or perforated within a
specified interval, and used for the determination of depth to
water, permeability or hydraulic head within a specific soil
horizon or substratum.
PLATY STRUCTURE — Characterized by a soil aggregate
which has one axis distinctly shorter than the other two and
are oriented with the short axis vertical.
REGIONAL ZONE OF SATURATION — A zone of saturation
which extends vertically without interruption below the depth
of soil borings and profile pits.
SANDY CLAY — A soil textural class having 35% or more of
clay and 45% or more of sand, as shown in Subsection J(3)(a)
(USDA Soil Textural Triangle).
SANDY LOAM — A soil textural class, as shown in Subsection
J(3)(a) (USDA Soil Textural Triangle), that has a maximum of
20% clay, and the percentage of silt plus twice the percentage
of clay exceeds 30, and contains 52% or more sand; or less
than 7% clay, less than 50% silt, and between 43% and 52%
sand.
SILT — A particle size category consisting of mineral particles
which are between 0.002 and 0.05 millimeters in equivalent
spherical diameter. It also means a soil textural class having
80% or more of silt and 12% or less of clay, as shown in
Subsection J(3)(a) (USDA Soil Textural Triangle).
SILT LOAM — A soil textural class having 50% or more of silt
and 12% to 27% of clay; or 50% to 80% of silt and less than
12% of clay, as shown in Subsection J(3)(a) (USDA Soil Textural
Triangle).
SILTY CLAY — A soil textural class having 40% or more of clay
and 40% or more of silt, as shown in Subsection J(3)(a) (USDA
Soil Textural Triangle).
SILTY CLAY LOAM — A soil textural class having 27% to 40%
of clay and less than 20% of sand, as shown in Subsection
J(3)(a) (USDA Soil Textural Triangle).
SOIL AGGREGATE — A naturally occurring unit of soil
structure consisting of particles of sand, silt, clay, organic
matter, and coarse fragments held together by the natural
cohesion of the soil.
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:517
SOIL COLOR — The soil color name and Munsell color
designation determined by comparison of the moist soil with
color chips contained in a Munsell soil color book.
SOIL CONSISTENCE — The resistance of a soil aggregate or
clod to being crushed between the fingers or broken by the
hands. Terms for describing soil consistence described are in
N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.3(h).
SOIL HORIZON — A layer within a soil profile differing from
layers of soil above and below it in one or more of the soil
morphological characteristics, including color, texture, coarse
fragment content, structure, consistence and mottling.
SOIL LOG — A description of the soil profile which includes
the depth, thickness, color, texture, coarse fragment content,
mottling, structure and consistence of each soil horizon or
substratum.
SOIL MAPPING UNIT — An area outlined on a map in a county
soil survey report and marked with a letter symbol designating
a soil phase, a complex of two or more soil phases, or some
other descriptive term where no soil type has been identified.
SOIL PHASE — A specific type of soil which is mapped by the
Natural Resources Conservation Service and which belongs to
a soil series described within the county soil survey report.
SOIL PROFILE — A vertical cross-section of undisturbed soil
showing the characteristic horizontal layers or horizons of the
soil which have formed as a result of the combined effects
of parent material, topography, climate, biological activity and
time.
SOIL SERIES — A grouping of soil types possessing a specific
range of soil profile characteristics which are described within
the county soil survey report. Each soil series may consist of
several soil phases which may differ in slope, texture of the
surface horizon or stoniness.
SOIL STRUCTURAL CLASS — One of the shape classes of soil
structure described in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.3(g).
SOIL STRUCTURE — The naturally occurring arrangement,
within a soil horizon, of sand, silt and clay particles, coarse
fragments and organic matter, which are held together in
clusters or aggregates of similar shape and size.
SOIL TEST PIT — An excavation made for the purpose of
exposing a soil profile which is to be described.
SOIL TEXTURAL CLASS — One of the classes of soil texture
defined within the USDA system of classification. (Soil Survey
Manual, Agricultural Handbook No. 18, USDA Soil
Conservation Service 1962.)
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:518
SOIL TEXTURE — The relative proportions of sand, silt and
clay in that portion of the soil which passes through a sieve
with two-millimeter openings.
STATIC WATER LEVEL — The depth below the ground surface
or the elevation with respect to some reference level, of the
water level observed within a soil profile pit or boring, or
within a piezometer, after this level has stabilized or become
relatively constant with the passage of time.
SUBSTRATUM — A layer of soil or rock material present below
the soil profile and extending beyond the depth of soil borings
or profile pits.
UNSUITABLE SOIL — All soil other than suitable soil.
USDA SYSTEM OF CLASSIFICATION — The system of
classifying soil texture used by the United States Department
of Agriculture which defines 12 soil textural classes based
upon the weight percentages of sand, silt and clay in that
portion of the soil which passes through a sieve with twomillimeter
openings. The soil textural classes are shown
graphically on the USDA Soil Textural Triangle, as shown in
Subsection J(3)(a).
VALUE — The relative lightness or intensity of a color, one
of the three variables of soil color defined within the Munsell
system of classification.
VERY FIRM CONSISTENCE — Characterized by a moist soil
which crushes under strong pressure; barely crushable
between thumb and forefinger.
VERY HARD CONSISTENCE — Characterized by a dry soil
which is resistant to pressure, can be broken in the hands
only with difficulty; not breakable between the thumb and
forefinger.
ZONE OF SATURATION — A layer within or below the soil
profile which is saturated with groundwater either seasonally
or throughout the year. This includes both regional and
perched zones.
(c) Methods for assessing soil suitability for infiltration
stormwater management BMPs. The results of a subsurface
investigation shall serve as the basis for the site selection and
design of stormwater infiltration BMPs. The subsurface
investigation shall include, but not be limited to, a series of soil
test pits and soil permeability tests conducted in accordance
with the following:
[1] All soil test pits and soil permeability results shall be
performed under the direct supervision of a professional
engineer. All soil logs and permeability test data shall be
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:519
accompanied by a certification by a professional engineer.
The results and location (horizontal and vertical) of all
soil test pits and soil permeability tests, both passing and
failing, shall be reported to the Township of Waterford.
[2] During all subsurface investigations and soil test
procedures, adequate safety measures shall be taken to
prohibit unauthorized access to the excavations at all
times. It is the responsibility of persons performing or
witnessing subsurface investigations and soil permeability
tests to comply with all applicable federal, state and local
laws and regulations governing occupational safety.
[3] A minimum of two soil test pits shall be excavated within
the footprint of any proposed infiltration BMP to
determine the suitability and distribution of soil types
present at the site. Placement of the test pits shall be
within 20 feet of the basin perimeter, located along the
longest axis bisecting the BMP. For BMPs larger than
10,000 square feet in area, a minimum of one additional
soil test pit shall be conducted within each additional area
of 10,000 square feet. The additional test pit(s) shall be
placed approximately equidistant to other test pits, so as
to provide adequate characterization of the subsurface
material. In all cases, where soil and or groundwater
properties vary significantly, additional test pits shall be
excavated in order to accurately characterize the
subsurface conditions below the proposed infiltration BMP.
Soil test pits shall extend to a minimum depth of eight feet
below the lowest elevation of the basin bottom or to a
depth that is at least two times the maximum potential
water depth in the proposed infiltration BMP, whichever is
greater.
[4] A soil test pit log shall be prepared for each soil test pit.
The test pit log shall, at a minimum, provide the elevation
of the existing ground surface, the depth and thickness (in
inches) of each soil horizon or substratum, the dominant
matrix or background and mottle colors using the Munsell
system of classification for hue, value and chroma, the
appropriate textural class as shown on the USDA textural
triangle, the volume percentage of coarse fragments
(larger than two millimeters in diameter), the abundance,
size, and contrast of mottles, the soil structure, soil
consistence, and soil moisture condition, using standard
USDA classification terminology for each of these soil
properties. Soil test pit logs shall identify the presence of
any soil horizon, substratum or other feature that exhibits
an in-place permeability rate less than one inch per hour.
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:520
[5] Each soil test pit log shall report the depth to seasonally
high water level, either perched or regional, and the static
water level based upon the presence of soil mottles or
other redoximorphic features, and observed seepage or
saturation. Where redoxomorphic features, including soil
mottles resulting from soil saturation, are present, they
shall be interpreted to represent the depth to the seasonal
high water table unless soil saturation or seepage is
observed at a higher level. When the determination of the
seasonally high water table shall be made in ground
previously disturbed by excavation, direct observation of
the static water table during the months of January
through April shall be the only method permitted.
[6] Any soil horizon or substratum which exists immediately
below a perched zone of saturation shall be deemed by
rule to exhibit unacceptable permeability (less than one
inch per hour). The perched zone of saturation may be
observed directly, inferred based upon soil morphology, or
confirmed by performance of a hydraulic head test as
defined at N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.9.
[7] Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall not be installed in soils
that exhibit artesian groundwater conditions. A
permeability test shall be conducted in all soils that
immediately underlie a perched zone of saturation. Any
zone of saturation which is present below a soil horizon
which exhibits an in-place permeability of less than 0.2
inch per hour shall be considered an artesian zone of
saturation unless a minimum one-foot thick zone of
unsaturated soil, free of mottling or other redoximorphic
features and possessing a chroma of four or higher, exists
immediately below the unsuitable soil.
[8] A minimum of one permeability test shall be performed at
each soil test pit location. The soil permeability rate shall
be determined using test methodology as prescribed in
N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.2 (Tube Permeameter Test), 6.5 (Pit Bailing
Test) or 6.6 (Piezometer Test). When the tube
permeameter test is used, a minimum of two replicate
samples shall be taken and tested. Alternative
permeability test procedures may be accepted by the
approving authority provided the test procedure attains
saturation of surrounding soils, accounts for hydraulic
head effects on infiltration rates, provides a permeability
rate with units expressed in inches per hour and is
accompanied by a published source reference. Examples
of suitable sources include hydrogeology, geotechnical or
engineering text and design manuals, proceedings of
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:521
symposia, or peer-review journals. Neither a soil
permeability class rating test, as described in N.J.A.C.
7:9A-6.3, nor a percolation test, as described in N.J.A.C.
7:9A-6.4, are acceptable tests for establishing
permeability values for the purpose of complying with this
section.
[9] Soil permeability tests shall be conducted on the most
hydraulically restrictive horizon or substratum to be left in
place below the basin as follows. Where no soil
replacement is proposed, the permeability tests shall be
conducted on the most hydraulically restrictive horizon or
substratum within four feet of the lowest elevation of the
basin bottom or to a depth equal to two times the
maximum potential water depth within the basin,
whichever is greater. Where soil replacement is proposed,
the permeability tests shall be conducted within the soil
immediately below the depth of proposed soil replacement
or within the most hydraulically restrictive horizon or
substratum to a depth equal to two times the maximum
potential water depth within the basin, whichever is
greater. Permeability tests may be performed on the most
hydraulically restrictive soil horizons or substrata at
depths greater than those identified above based upon the
discretion of the design or testing engineer. The tested
infiltration rate should then be divided by two to establish
the soil's design permeability rate. Such division will
provide a one-hundred-percent safety factor to the tested
rate.
[10] The minimum acceptable tested permeability rate of any
soil horizon or substratum shall be one inch per hour. Soil
materials that exhibit tested permeability rates slower
than one inch per hour shall be considered unsuitable for
stormwater infiltration. The maximum reportable tested
permeability rate of any soil horizon or substratum shall be
no greater than 20 inches per hour regardless of the rate
attained in the test procedure.
[11] After all construction activities have been completed on
the development site and the finished grade has been
established in the infiltration BMP, a minimum of one
permeability test shall be conducted within the most
hydraulically restrictive soil horizon or substratum below
the as-built BMP to ensure the performance of the
infiltration BMP is as designed. Hand tools and manual
permeability test procedures shall be used for the purpose
of confirming BMP performance. In addition, the
infiltration BMP shall be flooded with water sufficient to
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:522
demonstrate the performance of the BMP. Test results
shall be certified to the Municipal Engineer.
[12] A groundwater mounding analysis shall be provided for
each stormwater infiltration BMP. The groundwater
mounding analysis shall calculate the maximum height of
the groundwater mound based upon the volume of the
maximum design storm. The professional engineer
conducting the analysis shall provide the Municipal
Engineer with the methodology and supporting
documentation for the mounding analysis used and shall
certify to the Township of Waterford, based upon the
analysis, that the groundwater mound will not cause
stormwater or groundwater to break out to the land
surface or cause adverse impact to adjacent surface water
bodies, wetlands or subsurface structures, including, but
not limited to, basements and septic systems. If there is
more than one infiltration BMP proposed, the model shall
indicate if and how the mounds will interact. The
mounding analysis shall be calculated using the most
restrictive soil horizon that will remain in place within the
explored aquifer thickness unless alternative analyses is
authorized by the Municipal Engineer. The mounding
analysis shall be accompanied by a cross section of the
infiltration BMP and surrounding topography and the
mound analysis shall extend out to the point(s) at which
the mound intersects with the preexisting maximum water
table elevation.
[13] The applicant shall demonstrate that stormwater
infiltration BMPs meet the seventy-two-hour drain time
requirement established in Subsection E(2)(a) of this
section.
(4) Pretreatment measures for infiltration BMPs. By reducing
incoming velocities and capturing coarser sediments, pretreatment
can extend the functional life and increase the pollutant removal
capability of infiltration measures. Therefore, the installation of
pretreatment measures is recommended for all development sites.
Pretreatment measures may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(a) Vegetative filter strips;
(b) Bioretention systems. Used in conjunction with a bioretention
system, the infiltration basin takes the place of the standard
underdrain;
(c) Sand filters;
(d) Grassed swales; and
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:523
(e) Detention basins.
(5) Collection and conveyance.
(a) Bicycle-safe inlet grates. Site development plans that
incorporate site design features that help to prevent discharge
of trash and debris from drainage systems shall comply with
the following standard to control passage of solid and floatable
materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this
subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable
solids.
[1] Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a
storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
[a] The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
[b] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square
inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inch across the
smallest dimension. Examples of grates subject to this
standard include grates in grate inlets, the grate
portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates,
trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted
drains. Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces
of roads (including bridges), driveways, parking areas,
bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
[2] Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the
clear space in that curb opening (or each individual clear
space, if the curb opening has two or more clear spaces)
shall have an area of no more than seven square inches, or
be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
[3] This standard does not apply:
[a] Where the review agency determines that this
standard would cause inadequate hydraulic
performance that could not practicably be overcome
by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-59
168:524
[b] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection C are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is
designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass
through one of the following:
[i] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1.5
inches wide (this option does not apply for outfall
netting facilities); or
[ii] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
[c] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that
has parallel bars with one inch spacing between the
bars, to the elevation of the water quality design storm
as specified in Subsection C of this section; or
[d] Where the NJDEP determines, pursuant to the New
Jersey Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C.
7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will
damage or destroy the New Jersey Register listed
historic property.
(b) Catch basins. Catch basins are storm drain inlets with or
without sumps. Catch basins may provide pretreatment for
other stormwater BMPs by capturing large sediments. The
sediment and pollutant removal efficiency of catch basins
depends on the size of the sump and the performance of
routine maintenance to retain the available sediment storage
space in the sump. Where catch basins with sumps are
proposed, the minimum two-foot separation between the
bottom of the sump and seasonally high water table shall be
provided.
(c) Open or perforated conveyance piping. Where adequate
separation to the seasonal high water table exists, stormwater
from the development site may be conveyed to a stormwater
basin via a system of perforated pipes. These pipes may be
made of PVC or corrugated metal and are available with
perforations of varying size and spacing. Perforated pipe
specifications shall be certified by a professional engineer. A
professional engineer shall certify that perforated conveyance
piping will not act to intercept the seasonal high water table
and convey groundwater to the stormwater basin. All open or
perforated stormwater conveyance systems shall be installed
with a minimum separation of two feet from the seasonal high
water table.
K. Additional sources for technical guidance.
§ 176-59 INSURANCE § 176-59
168:525
§ 176-60. Easements.
(1) NJDEP Technical Guidance Sources.
(a) New Jersey BMP Manual. Available from the Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey
08625; or online at http://www.njstormwater.org.
(b) NJDEP Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance
Manual. Available from the Division of Watershed
Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; or online
at http://njedl.rutgers.edu/ftp/PDFs/1188.pdf.
(2) Additional Guidance Sources.
(a) New Jersey Pinelands Commission, PO Box 7, 15 Springfield
Road, New Lisbon, New Jersey 08064; phone: 609-894-7300;
website: http://www.state.nj.us/pinelands.
(b) State Soil Conservation Committee Standards for soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey. Available from all State
Soil Conservation Districts, including the Camden Soil
Conservation District, 423 Commerce Lane, Suite 1, West
Berlin, 08091; phone: (856) 767-6299, fax: (856) 767-1676.
(c) Camden Soil Conservation Districts.
(d) New Jersey Department of Transportation, PO Box 600,
Trenton, NJ 08625-0600; phone: 609-530-3536; website:
http://www.state.nj.us/transportation.
A. Utility easements along property lines or elsewhere for public purposes
may be required. Such easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide
for one utility, with another five feet for each additional utility, and shall
be located in consultation with the companies and Township
departments concerned and, to the fullest extent possible, shall be
centered on or adjacent to lot lines. Utility easements along street lines
shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide.
B. No plantings will be permitted along public rights-of-way or within
utility easements where such plantings will contact utility lines or wires
or where plantings will require routine maintenance to prevent contact
with utility wires.
C. Conservation easements and floodplains shall be indicated on the
preliminary and final plats and shown in such a manner that their
boundaries can be accurately determined. The removal of trees and
ground cover shall be prohibited in such easements except for the
following purposes:
(1) The removal of dead or diseased trees;
§ 176-59 WATERFORD CODE § 176-60
168:526
§ 176-61. Electrical equipment.
§ 176-62. Endangered vegetative species.
No development shall be carried out unless it is designed to avoid
irreversible adverse impacts on habitats that are critical to the survival of
any local populations of those threatened or endangered vegetative species
listed in the CMP under N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.27.
(2) Limited thinning of trees and brush to encourage the most
desirable growth;
(3) Removal of trees to allow for structures designed to impound water
or convey stormwater;
(4) The removal of trees for the construction of suction pipes;
(5) The removal of trees in areas to be flooded in the creation of ponds
and lakes; and
(6) The installation and maintenance of utilities.
D. The boundary line of any easement shall be monumented at its
intersection with all existing or proposed street lines, except when a lot
line forms the side or center line of the easement.
E. Whenever the internal grading of a lot is part of the design of the
drainage of stormwater systems, as by swale, berm or other
topographical feature designed to intercept or direct water, the same
shall be designed as an easement on the map to be filed, or shall be
dedicated by recorded instrument, in such a way as to give notice to
future owners of said property and to ensure continued maintenance of
such drainage feature. The recorded instrument or filed map shall
contain a metes-and-bounds description of the easement, as well as an
outline of the rights of the grantee in such easement, including but not
limited to construction, reconstruction, replacement, repair,
maintenance and enlargement of the facilities within the easement.
A. Electronic equipment, including all devices for transferring and
receiving electronic signals, shall be shielded so that there is no
interference with any radio or television reception beyond the
operators' property or dwelling unit as a result of the operation of such
equipment.
B. All electric or electronic devices shall be subject to the provision of
Public Law 90-602, 90th Congress, HR10790, dated October 18, 1968,
entitled "An Act for the Protection of Public Health and Safety from the
Dangers of Electronic Product Radiation" and the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code.125
125. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-60 INSURANCE § 176-63
168:527
§ 176-63. Energy conservation.
§ 176-64. Fences and walls.126
A. All development shall be carried out in a manner that promotes energy
conservation and maximizes active and passive solar energy in
accordance with any applicable statutes. Such measures may include
orientation of streets, buildings, landscaping and the like to permit
solar access and the use of energy conservation building materials.
B. Wherever feasible, the approving Board shall require bike paths to be
included in major site plans and major subdivisions.
A. Generally.
(1) A fence or wall shall be defined for the purposes of this chapter as
an artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire,
metal or any other manufactured material or combination of
materials, erected for the enclosure of land and/or dividing one
piece of land from another.
(2) Vegetation used in lieu of fencing shall be planted a minimum of
five feet inside the property boundaries and shall be kept trimmed
to avoid encroachment onto neighboring properties, sidewalks and
streets. No vegetation that will exceed two feet in height shall be
planted in any site triangle for streets or driveways. No vegetation
that will exceed 10 feet in height shall be planted in areas with
overhead electrical, telephone or cable wires.
B. Materials and composition.
(1) Any fence, wall or shrubbery which unduly cuts off light or air or
which may cause a nuisance, a fire hazard, or a dangerous
condition is hereby expressly prohibited.
(2) The following fences and fencing materials are specifically
prohibited: barbed wire, short pointed fences, canvas fences, cloth
fences, electrically charged fences (except livestock containment),
poultry fences, turkey wire, temporary fences such as snow fences
(except in emergency situations), expandable or collapsible fences
(except during construction of a building), and tires.
(3) All chain link fences shall be erected with the closed loop at the top
of the fence. Where privacy slats are used, they shall not be
multicolored.
(4) All entrances or gates shall open onto the property.
(5) The finished side of a solid fence shall face the adjacent property or
street.
126. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 131, Fences.
§ 176-63 WATERFORD CODE § 176-64
168:528
(6) No fence or wall shall be erected within the Township without the
owner of the premises, or his representative, obtaining a permit
from the Zoning and Construction Officials. The application form
for a permit shall be prepared by the Zoning and Construction
Officials and shall include the following information:127
(a) The owner and address of the premises where the fence or wall
is to be erected.
(b) The name and address of the company or person installing the
fence or wall.
(c) A sketch or plan of the fence or wall.
(d) A plot plan or survey of the premises in question, which shall
show streets abutting at the nearest intersection and shall
include the location of structures and easements.
(e) If a fence or wall is to be located within an easement granted to
the Township, the property owner shall provide a signed
statement indicating that he or she is aware that the fence or
wall is to be located within an easement and that he or she
agrees to remove and later replace the fence or wall at his or
her expense if such action is required by the Township in order
to conduct maintenance work.
(7) Any deed restrictions affecting the property on which the fence or
wall is to be erected or constructed shall not be superseded by this
section. Moreover, no fence or wall shall be located within a
conservation easement or deed restricted buffer area unless the
language of such easement or deed restricted buffer area explicitly
permits such fence or wall.
(8) All fences and walls shall be of quality materials and installed in a
good workmanlike manner. All fences and walls shall be maintained
by the owner.
(9) The following fences shall be exempt from the requirements of this
section, relative to permits, fees, construction, or materials:
(a) Fences accessory to farm operations, except that said
exemption shall not extend to that percentage of farm property
set aside for residential purposes as delineated upon the
property record cards of the Township.
(b) Fences accessory to any public facility, park, playground or
school premises.
(c) Fences approved as part of a subdivision or site plan
application.
127. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-64 INSURANCE § 176-64
168:529
C. Regulations in residential districts.
(1) Fences and walls shall be placed a minimum of one foot inside the
property line in front yards and six inches inside the property lines
of side and rear yards, providing the side and rear yard areas do
not abut a street or are part of a corner lot. Fences and walls on
parcels which have a zero side yard setback requirement may be
placed on the property line. For all other properties, if adjoining
property owners agree, in writing, fencing and walls may be placed
on the property line for side and rear yards not abutting a street.
(2) Fences and walls not exceeding four feet in height above ground
level may be erected in the front yard or along any property
boundary adjacent to a public right-of-way but shall not be located
in the sight triangle for driveways or streets.
(3) Fences and walls not exceeding six feet in height above ground
level may be erected in yard areas extending from the front wall of
a dwelling to enclose side and rear yard areas of interior lots. In the
case of corner lots, six-foot-high fencing may be erected to enclose
side and rear yard areas if it is placed a minimum of 10 feet inside
of the property line adjacent to the side street.
(4) Fences and walls on corner properties shall not be constructed of
materials that would block the view of vehicular traffic at the
intersection and shall not be located in any sight triangle for
driveways or streets.
(5) Barbed and/or electrified wire fences on any common property line
with another dwelling or public right-of-way are prohibited.
(6) Fences and walls for swimming pools shall comply with the New
Jersey Uniform Construction Code.128
(7) A tennis court may be surrounded by a fence a maximum of 15 feet
in height in compliance with § 176-118E(2).
D. Regulations in nonresidential districts.
(1) Fences and walls shall be set back a minimum of one foot from any
property boundary.
(2) When a landscaped buffer area is not feasible, privacy fences and
walls for commercial uses that abut existing residential uses shall
be required and shall be a minimum of six feet but no more than 10
feet in height.
(3) Fences and walls on corner properties shall not be constructed of
materials that would block the view of vehicular traffic and shall
not be located in any sight triangle for driveways and streets.
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-64 WATERFORD CODE § 176-64
168:530
§ 176-65. Fire management.
(4) No fence or wall shall be erected to restrict or otherwise alter the
vehicular traffic flow unless approved by the Planning Board.
A. All applications for development in the Township shall demonstrate
conformance with the standards for fire hazard mitigation per N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.124.
B. The potential fire hazard for any parcel of land proposed for
development shall be determined according to the following fire hazard
classes:
Fire Hazard Class Vegetation Type
Low Atlantic white cedar hardwood swamps
Moderate Non-pine barrens forest prescribed burn areas
High Pine barrens forest, including mature forms of
pine, pine-oak or oak-pine
Extreme Immature or dwarf forms of pine-oak or oakpine;
all classes of pine-scrub oak and pinelowland
C. All applications for development shall determine the appropriate fire
hazard class by referring to the vegetation map in the natural resources
inventory, supplemented by an on-site inspection to determine true
height and spacing, as is necessary.
D. For lands classified as moderate, high and extreme fire hazard areas, all
roads shall conform with the following standards:
(1) All new residential developments of 25 units or more shall have two
accessways of width and surface composition sufficient to
accommodate and support fire-fighting equipment.
(2) All dead-end roads will terminate in a manner that provides safe
and efficient entry and exit for fire equipment.
(3) The rights-of-way of all roads will be maintained so that they
provide an effective firebreak.
E. The Fire Official shall require and designate public or private fire lanes
as deemed necessary for the efficient and effective use of fire
apparatus. Fire lanes shall be a minimum of 18 feet in width.
F. Fire Department access shall be provided and maintained to all
buildings undergoing construction, alteration or demolition. Fire
Department access roadways shall be of an approved surface material
capable of providing emergency access and support at all times. Fire
Department access roadways shall be a minimum of 18 feet in
unobstructed width.
§ 176-64 INSURANCE § 176-65
168:531
G. For lands classified as moderate, high and extreme hazard areas, a fire
hazard fuel break shall be provided around structures proposed for
human use, by selectively thinning, mowing, or pruning and
maintaining on an annual basis, the shrubs, understory trees, bushes
and ground cover and removing all dead plant material. These fuel
breaks shall be at widths, measured outward from the structure, as
follows:
(1) Thirty feet in moderate fire hazard areas.
(2) Seventy five feet in high fire hazard areas.
(3) One hundred feet in extreme fire hazard areas.
H. Fire hazard fuel breaks within lands classified as extreme fire hazard
areas shall contain no pine tree (Pinus Species) that is within 25 feet of
another pine tree.
I. All applications for development of 100 or more dwelling units on lands
classified as high or extreme fire hazard areas shall have a twohundred-
foot perimeter fuel break between all structures and the forest
in which:
(1) Shrubs, understory trees, and ground cover are selectively
removed, mowed or pruned, and maintained on an annual basis;
(2) All dead plant material is removed;
(3) Roads, rights-of-way and wetlands are incorporated into the fuel
break to the maximum extent practicable; and
(4) There is a specific program for maintenance.
J. All new structures proposed for development in the Township shall
meet the following specifications:
(1) Roofs and exteriors will be constructed of fire-resistant materials,
such as asphalt rag felt roofing, tiles, fire-resistant roofing shingles,
sheet iron, aluminum or brick. Fire-retardant-treated wood
shingles or shake-type roofs are prohibited in high or extreme fire
hazard areas;
(2) All projections, such as balconies, decks and roof gables, shall be
constructed of fire-resistant materials or materials treated with
fire-retardant chemicals;
(3) Any openings in the roof, attic and the floor shall be screened;
(4) Chimneys and stovepipes which are designed to burn solid or liquid
fuels shall be equipped with screens over the outlets;
(5) Flat roofs shall be permitted in areas where vegetation is higher
than the roof, provided that the provisions of Subsection G of this
section for modified fire hazard areas are met; and
§ 176-65 WATERFORD CODE § 176-65
168:532
§ 176-66. Fish and wildlife.
No development shall be carried out in the Pinelands Area unless it is
designed to avoid irreversible adverse impacts on habitats that are critical
to the survival of any local populations of those threatened or endangered
animal species designated by the NJDEP pursuant to N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1 et seq.
All development or other authorized activity shall be carried out in a manner
which avoids disturbance to fish and wildlife habitats that are essential
to the continued nesting, resting, breeding and feeding of significant
populations of fish and wildlife.
§ 176-67. Forestry.
No forestry in the Township shall be carried out by any person unless a
permit for such activity has been issued by the Township Zoning Official
in accordance with § 176-12F. Notwithstanding this requirement, no such
permits shall be required for the following forestry activities:
§ 176-68. Glare.
No use shall produce a strong, dazzling light or reflection of a strong,
dazzling light or glare beyond its lot lines. Exterior lighting shall be
shielded, buffered, and directed so that glare, direct light or reflection will
not become a nuisance to adjoining properties, units, districts, or streets.
§ 176-69. Heat.
Sources of heat, including, but not limited to, steam, gases, vapors,
products of combustion or chemical reaction shall not discharge onto or
directly contact structures, plant or animal life on neighboring uses. No
(6) Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a second floor emergency
rear exit if the height of the building exceeds 2 1/2 stories.
A. Normal and customary forestry practices on residentially improved
parcels of land that are five acres or less in size.
B. Tree harvesting, provided that no more than one cord of wood per five
acres of land is harvested in any one year and that no more than five
cords of wood are harvested from the entire parcel in any one year.
C. Tree planting, provided that the area to be planted does not exceed five
acres in any one year, no soil disturbance occurs other than that caused
by the planting activity and no trees other than those authorized by
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25 are to be planted.
D. Forest stand improvement designed to selectively thin trees and brush,
provided that no clearing or soil disturbance occurs and that the total
land area on the parcel in which the activity occurs does not exceed five
acres in any one year.
E. Prescribed burning, clearing and maintaining of fire breaks.
§ 176-65 INSURANCE § 176-69
168:533
use, occupation, activity, operation or device shall cause an increase in
ambient temperature, as measured on the boundary between neighboring
uses. Further, no use shall be permitted which could cause the temperature
to rise or fall in any body of water, except that this provision shall not apply
to any sewerage treatment plant which has received approval by the NJDEP
as they may be adopted and amended.
§ 176-70. Historical and cultural resource preservation.
A. Planning Board powers. The Planning Board shall exercise all the
powers and perform all the duties set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.153(a),
including recommendations to the Township Committee for designation
of historic resources, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.,
which are determined to be significant pursuant to § 176-70D(3) below.
B. Authority to issue certificates of appropriateness.
(1) The standards governing the issuance of certificates of
appropriateness in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.156(c) shall be followed by the
Planning Board.
(2) The Planning Board shall issue all certificates of
appropriateness.129
(3) Certificates of appropriateness shall be required for the following:
(a) Construction, encroachment upon, alteration, remodeling,
removal, disturbance or demolition of any resource designated
by the Township Committee or the Commission pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.154 or any action which renders such a site
inaccessible; and
(b) Development not otherwise exempted from review pursuant to
§ 176-14 where a significant resource has been identified
pursuant to § 176-70D below.
(4) Applications for certificates of appropriateness shall include the
information specified in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.156(b).
C. Effect of issuance of certificate of appropriateness. The effect of the
issuance of a certification of appropriateness is as follows:
(1) All subsequent development approvals shall be issued or denied in
a manner consistent with the certificate of appropriateness except
as provided in Subsection C(2) below.
(2) A certification of appropriateness issued as a result of the cultural
resource survey requirement set forth in § 176-70D below shall be
effective for two years. If the resource is not designated by the
129. Editor's Note: Original § 176-70.2C, regarding the issuance of certificates of
appropriateness by the Board of Adjustment, which previously followed this subsection,
was deleted under the authority of Ord. No. 2003-1, adopted 1-22-2003
§ 176-69 WATERFORD CODE § 176-70
168:534
Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.154 or by the Township
Committee pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. within that twoyear
period, the historic resource standards of this section shall
no longer apply to the resource in question until such time as
the Commission designates the resource pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.154.
D. Cultural resource survey required.
(1) A cultural resource survey shall accompany all applications for
development in the PV District and all applications for major
development in order to determine whether any significant historic
resources exist on the parcel, in accordance with § 176-106.
(2) This requirement for a survey may be a waived by the local
approving authority if:
(a) There is sufficient evidence of significant cultural activity on
the project site or, in the case of archaeological resources,
within the vicinity;
(b) The evidence of cultural activity on the site lacks the potential
for importance because further recording of the available data
will not contribute to a more comprehensive understanding of
Pinelands culture; or
(c) The evidence of cultural activity lacks any potential for
significance pursuant to the standards of Subsection D(3)
below.
(3) A resource shall be deemed to be significant if it possesses integrity
of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and
association which reflects its significance in American history,
architecture, archaeology or culture under one or more of the
following criteria:
(a) The presence of structures, sites or areas associated with
events of significance to the cultural, political, economic or
social history of the nation, state, local community or the
Pinelands; or
(b) The presence of structures, sites or areas associated with the
lives of persons or institutions of significance to the cultural,
political, economic or social history of the nation, state, local
community or the Pinelands; or
(c) The presence of structures that represent the work of a master,
or that possess high artistic values, or that embody the
distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of
construction, or that represent a distinguishable entity of
significance to the architectural, cultural, political, economic
or social history of the nation, state, local community of the
§ 176-70 INSURANCE § 176-70
168:535
§ 176-71. Homeowners' association.
Pinelands, although its components may lack individual
distinction; or
(d) The presence of a site or area which has yielded or is likely to
yield significant information regarding the history or
archaeological history of the Pinelands.
E. Documentation of resources. Resources shall be documented in
accordance with § 176-106E.
F. Discovery of resource during construction. If archaeological data is
discovered on site any time after construction has been commenced,
the developer shall immediately cease construction, notify the Planning
Board and Commission and take all reasonable steps to protect the
archaeological data in accordance with the "Guidelines for the
Recovery of Scientific, Prehistoric, Historic and Archaeological Data:
Procedures for Notification Reporting and Data Recovery" (36 CFR 66).
A. In order to secure property improvement and maintenance of all
common open space in any proposed housing development, the
landowner shall provide for and establish an organization for the
ownership and maintenance of any common open space not dedicated
to and accepted by the Township. Such organization shall not be
dissolved nor shall it dispose of any common space, by sale or otherwise
(except to an organization conceived and established to own and
maintain the common open space), without first offering to dedicate the
same to the Township or other governmental agency designated by the
Township. The Planning Board shall make findings concerning the
operation of the organization for the ownership and maintenance of any
common open space. It shall consider the following:
(1) Time when organization was created.
(2) Mandatory or automatic nature of membership in the organization
by resident or successor.
(3) Permanence of open space safeguards.
(4) Liability of organization for insurance, taxes and maintenance of all
facilities.
(5) Provision of pro rata sharing of costs and assessments.
(6) Capacity of the organization to administer common facilities and
preserve the benefits of common open space.
B. In the event that the organization established to own and maintain
common open space, or any successor organization, shall, at any time
after establishment of the development, fail to maintain the common
open space in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the
plan, the municipality may serve written notice upon such organization
§ 176-70 WATERFORD CODE § 176-71
168:536
or upon the residents and owners of the development setting forth the
manner in which the organization has failed to maintain the common
open space in reasonable condition and said notice shall include a
demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be cured within 30 days,
and shall state the date and place of a hearing which shall be held
within 14 days of the notice. At such hearing, the municipality may
modify the terms of the original notice of the deficiencies and may give
an extension of time within which they shall be cured. If the deficiencies
set forth in the original notice, or in the modifications thereof, shall not
be cured within said 30 days or an extension thereof, the municipality,
in order to preserve the taxable values of the properties within the
planned development and to prevent the common open space from
becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon said common open space
and maintain the same for a period of one year. Said entry and
maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use the common
open space except when the same is voluntarily dedicated to the public
by the residents and owners. Before the expiration of said year, the
municipality shall, upon its initiative or upon the request of the
organization responsible for the maintenance of the common open
space, call a public hearing upon notice to such organization, or to the
residents and owners of the development, to be held by the municipal
authority, at which hearing such organization or the residents and
owners of the development shall show cause why such maintenance
by the municipality should not continue for a succeeding year. If the
Township shall determine that such organization is not ready and able
to maintain said common open space during the next succeeding year
and subject to a similar hearing and determination in each year
thereafter. The decision of the Township in any such case shall
constitute a final administrative decision subject to judicial review.
C. The cost of such maintenance by the municipality shall be assessed
ratably against the properties within the development that have a right
of enjoyment of the common open space and shall become a tax lien on
said properties. The municipality at the time of entering upon said
common open space for the purpose of maintenance, shall file a notice
of such lien in the office of the County Clerk upon the properties
affected by such lien within the development.
D. Membership shall be limited to and mandatory for all property owners,
condominium owners, stockholders under a cooperative development
or other owners of property or interest in the project. Required
membership and the responsibilities of the members shall be in writing
between the organization and each member in the form of a covenant
with each agreeing to liability for his pro-rata share of the
organization's costs. The organization shall be responsible for liability
insurance, taxes, maintenance and any other obligations assumed by
the organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it dispose of any of its
open space or property without offering to dedicate the same to the
Township.
§ 176-71 INSURANCE § 176-71
168:537
§ 176-72. Landscaping, street (shade) trees, and grasses.
E. The assessment levied by the organization upon each member may
become a lien on each member's property. The organization shall be
allowed to adjust the assessment to meet changing needs.
F. The organization shall clearly describe in its bylaws all the rights and
obligations of each tenant and owner, including a copy of the covenant,
model deeds and articles or incorporation of the organization, and the
fact that every tenant and property owner shall have the right to use all
common property. These shall be set forth as a condition of approval
and shall be submitted to the Township Attorney prior to the granting of
final approval of the development.
G. The articles of incorporation, covenants, bylaws, model deeds and other
legal instruments shall stipulate that control of the organization shall
be transferred to the members based on percentage of the dwelling
units sold and/or occupied. Further, these instruments shall clearly
indicate that in the event such organization shall fail to maintain the
common open space or common property in reasonable order and
condition, the Township may serve written notice upon such
organization and shall follow the procedures set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-43b, and if it becomes necessary for the Township to provide
maintenance, the imposition of a lien, as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43,
shall be followed.
A. Conformance.
(1) All development shall conform to the provisions of this section and
all other applicable provisions of this chapter.
(2) Development prohibited in the vicinity of threatened or endangered
plants. No development shall be carried out by any person unless it
is designed to avoid irreversible adverse impacts on the survival of
any local populations of threatened or endangered plants of the
Pinelands designated in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.27.
B. Street (shade) trees. For all land development devoid of major trees
along arterial and collector streets of a development, and along
proposed roads and street rights-of-way where natural woods are not
present, and where, due to construction, the entire right-of-way is
cleared, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Trees shall be planted along both sides of all streets as approved by
the Planning Board.
(2) Trees shall be planted at forty-foot intervals, or an equivalent
number shall be planted in an informal arrangement.
(3) Trees shall be planted so that they will not interfere with utilities,
block sight easements, or obscure streetlights. Spacing between
street trees and various objects should be as follows:
§ 176-71 WATERFORD CODE § 176-72
168:538
Object
Distance (from tree)
(feet)
Fire hydrant 8
Light pole 25
Street/stop/directional signs 25
Street corner 40
(4) The caliper of the trees shall be 2 1/2 inches measured 12 inches
above the ground. The standing height shall be a minimum of 10
feet. All trees shall be brought to the site balled and burlapped or
other acceptable means, free of insects and disease and true to
species and variety.
(5) Developers shall use a tree root control barrier a minimum of 18
inches in depth to prevent street, sidewalk and curb hazards. The
barriers shall be installed along the edge of the sidewalk and curb,
against the finished concrete work, slightly below finished grade.
The barriers shall be backfilled with a layer of gravel then
completed with normal fill material.
(6) Stripping trees from a lot or filling around trees on a lot shall not be
permitted unless it can be shown that grading requirements
necessitate removal of trees, in which case, those lots shall be
replanted with trees to reestablish the tone of the area and to
conform with adjacent lots.
(7) All apartments, condominiums and townhouses must provide
adequate landscaping with at least one approved tree per unit that
must be maintained by the owner of the apartment development,
the condominium association, or the individual townhouse owners
if on individual lots.
(8) Wherever medial grass strips or other landscaped areas are
proposed which will be visible to the general public within the
development, the covenants and/or agreements of the maintenance
of such areas by that association shall apply.
C. General landscaping provisions.
(1) Landscaping provided as part of any development plan shall utilize
native Pinelands vegetation, except that 20% of all trees, shrubs,
and ground cover may be of nonnative, nontoxic, species.
Nonnative, nontoxic species may be used only in accordance with
§ 176-72C(4)(d) below. Vegetation represents the most visible
element of the essential character of the Pinelands and constitutes
the fundamental structure of wildlife habitats. The mandatory
utilization of primary Pinelands native vegetation will insure the
continued integrity of the visual and ecological character of the
Pinelands.
§ 176-72 INSURANCE § 176-72
168:539
(2) All clearing and soil disturbance activities, whether or not an
application for development is required pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4
and this chapter, shall be limited to that which is necessary to
accommodate an activity, use or structure which is permitted by
this chapter.
(3) Where practical, all clearing and soil disturbance activities
associated with an activity, use or structure, other than agriculture,
forestry and resource extraction, shall:
(a) Avoid wooded areas, including New Jersey's Record Trees as
published by the NJDEP in 1991 and periodically updated; and
(b) Revegetate or landscape areas temporarily cleared or
disturbed during development activities.
(4) In order to conserve water, conserve natural features and reduce
pollution from the use of fertilizers, pesticides and other soil
supplements, all landscaping or revegetation plans shall
incorporate the following elements:
(a) The limits of clearing shall be identified;
(b) Existing vegetation, including New Jersey's Record Trees as
published by the NJDEP in 1991 and periodically updated, shall
be incorporated into the landscape design where practical;
(c) Permanent lawn or turf areas shall be limited to those
specifically intended for active human use such as play fields,
golf courses and lawns associated with a residence or other
principal nonresidential use. Existing wooded areas shall not
be cleared and converted to lawns except when directly
associated with and adjacent to a proposed structure; and
(d) Shrubs and trees authorized by N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25 shall be used
for revegetation or landscaping purposes. Other shrubs and
trees may be used in the following circumstances, provided
they do not exceed the twenty-percent maximum nonnative
vegetation permitted in § 176-72C(1):
[1] When the parcel to be developed or its environs contain a
predominance of shrubs and tree species not authorized
by N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25;
[2] For limited ornamental purposes around buildings and
other structures; or
[3] When limited use of other shrubs or tree species is
required for proper screening or buffering.
(e) When automatic irrigation systems are used they shall be fitted
with a moisture-sensing device.
§ 176-72 WATERFORD CODE § 176-72
168:540
(f) When possible, irrigation systems shall use nonpotable water
(i.e., retained stormwater).
(g) Planting beds shall be covered with mulch.
D. Vegetation.
(1) Trees and shrubs listed hereunder shall be utilized for landscaping
purposes:
Pitch pine Shortleaf pine Blackjack oak
Southern red oak White oak Chestnut oak
Scrub oak Post oak Trident red maple
Scarlet oak Black huckleberry Black chokeberry
Black gum Red chokeberry Inkberry
Shadbush Hayberry Arrowwood
Winterberry Sweet pepperbush Sheep laurel
Sandmyrtle Dangleberry Lowbush blueberry
Virginia pine American holly Atlantic white cedar
Mountain laurel Gray birch Sweetbay magnolia
Red cedar Sassafras Teaberry
Swamp leucothoe Staggerbush Dwarf huckleberry
Trailing arbutus Bearberry Black highbush
blueberry
Cranberry Swamp azalea
Rhododendron
maximum
Black oak
(2) Tree and shrub species other than those listed in Subsection D(1)
above may be used, provided that, of the 20% maximum nonnative
vegetation permitted under § 176-72C(1), species of the heath
family (Ericaceae) comprise at least 80% of the plantings.
(3) In cases where 80% of native Pinelands species for landscaping is
limited due to extreme site conditions, the Planning Board may
hear arguments from the applicant with reference to the flexibility
of mandatory Pinelands vegetation requirements. In such cases,
the Board shall consider the following guidelines before granting a
waiver from the vegetation requirements:
(a) The individual site conditions.
(b) The extremity of the stressful nature of the site.
(c) The extent of native vegetation on adjacent sites.
(d) Proximity of the site to sensitive environmental areas.
§ 176-72 INSURANCE § 176-72
168:541
(e) Availability of water and/or maintenance access.
(f) The extent to which proposed plans are compatible with native
species. (The use of exotic varieties shall be avoided.)
(g) The extent to which a native buffer could be utilized between
the developed portions and the natural portions of the tract.
(4) The Board shall not accept the unavailability of native or
indigenous species as adequate grounds for a waiver from this
section.
E. Ground cover and mulch.
(1) All planting beds must be provided with ground cover and the type
to be used must be noted on the site plan. Where mulches are used,
a layer of black, four-mil polyethylene or its equivalent must be
used to reduce weed growth and retain moisture. Minimum
required depth of placement is four inches.
(2) Ground covers are required in place of grass in small and restricted
areas, such as tree and shrub planters.
(3) All ground cover areas and steep banks with slopes greater than a
3:1 gradient must be planted with an approved ground cover.
F. Grasses.
(1) Grasses that are adapted to drought, nutrient poor soils (such as
tall fescue, sheep fescue, chewings fescue, red fescue and
smoothgrass) and those that are native to the Pinelands (such as
little bluestem, deertongue, redtop and switchgrass) shall be
utilized for landscaping purposes. Species used for temporary
cover (such as rye grass and oats) shall be utilized to stabilize soils.
(2) An area not exceeding 2,000 square feet per building may be
planted with grasses not meeting the requirements of Subsection
F(1) above. The requirements of Subsection F(1) shall not apply to
areas which are planted with grass and dedicated for public
recreational uses.
(3) Cover crops shall be used to control erosion during construction or
when cover is needed for a temporary period.
Time Period Options
0 to 6 months Mulch
6 to 12 months Oats, winter rye
1 to 2 years Annual rye, perennial rye, winter rye
2 or more years Fescue with mixture of perennial rye
G. Protection of existing plantings.
§ 176-72 WATERFORD CODE § 176-72
168:542
(1) Sound existing trees, substantial clumps, and fine specimens shall
be carefully protected during construction to avoid disturbance of
the microclimate of the plantings.
(2) Stockpiling of soil shall be done in open areas, and soil shall be left
undisturbed in a ten-foot radius around any tree to be preserved.
(3) Temporary fences, of sturdy material, shall be erected at the drip
line to prevent encroachment, soil compaction, and damage from
equipment. If a tree has a large spread, a triangular fence may be
built instead of a fence at the drip line. These fences shall not be
supported by the plants they are protecting, but shall be self
supporting.
(4) The grade of land located within six feet of a tree shall not be raised
or lowered more than six inches unless compensated by welling or
retaining methods described herein. In situations of specimen trees
with shallow surface rooting, grading shall not occur within a
twelve-foot radius of the tree trunk unless excavated by hand. No
equipment is to be driven over this area, and no building materials
are to be stacked against the trees or within the area of the barrier.
(5) Tree wells are to be constructed around each tree or group of trees
before any grades are increased. Wells are to be constructed of
uncemented stone, block or any other suitable material. This well
should be a minimum of three feet in diameter for four-inch or less
caliper trees. Construction is to be started at the determined
distance, on existing grade so as not to disturb roots with
foundation construction. For trees of more than four inches in
diameter, add one foot to the diameter of each additional inch of
caliper measured 12 inches above natural ground level, to a
maximum of eight feet.
(6) Retaining walls shall be constructed around each tree or group of
trees immediately after grade is lowered. This retaining wall is to
be constructed of pressure-treated timber or any other suitable
material subject to approval by the Township Engineer and the
Planning Board.
(7) No tree is to support any scaffolding, signs, temporary utility or any
other device.
H. Planting procedure. Any vegetation delivered to a site, which is not
planted immediately, shall be heeled-in to prevent desiccation. Trees
and bushes should be planted according to the following recommended
horticultural procedures:
(1) Plantings should be well-formed and healthy nursery grown stock.
The root ball should be inspected to ensure that it is undamaged, of
good quality soil and that it encompasses the entire root system.
§ 176-72 INSURANCE § 176-72
168:543
(2) Planting should take place when trees and bushes are dormant
because transplanting during this period greatly increases the
chances of success.
(3) Planting holes should be dug two times as wide and 1 1/2 times as
deep as the root ball. Topsoil and subsoil should be mixed
thoroughly with sphagnum peat moss or according to the
recommendations of the county agricultural agent and a layer six
inches to seven inches of the mix placed in the bottom of the hole.
Fertilizer should not be added to the soil mix since it can burn new,
tender roots, slowing down the growth of the plant or even killing
it. The soil in the bottom of the hole should be tamped down
without compacting it.
(4) Plantings should be positioned in the planting hole so that trunks
are straight, and the base is at the finished grade of the new
location and at the same depth as it was when it was growing.
Roots should be spread evenly throughout the hole, and soil added
carefully.
(5) The backfilled soil should be tamped in place, and the hole filled to
the top of the root ball. The added soil should be tamped gently, but
not compacted, and a ring of soil two inches to three inches high
should be formed around the edge of the planting hole to aid in
watering.
(6) Plantings should be watered with a fertilizer-water solution, the
amount of fertilizer depending on an analysis. Watering should be
thorough and done slowly and gently to avoid damage to the soil
structure.
(7) Saucers shall be designed to catch and hold the maximum amount
of water, either from natural precipitation or irrigation and shall be
a minimum of four inches higher than the finished grade. The area
within the watering saucer should be filled to a depth of two inches
to three inches with mulch. Saucers placed on slopes shall be level
at the top and perpendicular to the tree trunk.
(8) Tree trunks should be coated with an insecticide to reduce the
chances of attack by borers. The specific insecticide can be
recommended by the county agricultural agent.
(9) All newly planted trees and shrubs should be pruned. Balled and
burlapped and container-grown plants should be shaped lightly and
have broken and damaged branches removed. Bare root plants
require much heavier pruning to reduce the water demand by the
top of the plant in order to compensate for the roots lost when the
plants were dug up. One-third to 1/2 of the leaf area should be
removed by thinning the branches and reducing their length.
Pruning should retain the natural form of the tree or shrub; the
central leader or top of a newly planted tree should never be
removed, since this will destroy its natural growth habit.
§ 176-72 WATERFORD CODE § 176-72
168:544
(10) If properly planted, shrubs will not have to be staked, although
oversized bushes may need some support. Trees should be staked
in accordance with good nursery practice.
(11) Special planting techniques may be necessary when planting in
heavy, poorly drained or sandy soils. Recommendations of the
county agricultural agent should be followed.
(12) After planting, an adequate supply of water and even amount of
moisture shall be maintained. Plant conditions should be carefully
observed, and if the soil is dry three inches to six inches beneath
the surface, water should be added immediately. The water should
be applied slowly, preferably through drip irrigation, so that it
soaks in and does not run off. As a general rule, plantings in welldrained
soils should be watered one inch per week, and those in
lighter sandy soils, two inches per week, except during periods of
heavy rainfall.
(13) Dead or dying trees which have been transplanted by virtue of the
requirements of this section shall be replaced by the developer
during the next recommended planting season.
I. Staking procedures. Trees over six feet in height must be staked in the
following manner:
(1) Two stakes shall be driven a minimum of two feet into undisturbed
soil outside the planting hole.
(2) After placement stakes must be 1/2 to 2/3 the height of the tree
measured from ground level.
(3) Stakes shall be a minimum of two inches by two inches stock at the
thick end.
(4) Stakes shall be placed in line with prevailing winds.
(5) Stakes shall be attached to the tree with twelve-gauge galvanized
wire covered with rubber or plastic hose where wire is likely to
come into contact with the tree trunk. Any of the commercially
available materials designed for staking trees may be used as an
alternative with the approval of the Township Engineer. The loop in
contact with the tree shall be loose enough to permit growth and
prevent girdling for two years but shall be tightly bound to prevent
slippage.
J. Mulching.
(1) A four-inch minimum layer of mulch shall be applied around each
individual or group of trees and shrubs.
(2) Mulch shall be considered any material, organic or inorganic, of a
granular nature that is not readily subject to movement by wind or
water.
§ 176-72 INSURANCE § 176-72
168:545
§ 176-73. Lighting.
(3) Wood chips partially rotted or nitrogen-enriched may be used. New
wood chips are not acceptable because of the bacterial drawings of
available nitrogen from the soil, thus preventing its use by the
plants it is intended to protect.
K. Wrapping. Each deciduous tree shall be wrapped with an expandable
paper or cloth treated to last at least one year to prevent sunscald.
(1) The wrap shall extend from the ground level up the trunk to the
first branches.
(2) The wrap shall be attached or fastened to each end with a material
that will permit tree growth without girdling.
A. General standards.
(1) For minor site plans and, wherever appropriate in the discretion of
the Township Engineer, for developments with insignificant impact
with reference to lighting, the developer may submit a sample of
the actual fixture and lighting proposed for review and approval by
the Township Engineer in lieu of the engineering data required in
this section.
(2) Any proposed outdoor lighting shall be shown on the site plan in
sufficient detail to allow determination of the effects at the
property line, on nearby streets, driveways, residences and
overhead sky glow. The objective of these specifications is to
minimize glare and undesirable off-site effects.
B. Illumination levels. The maintained footcandles of illumination
recommended at ground level are as indicated in the following table:
Area Classification
Commercial Intermediate Residential
Street
Hierarchy Lux FootcandlesLux FootcandlesLux Footcandles
Collector 13 1.2 10 0.9 6 0.6
Minorresidential
subcollector
10 0.9 6 0.6 4 0.4
Local 6 0.6 4 0.4 4 0.4
§ 176-72 WATERFORD CODE § 176-73
168:546
Parking Illumination (Open Parking Facilities)
Illumination Objectives
Level of
Activity Vehicular Traffic
Pedestrian
Safety
Pedestrian
Security
Lux Footcandles Lux Footcandles Lux Footcandles
Low 5 0.5 2 0.2 9 0.8
Medium 11 1 6 0.6 22 2
High 22 2 10 0.9 43 4
Pedestrianway Illumination
Average Levels for Special
Pedestrian Security
Minimum
Average Level
Mounting
Heights 3 to 5
Meters
(9 to 15 feet)
Mounting
Heights 5 to 10
Meters
(15 to 30 feet)
Walkways
and
Bikeway
ClassificationLux FootcandlesLux Footcandles Lux Footcandles
Sidewalks
(roadside)
and Type A
bikeways
Commercial 10 0.9 22 2.0 43 4.0
Intermediate 6 0.6 11 1.0 22 2.0
Residential 2 0.2 4 0.4 9 0.8
Walkways
distant from
roadways
and Type B
bikeways
Park
walkways
and
bikeways
5 0.5 6 0.6 11 1.0
Pedestrian
tunnels
43 4.0 54 5.0 — —
Pedestrian
overpasses
3 0.3 4 0.4 — —
Pedestrian
stairways
6 0.6 9 0.8 — —
§ 176-73 INSURANCE § 176-73
168:547
Type A Bikeway: A strip within or adjacent to a public roadway or
shoulder, used for bicycle travel.
Type B Bikeway: An improved strip identified for public bicycle travel
and located away from a roadway or its adjacent sidewalk system.
Activity Level:
High: Major cultural or civic events and major regional shopping
centers.
Medium: Fast-food facilities, area shopping centers, hospital
parking areas, transportation parking areas, cultural, civic or
recreational events, and residential complex parking.
Low: Local merchant parking, industrial employee parking,
educational facility parking.
C. Luminaries.
(1) Sharp cutoff type luminaries are recommended for the best
approach to lighting parking areas and shall be of the type that can
be provided with sharp cutoff deflectors or retractors where
required to shield light from the luminaire at angles less than the
set cutoff degree angle above nadir (from the vertical). The
shielding angle shall be selected to minimize discomforting glare to
an observer's eyes from the light source at an angle below the set
cutoff. Shielding shall also be employed to prevent spill over of
undesirable light to adjoining property.
(2) LED lighting shall be utilized. [Amended 8-9-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-21]
(3) General illumination of the exterior of buildings, including the roof,
is not permitted unless specifically approved by the Planning
Board. Objectionable spill, to the exterior, of bright and glaring
interior building light shall be avoided by the use of low-brightness
lenses on interior lighting.
(4) The lighting plan shall provide for nonglare lights and recessed
lenses focused downward in parking areas.
D. Light pollution or light intrusion.
(1) Any outdoor lighting, such as sidewalk illumination, driveways with
no adjacent parking, the lighting of signs and permitted
ornamental lighting, shall be shown on the lighting plan in
sufficient detail to allow a determination of the effects upon
adjacent properties and traffic safety. The objectives of these
specifications are to minimize undesirable off-premises effects. No
light shall shine into windows or onto streets and driveways to
interfere with or distract drivers. To achieve these requirements,
the intensity of such light sources, light shielding and similar
characteristics shall be subject to site plan approval.
§ 176-73 WATERFORD CODE § 176-73
168:548
(2) The maximum cutoff angle shall be used to shield light source glare
and unwanted light from adjacent properties and motorists
approaching on bounding roads and highways. Light spillage of
more than 0.2 footcandles onto adjacent properties shall be
prohibited.
(3) Adequate shielding shall be employed to protect properties, streets
and highways from the glare of such illumination, including
luminaries for illuminating entrances and driveways for parking
areas.
(4) Conflict with lighting of adjacent properties parking areas shall be
avoided. For example, if one or more adjacent areas with
established lighting systems are using mercury-vapor lamps, the
submitted area shall conform to the same lamp type, but not
necessarily the same type luminaire. However, other high-intensity
discharge lamps may be considered when there is ample reason for
employing such lamps and ample proof that a suitable method can
be employed to reduce color conflict.
E. Mounting height. The maximum mounting height of pole-mounted
luminaries shall be 25 feet or the height of the building, whichever is
less. In no case shall the standards be less than 12 feet high.
F. Security lighting. All parking areas and walkways thereto and
appurtenant passageways and driveways serving commercial, public,
office, multiple-family or other uses having common off-street parking
and/or loading areas shall be adequately illuminated for safety and
security reasons from sunset to sunrise. Lighting used to illuminate offstreet
parking and loading areas shall be arranged to reflect the light
away from residential premises and public streets.
G. Streetlighting. Plans accompanying all applications for development
shall include the location of all proposed streetlights of a type supplied
by the utility and a type and number approved by the Board and/or
Township Engineer. Streetlights shall be provided at the entrance from
collector roads, at all major changes in direction in roads, at all
intersections and anywhere else deemed necessary for safety reasons.
(1) Streetlighting shall be provided at all street intersections and
otherwise at intervals of 200 feet to 250 feet. Lighting shall be
placed on one side of the street only.
(2) For normal street usage, a thirty-watt light emitting diode (LED)
fixture shall be used. For intersections of minor streets, a forty-fivewatt
LED fixture shall be used. At the intersection of a minor street
and a collector street and an arterial; a ninety-watt LED fixture
shall be used. [Amended 8-9-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-21]
(3) The maximum mounting height for streetlighting shall be 25 feet.
§ 176-73 INSURANCE § 176-73
168:549
§ 176-74. Lot configuration.
(4) The installation of streetlighting shall be coordinated with the local
utility company.
H. Pedestrian lighting. Pedestrian lighting shall be in a height range
between one foot and 12 feet high.
I. Information to be submitted. The following shall be submitted for
review and approval of all lighting systems:
(1) Site plan showing existing and proposed streetlights within 100
feet of the property area to be lighted, location of all poles and
luminaries, illumination levels using photometric curve plotting or
point-by-point grid showing footcandles of illumination at each
point.
(2) Type of luminaries, including manufacturer's data.
(3) Type and wattage of lamp, including manufacturer's data.
(4) Mounting height of luminaire.
(5) Photometric data and isofootcandle curves of the luminaire and
lamp proposed. Photometric data shall be from an independent
testing laboratory. Photometric curves shall be drawn to the same
scale as the site plan scale and shall show maintained foot-candle
levels of illumination. The following shall be included with
photometric and luminaire data:
(a) Light source corrections.
(b) Lamp life lumen depreciation factor.
(c) Coefficient of utilization.
(d) Luminaire dirt depreciation factors.
(e) Maintenance factor correction.
(6) Type of pole and manufacturer's data. Applicants are encouraged
to use wooden or bronze-colored aluminum poles in keeping with
the architecture of the building and surrounding areas.
(7) Pole base and foundation design and details. Anchor bolts shall be
in accordance with those recommended by the manufacturer and
conform with all state requirements. [Amended 2-23-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-5]
A. General provisions.
(1) Lots shall conform to the requirements of the zoning provisions of
this chapter, and insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall either be
at right angles or radial to street lines. Notwithstanding any other
§ 176-73 WATERFORD CODE § 176-74
168:550
provisions of this chapter, any deviation from the provisions
specified in this section shall require variance relief in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
(2) Whenever title to two or more contiguous lots is held by the same
owner, regardless of whether or not each of said lots have been
approved as portions of a subdivision or acquired by separate
conveyance or by other operation of law, and one or more of said
individual lots should, by reason of exceptional shallowness,
topographic conditions, substandard area or yard space or similar
measurements, not conform with the minimum lot area and
dimensional requirements for the zone in which it is located, the
contiguous lots of said owner shall be considered as a single lot.
(3) Each lot must front upon an approved public street with frontage at
the right-of-way in accordance with particular zoning district in
which it is located.
(4) Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing
streets, lots shall begin at such new street lines, and all setbacks
shall be measured from such lines. Additionally, whenever the
owner of a lot existing at the time of adoption of this chapter has
dedicated or conveyed land to the Township in order to meet the
minimum street width requirements of the Official Map or Master
Plan, the Construction Official shall issue construction and
occupancy permits for lots whose depth and/or areas are rendered
substandard only because of such dedication and where the owner
has no other adjacent lands to provide the minimum requirements.
(5) Except as provided in Subsection A(2) above, any existing lot on
which a building or structure is located and which lot does not meet
the minimum lot size, or a structure which violates any yard
requirements, may construct additions to the principal building
and/or construct an accessory building without an appeal for
variance relief, provided:
(a) The existing use(s) on the lot are conforming to the permitted
use(s) stipulated in this chapter for the lot in question;
(b) The total permitted building coverage is not exceeded;
(c) The accessory building or addition does not violate any other
requirements of this chapter, such as, but not limited to, height
and parking, or aggravate an already existing violation of
setback for yard requirements.
(6) No residential dwelling unit in an R1, R2, R3, R4, OC, OP, NB, TC,
PHB or PI District shall be located on a parcel of less than one acre
unless served by a centralized wastewater treatment plant.
(7) For administrative purposes, any application for a construction
permit under the provisions of Subsection A(4) and (5) above shall
§ 176-74 INSURANCE § 176-74
168:551
be referred to the Department of Planning and Zoning for a
determination as to whether or not the provisions are met. In
the event that a determination cannot be made whether or not
the lot qualifies for a construction permit without the submission
of further application information, or, if the applicant requests
exemptions from the minimum standards of this section, the
application shall be reviewed and acted upon by the Planning
Board as a minor site plan.
(8) Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for
their intended use due to factors such as wetlands, flood conditions
or similar circumstances, the Planning Board shall, after adequate
investigation, withhold approval of such lots.
(9) No building to be used as a dwelling shall be constructed or altered
in the rear of a building situated on the same lot; nor shall any
building be constructed in front of or moved to the front of a
dwelling situated on the same lot.
(10) Lots fronting on more than one street must be avoided except in
cases where proximity to major highways warrant it. In such cases,
access for the lot shall be from the minor road and the rear of the
lot shall be screened from the major road by suitable planting as
required by this chapter.
B. Corner lots. Any building on a corner lot or at the intersection of
driveways, access aisles or on-lot circulation drives shall not interfere
with any required site triangle. On all corner lots, the widths of all yards
abutting upon streets shall not be less than the minimum front yard
depth required for the zone, unless otherwise provided for in this
chapter.
C. Flag lots.
(1) Flag lots are prohibited unless they are deemed by the Planning
Board to be in the best interest of the Township and/or for the
purpose of reducing negative impact to the natural environment.
(2) Flag lots shall not be approved for subdivision applications
involving more than three lots inclusive of the original lot from
which the additional lots are being created.
(3) If the Planning Board finds sufficient reason to allow the creation of
flag lots, they shall be a minimum of one acre, not including the
area found in the stem. The entire stem shall have a width of at
least 35 feet on an approved public street. The length of the stem
shall not exceed 250 feet.
D. Yards.
§ 176-74 WATERFORD CODE § 176-74
168:552
§ 176-75. Natural features.
(1) No area set aside for the purpose of meeting front, side or rear
yards for one building shall be considered as meeting the yard
provisions of another building.
(2) On a lot extending through a block resulting in frontage on two or
more streets, excluding corner lots, the front yard shall be that
portion of the lot which abuts the street of address.
(3) Corner lots shall adhere to the setback requirements of front yards
in their zoning district for both streets.
(4) Front yards shall not contain clotheslines or be used for the storage
of garbage or refuse disposal units.
(5) No uses other than ornamental landscaping, buffer strips and
access drives shall be permitted in front yards.
(6) Basketball poles and nets shall not be placed in the right-of-way of
any public street or in the front yard of any apartment,
condominium, or townhouse residence.
E. Monuments.
(1) Monuments shall be of the size and shape required by Section 1 of
Chapter 217 of the Laws of 2011 (N.J.S.A. 46:26B-3), as amended,
and shall be placed in accordance with said statute by the
developer and indicated on the final plat. [Amended 2-23-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-5]
(2) All lot corners shall be marked with a plastic or metal alloy pin of
permanent character, or with a drill hole where a lot corner is
covered with a concrete surface.
A. Physical characteristics of the site shall be located on all base plans,
and methods for preservation shall be outlined.
(1) Soil and subsoil conditions must be suitable for excavation and site
preparation.
(2) The topography of the site and its drainage must be suitable for the
proposed development and designed to prevent erosion.
(3) Natural features, such as lakes, streams, topsoil, trees and shrubs,
must be preserved and incorporated into the final landscaping of
the development.
(4) The effects of prevailing winds, seasonal temperatures and hours of
sunlight on the physical layout and form of the proposed land use
and building must be taken into account.
B. The Planning Board shall inquire into the means whereby trees and
other natural features shall be protected during construction. Clearing
§ 176-74 INSURANCE § 176-75
168:553
§ 176-76. Noise.
Noise levels shall be designated and operated in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:29-1.2, local regulations, and those rules established by the NJDEP as
they may be adopted and amended.
§ 176-77. Nonconforming uses and structures.
The lawful use of land, buildings or structures existing when this chapter
is adopted may continue even though they do not conform to this chapter.
However, none shall be enlarged, extended, relocated, converted to another
use or altered, except in conformity with this chapter.
a site of topsoil, trees and natural features before the developer has
received all required permits and approvals shall not be permitted.
A. Recognized nonconforming uses. Preexisting lawful nonconforming
uses, as listed in the Township's Master Plan, shall be permitted to
continue. The owner/operator of any preexisting nonconforming use not
listed in the Township's Master Plan shall apply to the Land Use Board
in accordance with § 176-34C for a certification of preexisting use
within one year of the effective date of the adoption of this chapter.
[Amended 10-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-22]
B. Abandonment. A nonconforming use shall be considered abandoned if it
is terminated by the owner or if a nonconforming use involving a
structure is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, or if a
nonconforming use of land ceases for a period of 12 months. The
subsequent use of the abandoned building, structure and/or land shall
be in conformance with this chapter.
C. Restoration. Any nonconforming building, structure or use which has
been condemned or damaged by fire, explosion, flood, windstorm or act
of God shall be examined by the Construction Official. If, in the opinion
of the Construction Official, the cost of repair is greater than 60% of the
value of replacing the entire structure, it shall be considered
completely destroyed and may be rebuilt to the original specifications
only upon approval of a variance. If the cost of repair is less than 60% of
the value of replacing the entire structure, it may be rebuilt and used
for the same purpose as before, provided that it is rebuilt within one
year and does not exceed the height, area and volume of the original
structure. The percent damaged shall be the current replacement costs
of the portion damaged or condemned, computed as a percentage of the
current total replacement cost of the entire structure, neither to include
the cost of the foundation unless the foundation is involved in the
repair.
D. Repairs and maintenance. Repairs and maintenance may be made to a
nonconforming use, structure or lot, provided that the work does not
change the use, expand the building or the functional use of the
§ 176-75 WATERFORD CODE § 176-77
168:554
§ 176-78. Odor.
Odors shall not be discernible at the lot line or beyond. Any process which
may involve the creation or emission of any odors shall be provided with
a secondary safeguard system so that control will be maintained if the
primary safeguard system should fail.
§ 176-79. Off-street parking, driveways and loading areas.
building, increase the area of a lot used for a nonconforming purpose or
increase the nonconforming purpose or nonconformity in any manner.
E. In the event a nonconforming use or structure becomes vacant, sold,
leased or if there is any other change of ownership or tenancy, a
certificate of preexisting nonconforming use shall be required from the
Land Use Board purusant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68 before that use may be
continued. [Added 10-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-22]
A. General regulations.
(1) Off-street parking areas shall be oriented to and within a
reasonable walking distance of the buildings they are designed to
serve. A maximum of 1,000 feet for employee parking; 500 feet to
800 feet for shoppers; 250 feet for nonelderly residents; 150 feet
for elderly residents; and 300 feet for guests.
(2) Parking areas shall be suitably landscaped to minimize noise, glare
and other nuisance characteristics as well as to enhance the
environment and ecology of the site and surrounding area. Large
parking lots shall be broken down into sections according to type
and size of development determined by the Planning Board,
separated from other sections by landscaped dividing strips,
berms, and similar elements.
(3) No parking space, aisleway, or driveway (other than entrance or
exit drives) may be located within 20 feet of the cartway. Individual
district regulations may prescribe greater parking area setbacks.
(4) Parking lots for commercial uses that utilize shopping carts shall
provide areas for the collection of such carts. Collection areas shall
be evenly dispersed throughout the parking lot. The collection
points shall be curbed to delineate and separate the parking area
from the collected shopping carts and shall be so designed as to not
impede the vehicular or pedestrian circulation pattern.
(5) An internal collector drive shall be provided for all parking areas in
excess of 250 spaces. No parking shall have direct access to an
internal collector drive. The intersection of any internal collector
drive and drive aisle shall be 90°, unless, because of unusual
topography or lot geometry, a right angle would impede the
efficient circulation of vehicles. In no case shall such an
intersection be less than 60°.
§ 176-77 INSURANCE § 176-79
168:555
(6) Access to parking lots shall be designed to allow free flow of traffic.
There shall be adequate provision for ingress and egress from all
parking spaces to ensure ease of mobility, ample clearance, and
safety of vehicles and pedestrians. Ingress and egress shall be
limited to one per street frontage up to a maximum of two per site,
with the following exceptions:
(a) Two entrance drives on one public street shall be permitted for
lots or premises with frontage in excess of 300 feet, up to a
maximum of three per site.
(b) Automotive service stations primarily involved in the retail sale
of vehicular fuels shall be permitted two entrance drives on
one public street, up to a maximum of three per site, provided
that the center lines of the two entrance drives on one street
frontage are no less than 60 feet apart.
(7) Where sidewalks occur in parking areas, parked vehicles shall not
overhang or extend over the sidewalk unless two feet of additional
sidewalk width is provided in order to accommodate such
overhang.
B. Location of parking and loading areas.
(1) Required off-street parking (residential or commercial) and loading
spaces shall be located on the same lot or premises as the use
served, regardless of the number of spaces required by this
chapter, except in the following cases:
(a) When it is determined during site plan review that the
requirements for on-site off-street parking cannot be met
because of existing conditions, the location and adequacy of
off-site parking spaces to service the use shall be specified on
the site plan for approval by the Board.
(b) A cooperative arrangement between nonresidential uses on
different lots or premises has been approved by the Board.
(2) No off-street loading and maneuvering areas shall be located in any
front yard nor require any part of a street.
(3) No off-street loading areas will be located within 100 feet of any
residential zone or use, school, hospital or nursing home.
(4) Loading areas shall not be used for the purposes of refuse storage
or removal.
(5) Loading spaces shall abut the building being served and shall be
located to directly serve the building for which the space is being
provided.
(6) No loading or parking spaces shall be located in any required
buffer area.
§ 176-79 WATERFORD CODE § 176-79
168:556
(7) No parking of vehicles shall be permitted in designated fire lanes,
streets, driveways, landscaped areas, aisles, sidewalks or turning
areas.
(8) The required handicapped parking spaces shall be located as close
as possible to elevators, ramps and walkways and no more than 200
feet from an accessible entrance.
(9) Where the separate designation of a specific loading space is not
required for an activity, the required off-street parking area shall
not be used for loading and unloading purposes except during
hours when normal business operations are suspended.
(10) The intersection of any entrance drive and a public street shall be
located to permit the flow of vehicles to and from the lot or
premises in a manner that is not hazardous to the health, safety or
general welfare and shall be separated from entrance drives,
existing or proposed, on other or adjacent lots or on the same lot
according to the following schedule:
Lot Frontage
Minimum Separation
(feet)
Less than 150 feet 60
Greater than 150 feet 100
C. Driveways and accessways.
(1) Single-lot residential driveways of more than 50 feet in length shall
have a minimum unobstructed width of 18 feet to allow access for
emergency vehicles. Improved driveway width shall be a minimum
of 12 feet with three feet on either side cleared of vegetation other
than ground cover or low growing ornamental.
(2) Driveway curb cut access shall be limited by the approving
authority, as deemed necessary, in order to provide as few curb cuts
as necessary, and no curb cut shall be more than 24 feet in width
for residential use. In all instances, due consideration to the
proposed width, curbing, direction of traffic flow, radii of curves
and method of dividing traffic lanes shall be given. Curbing, where
required, shall be depressed at the driveway and the curbing may
be rounded at the corners.
(3) Driveways and parking spaces shall be located at least 10 feet from
the side property line except that, where the permitted side yard
set back for a principal building is zero, the driveway shall be
located on the property line of the abutting lot.
(4) Each lot developed with a two-family dwelling unit shall provide an
on-site driveway turnaround where direct access is provided from a
collector or arterial street and shall be permitted only one curb cut
per lot. Where feasible, abutting lots shall have a common access
§ 176-79 INSURANCE § 176-79
168:557
drive. Each curb cut shall be a minimum 16 feet wide and the curb
cut and access drive shall be located on the common property line.
(5) Lots developed with Townhouse units shall have common access
drives whenever possible.
(6) Commercial driveways and access to any public street shall be
located at least 35 feet from the intersection of the street at the
curbline and shall be designed in a manner conducive to safe
ingress and egress.
(7) In other than major subdivisions and projects having site plan
approval, which are currently covered by a performance or
maintenance guarantee, the following procedures shall be followed
for construction of any new driveway or accessway to any street or
the paving of an existing driveway or accessway.
(a) No person shall construct or pave a driveway entrance or cut,
alter or remove a curb, or part thereof, in or along any public
street or right-of-way of the Township without first having
obtained a permit to do so pursuant to this section.
(b) Application for a permit required by this subsection should be
made, in writing, to the Department of Planning and Zoning
accompanied by fees, in accordance with § 176-20B, and a plan
showing the location and details of the proposed construction,
cutting, landscaping and/or removal, and driveway dimensions
with grades and construction details.
(c) Special attention must be paid to roadside drainage and
sufficient detail provided for the Township Engineer to assess
the impact of the proposed construction on surface drainage.
Moreover, the plan should provide information on the existing
and proposed lot coverage and any deed restriction or
easement placed on the lot.
(d) The Township Engineer shall review the application and report
back on the application within 14 days of the date of filing,
stating either approval or a denial with an explanation of the
reasons for denial.
(e) Upon approval by the Township Engineer, the Zoning Official
shall issue the permit, which shall be valid for a period of not
more than one year.
(f) The Township Engineer shall certify that the driveway
entrance or accessway has been completed in accordance with
the terms of the permit issued pursuant to this section, and
that the pavement on the street or streets abutting the
property has been restored to the condition that existed prior
to the start of construction.
§ 176-79 WATERFORD CODE § 176-79
168:558
(8) No principal driveway access for ingress and egress to any
commercial or industrial use shall be permitted through any
residential district.
D. Residential off-street parking requirements.
(1) The required number of parking spaces for residential use may be
provided in a garage, carport, or off-street parking area, but in no
case may be located more than 150 feet from the dwelling units
intended to be served.
(2) A one-car garage and driveway combination counts as two offstreet
parking spaces, provided the driveway measures a minimum
of 18 feet in length between the face of the garage door and the
right-of-way, or 30 feet to the curbline. A two-car garage and
driveway combination count as 3.5 off-street parking spaces,
provided the minimum width of the driveway is 20 feet and its
minimum length is as specified above for a one-car garage.
(3) For single-family dwellings there shall be two off-street spaces
provided for two- and three-bedroom units; three off-street spaces
for four- and five-bedroom units.
(4) For apartments and condominiums, including senior housing, there
shall be one off-street space provided for efficiency and onebedroom
units; two off-street spaces for two- and three-bedroom
units.
(5) For townhouses there shall be two off-street spaces for each unit.
E. Nonresidential off-street parking requirements.130
Use Required Number of Off-Street Spaces
Assembly operation 1 per 800 square feet of GFA
Automotive service
station
4 per bay and work area
Bar 1 per 2 seats
Banks, savings and loan 1 per 300 square feet of GFA
Boardinghouse 1 per boarder
Bowling alley 4 per alley
130. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-79 INSURANCE § 176-79
168:559
Use Required Number of Off-Street Spaces
Car wash 1 per employee; plus
1 separate space for each waxing,
upholstery cleaning or similar specialized
service area; plus
Queuing capacity for a minimum of 12
vehicles for each access lane to a
mechanized car wash entrance; see
§ 176-104K(6)
Churches/synagogue 1 per 3 seats
Church rectory/parsonage 3 per residence on church site
Hospital, philanthropic
clinic, residential health
care facility, nursing
home and convalescent
center
1 1/2 for every bed
Hotel/motel 1 per guest room, plus 10 per 1,000 square
feet GFA
Industrial 1 per 800 square feet GFA
Library 1 per 300 square feet GFA
Manufacturing 1 per 800 square feet GFA
Medical/dental offices 6 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Nightclub 1 per 3 seats
Professional and business
offices
4 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Receiving 1 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Recreation, indoor 3 per 1,000 square feet of GFA plus 1
space per 3 spectator seats
Recreation, outdoor 1 per 2,000 square feet of field area
Research/laboratory 1 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Restaurant 1 per 3 seats
Fast-food restaurant 1 per 30 square feet GFA, plus 1 for each
employee on the largest shift
Retail store 1 per 200 square feet GFA
Schools (day care,
nursery)
Not less than 1 per teacher and staff
member, plus 2 per 1,000 square feet of
GFA
Schools (elementary)131 2 for each classroom, but not less than 1
for each teacher and staff member
§ 176-79 WATERFORD CODE § 176-79
168:560
Use Required Number of Off-Street Spaces
Schools (intermediate) 1 1/2 for each classroom, but not less than
1 for each teacher and staff member
Schools (secondary) 2 1/2 for each classroom, but not less than
2 for each teacher and staff member
Schools (junior college,
college, university, trade
or technical)
Not less than 1 per teacher and staff
member, plus 1 per 4 students
Shopping center:
0 to 400,000 square
feet
4 per 1,000 square feet GLA
400,000 square feet
and larger
5 per 1,000 square feet GLA
Storage centers 1 per 5,000 square feet GLA
Theaters, community
centers and other places
of assembly
1 per 3 seats or 1 per 200 square feet GFA,
whichever is greater
Warehouse 1 per 5,000 square feet GFA
GFA = Gross floor area
GLA = Gross lease area
F. Handicapped parking.
(1) Parking spaces shall conform to the requirements of the Barrier-
Free Subcode of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.9 and the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA)
Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities.
(2) All public and commercial development shall provide adequate
parking for persons who are physically challenged.
Total Number of Parking
Spaces
Number of Required
Handicapped Spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
131. Editor's Note: The number of parking spaces for schools may be increased by the Planning
Board; see § 176-104U(2)(b).
§ 176-79 INSURANCE § 176-79
168:561
Total Number of Parking
Spaces
Number of Required
Handicapped Spaces
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
1,000+ 20, plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000
(3) For every eight accessible parking spaces or fraction thereof, at
least one shall be a van-accessible parking space.
G. Dimensions.
(1) Any area, either within a structure or in the open, of not less than
nine feet wide by 18 feet in length, or, in the case of parking spaces
for the physically challenged, an area not less than eight feet wide
by 20 feet with an adjacent access aisle at least five feet wide, for
the parking of motor vehicles, exclusive of driveways, access
drives, fire lanes, and public rights-of-way. Notwithstanding any
other provision of this chapter, nothing shall prohibit private
driveways for detached dwelling units from being considered offstreet
parking areas, except that no portion of such private
driveway within the right-of-way line of the street intersected by
such driveway shall be considered off-street parking areas. The
width and length of each space shall be measured perpendicular to
each other regardless of the angle of the parking space to the
access aisle or driveway.
(2) The provisions of parking and loading spaces also shall include
adequate driveway and necessary turning areas for handling the
vehicles for which provision is made. Parking areas shall be
designed to permit each motor vehicle to proceed to and from the
parking space provided for it without requiring the moving of any
other motor vehicles except for a driveway providing access to a
private residential garage. Aisles providing access to parking areas
shall have the following minimum dimensions:
Angle of Parking
(degree)
One-Way Aisle
(feet)
Two-Way Aisle
(feet)
90° 24 24
60° 18 24
45° 13 24
(3) Off-street parking areas shall be designed to eliminate the
maneuvering of vehicles within entrance drives. The length of
entrance drive free of vehicle maneuvering shall conform to the
following schedule (measured from the right-of-way line):
§ 176-79 WATERFORD CODE § 176-79
168:562
Total Number of Parking
Spaces
Length of Maneuver-Free Drive
(feet)
Less than 40 20
40 to 99 40
100 to 250 60
250 or greater 60, plus 20 feet for each additional
500 spaces or part thereof
H. Off-street loading and unloading (shipping and receiving areas).
(1) Shipping and receiving areas shall be located in side or rear yard
areas only. When shipping and receiving areas are located in the
side yard, they must be screened from view of any public right-ofway
or adjoining property in accordance with § 176-52.
(2) In connection with every building or building group or part thereof
hereafter erected which is to be occupied by manufacturing or
commercial uses, there shall be maintained on the same lot with
such building off-street loading berths in accordance with this
section.
(3) Off-street loading spaces shall have 15 feet of vertical clearance
and shall be designed in accordance with the following schedule,
except that the loading space may be reduced to 40 feet in length in
cases where the site is to be serviced by vans or smaller trucks with
less than four axles and when the site plan is approved by the
Board:
Loading Space
Combined Apron and Aisle
Length
Length
(feet)
Width
(feet)
90°
(feet)
60°
(feet)
60 10 72 66
60 12 63 57
60 14 60 54
(4) Off-street loading shall be provided according to the following
schedule:
§ 176-79 INSURANCE § 176-79
168:563
Use
Square footage at
which one
loading berth is
required
Square footage at
which a second and
each additional
loading berth is
required
Manufacturing and
warehousing
0 to 40,000 Over 40,000
Commercial
(wholesale)
0 to 40,000 Over 40,000
Commercial (retail) 0 to 20,000 Over 20,000
Service
establishment
0 to 40,000 Over 40,000
Undertakers/funeral
homes
0 to 40,000 Over 40,000
Restaurants 0 to 25,000 Over 25,000
Office/bank 0 to 100,000 Over 100,000
Hotel 0 to 100,000 Over 100,000
School 0 to 100,000 Over 100,000
Hospital/nursing
home
0 to 100,000 Over 100,000
Place of public
assembly
0 to 100,000 Over 100,000
I. Staged development relief. Where the total number of off-street parking
spaces required may not be immediately required for a particular use, a
staged development plan may be permitted which requires that only a
portion of the parking area, but not less than 65% of the required
spaces be completed initially, subject to the following regulations:
(1) The site plan shall clearly indicate both that portion of the parking
area to be initially paved and the total parking needed to provide
the number of spaces required.
(2) The site plan shall provide for adequate drainage of both the partial
and total parking area.
(3) The portion of the parking area not to be paved initially shall be
landscaped in accordance with § 176-72.
(4) The applicant shall post separate performance guarantees, in
addition to the performance guarantees required under § 176-22,
which will reflect the cost of installing the additional parking
facilities necessary to provide the total number of parking spaces
required.
(5) In lieu of a permanent certificate of occupancy, a temporary
certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a period of two years.
§ 176-79 WATERFORD CODE § 176-79
168:564
§ 176-80. Paving of parking areas, driveways and loading berths.
§ 176-81. Principal uses and buildings permitted per lot.
Prior to the expiration of the two-year period, the applicant may
either install the additional parking shown on the site plan and
apply for issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy or apply
to the Planning Board after the use has been in operation a
minimum of 18 months for a determination as to whether or not
the initial parking area provided is adequate. If the Planning Board
determines that the parking facility is adequate as originally
constructed, the performance guarantees shall be released and
a permanent certificate of occupancy issued. If, however, the
Planning Board determines that the partial off-street parking area
is not adequate, the applicant shall be required to install the
additional parking facilities in accordance with the terms of the
performance guarantees prior to issuance of a permanent
certificate of occupancy.
(6) Any change of use on a site for which the Planning Board may have
approved a partial paving of off-street parking areas to a use which
requires more parking spaces than are provided on the site shall
require submission of a new site plan.
A. Parking areas, driveways and loading berths.
(1) All parking areas shall be surfaced with a durable all-weather
asphalt or concrete paving. All parking areas, parking bays,
driveways, drive aisles, and internal collectors shall be curbed with
concrete curbing. Paving shall consist of a minimum of two-inch
bituminous surface course, mix I-5 on six inches of dense graded
aggregate.
(2) Concrete pads a minimum of six inches in depth shall be provided
for all loading berths. Loading berth approach aprons and
driveways providing access to loading areas shall be paved in
accordance with the recommendations of the Planning Board
Engineer.
B. Residential driveway paving. Residential driveways may be paved with
an impervious material if there are no restrictions in a certificate of
filing issued by the Commission that the subject parcel must have a
driveway of crushed stone or gravel. The design and construction of the
driveway shall be reviewed as an administrative site plan and approved
by the Township Engineer to ensure grading meets the requirements of
this chapter.
A. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, no more than one principal
dwelling or building shall be permitted on a lot, except that shopping
centers, industrial and office complexes, two-family dwellings,
multifamily complexes and condominium and townhouse developments
§ 176-79 INSURANCE § 176-81
168:565
§ 176-82. Recreational open space.
receiving site plan approval may be permitted to have more than one
building on a lot, provided that the structures comply with the setback
and yard provisions of this chapter.
B. Every principal building shall be built upon a lot with frontage upon a
public street or streets improved to meet the Township's standards or
accepted by the Township.
C. No more than one principal use shall be permitted on a lot except as
otherwise permitted in this chapter for forestry, agriculture,
horticulture, fish and wildlife management, and, on agricultural lands,
recreation development.
A. General.
(1) All recreation areas and facilities shall be designed in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.143(a)2 and 7:50-6.144(a)1 through 3 and with
the NJDEP publication entitled "Administrative Guidelines Barrier
Free Design Standards for Parks and Recreational Facilities."
(2) Commercial and industrial developments shall ensure that
recreational areas designed to include lawn areas are used for
public recreational purposes, meet an identified public recreation
need and are dedicated to public recreation use.
(3) Recreational development incorporating lawn areas shall limit said
lawn areas that support recreational activities and which, to the
extent practical, are of a variety of grass which requires minimal
fertilization.
(4) Areas set aside for common open space shall not be used to satisfy
recreational land area requirements.
B. Land area standards of recreational areas.132
(1) All residential development of 25 units or more shall comply with
the following:
(a) Ten percent of the total acreage of the proposed residential
portion of a development shall be land set aside for
recreational purposes.
(b) Land provided in accordance with Subsection B(1)(a) above
shall be provided in a single area or in individual parcels no
smaller than one acre in size.
132. Editor's Note: Original § 176-82.2A, which required a monetary contribution by certain
major subdivisions to a special recreational open space land fund, which was previously
included in this subsection, was repealed 2-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-2.
§ 176-81 WATERFORD CODE § 176-82
168:566
(c) All residential units for which the recreational land is provided
in accordance with Subsection B(1)(b) above shall be located
within 1/4 mile of such recreational land.
(d) Land proposed for this purpose shall be entirely suitable for
recreational development. Natural features, including soils,
vegetation and topography, shall be of a type, nature and
character that represents no significant limitation to the area's
development suitability.133
C. Facility standards. Recreational facilities in accordance with the
following schedule shall also be provided to the extent recreational
facility needs are generated by the proposed development. An analysis
of the recreational facility needs of a proposed development within a
specific service area around the development shall be conducted by
comparing the following schedule of facility standards with existing
recreational facilities within the service area and the projected
population of the service area:
Type of
Facility Population
Minimum Space
Standard
Service Area
Radius
Basketball
courts
1 per 1,000 Court dimension
range from 60 x 80
feet to 70 x 104 feet
1/2 mile
Tennis court 1 per 1,000 Court dimension
range from
60 x 120 feet single
court;
45 x 120 feet
additional adjoining
courts
1 mile
Multipurpose
paved area
1 per 2,000 0.50 acre (including
basketball and tennis
courts)
1/2 mile
Passive area
(sitting)
1 per 2,000 0.50 acre 1/2 mile
Senior citizen
(over 55)
(bocce,
shuffleboard
horseshoe)
1 per 1,000 0.50 acre 1/4 mile
Preschool
playground
1 per 2,000 0.25 acre 1/4 mile
133. Editor's Note: Original § 176-82.2(5), regarding payment in lieu of open space, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Land Use Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-82 INSURANCE § 176-82
168:567
§ 176-83. Recyclable material storage.
Collection and disposal of these materials shall be in accordance with
Chapter 235, Solid Waste, of the Waterford Township Municipal Code.
Type of
Facility Population
Minimum Space
Standard
Service Area
Radius
Advanced
playground
1 per 2,000 0.25 acre 1/2 mile
Multipurpose
turf area
1 per 2,000 0.50 acre 1 mile
Football/
soccer fields
1 per 6,000 2.8 acres
325-foot outfield
1 mile
Baseball
youth
1 per 6,000 1.0 acre 1 mile
Softball
60-foot
diamond
200-foot outfield
Picnic area 1 per 6,000 8 eight-foot tables 1 mile
A. Residential.
(1) Each application for residential development of 30 or more units of
single-family or two-family housing or 25 or more units of
multifamily housing must include provisions for the collection,
disposition, and recycling of recyclable materials. A single-family
unit or a unit within a multifamily dwelling should provide at least
12 square feet of floor area conveniently arranged and located as a
holding area for a two-week accumulation of materials. Such an
area may be within a hidden laundry room, basement or garage.
(2) All apartments and condominium units shall have an outdoor
recycling area for the storage of residentially generated recyclable
materials. The dimensions of the recycling area shall be sufficient
to accommodate recycling bins or containers of adequate size and
number consistent with anticipated usage.
B. Nonresidential. Each application for a nonresidential use that utilizes
1,000 square feet or more of land must include provisions for the
collection, disposition and recycling of recyclable materials. Each
application shall quantify the amount of recyclable material it will
generate as part of its weekly generation, including newspapers,
leaves, white high-grade paper, glass bottles and jars, aluminum,
corrugated cardboard, and tin and bimetal cans. The application shall
provide a storage area to contain a week's accumulation of recyclable
material.
C. General area requirements.
§ 176-82 WATERFORD CODE § 176-83
168:568
§ 176-84. Resource extraction.
No resource extraction operation shall be carried out by any person unless
an application containing the information required by N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.2(b)6
is filed with the Department of Planning and Zoning and approved by the
Zoning Official in accordance with § 176-12G.
§ 176-85. Sanitary sewers.
On lands within the existing or proposed sewer service area as indicated
in the Waterford Township Wastewater Facility Plan and where a public
wastewater treatment collection system is accessible to a property
proposed for development, or where such facilities are to be constructed as
a condition of approval of any application for development, the developer
shall construct such wastewater sanitary sewer lines and building
connections in accordance with the Waterford Township Wastewater
Facilities Plan and NJDEP permit requirements and in such a manner as to
make adequate sewage treatment available to each lot and building within
the development.
(1) The storage area for recyclable materials shall be designed for
truck access for pickup of materials.
(2) The recycling area shall be well lit and shall be safely and easily
accessible by recycling personnel and vehicles. Collection vehicles
shall be able to access the recycling area without interference from
parked cars or other obstacles. Reasonable measures shall be
taken to protect the recycling area, and the bins or containers
placed therein, against theft of recyclable materials, bins or
containers.
(3) The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the residential
disposition of source separated recyclable materials, preferably
near, but clearly separated from, a refuse dumpster.
(4) The recycling bins and or containers shall be designed to provide
protection against adverse environmental conditions that might
render the collected materials unmarketable. Any bins or
containers that are used for the collection of recyclable paper or
cardboard shall be equipped with a lid, or otherwise covered, to
keep the paper or cardboard dry.
(5) Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials
accepted shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to the
recycling area. Individual bins or containers shall be equipped with
signs indicating the materials to be placed therein. Signs shall
conform to the requirements of § 176-88.
(6) Fencing, at least six feet high, shall be provided around an outdoor
recycling area, and the area shall be suitably screened from view in
accordance with § 176-52.
§ 176-83 INSURANCE § 176-85
168:569
§ 176-86. Sidewalks.
A. Dry sewer lines. In the event of approval of the use of individual
subsurface disposal systems on lands located within the existing or
proposed sewer service area according to the Waterford Township
Wastewater Facilities Plan, the Planning Board additionally may require
the installation of sewer lines, which must include connections to each
building, for future use when public sewage treatment facilities are
provided to serve the realty improvements to be constructed in the
development. Until such time that the dry sewer lines are made
operational and public sewage treatment facilities are provided to the
site, the density provisions specified within § 176-110 for development
with septic systems shall prevail.
B. Construction of dry sewer lines. The end of all dry sanitary sewer
building connection lines shall have a tamper-proof plug or cap,
temporarily sealed with a material that can be removed to utilize the
fitting when the system is to be activated. The Plumbing Subcode
Official or the Plumbing Inspector shall affix an adhesive-backed disc on
the cap or plug bearing a preprinted message and instructions related
to tampering and future use, that will be sufficient to alert and warn the
original and subsequent occupants of the building. The capping and
plugging shall be performed by the developer at his expense.
C. Additional standards.
(1) All sanitary sewer lines shall be air and mandrel tested.
Additionally, all lines shall be televised, if needed, at the direction
of the Township Engineer, and a videotape of the lines shall be
provided to the Township Engineer immediately prior to the
activation of the sewer lines or acceptance of the streets,
whichever occurs earlier.
(2) It is the developer's responsibility to expand any on-tract public
sanitary sewers to the limits of the tract boundary line to service
future development and to conform to the Township's Master Plan
and Wastewater Facilities Plan. Moreover, it is the developer's
responsibility to maintain all sanitary sewer improvements for
partially completed developments.
(3) See § 176-53 for additional standards.
A. Sidewalks along all streets are not required, but they shall be installed
at the direction of the approving authority's discretion, depending on
the probable volume of pedestrian traffic, the street classification in
instances where streets are involved, school bus stops, the
development's location in relation to other populated areas and the
general type of improvement intended. Where required, sidewalks shall
be at least four feet wide and located as approved by the approving
authority. Sidewalks shall be at least four inches thick, except at points
of vehicular crossing where they shall be at least six inches thick, of
§ 176-85 WATERFORD CODE § 176-86
168:570
§ 176-87. Sight triangle.
§ 176-88. Signs.
Any sign that does not conform to this section shall be removed immediately
upon notification from the Department of Planning and Zoning.
Class C concrete having a twenty-eight-day compressive strength of
4,000 pounds per square inch, and shall be air-entrained.
B. Sidewalks as required in Subsection A above shall, where adjoining
existing sidewalks, be so designed as to match alignment and grade of
the adjoining sidewalks.
A. Sight triangles shall be required at each quadrant of an intersection of
streets, or streets and driveways, involving collector and arterial
streets in the Township. The classification of existing and proposed
streets shall be designated by the Township Engineer at the time of
approval of a new street. The area within sight triangles shall either be
dedicated as part of the street right-of-way or maintained as part of the
lot adjoining the street set aside on a subdivision or site plan as a site
triangle easement.
B. At the intersection or interception of two or more streets, no hedge,
fence or wall, nor any obstruction to vision, shall be permitted within
the triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines and a
straight line joining said street lines at points which are 25 feet distant
from the point of intersection, measured along said street lines.
A. Scope. In all zoning districts of the Township of Waterford, signs may be
erected, altered, maintained, used, replaced, removed or moved only in
compliance with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.107 and this section,
except that any sign inside the structure or building which is not visible
from outside the building or structure is excluded from the
requirements.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ATTACHED SIGN — Any sign erected, constructed or maintained on
a building with the principal support of said sign being the building,
including, specifically, the painting of signs or displays on the exterior
surface of a building. "Attached signs" shall not be more than 10 inches
off the building to which they are attached.
DEVELOPMENT SIGN — A sign designating the name of a subdivision
of residential homes, whether single-family, multifamily, attached or
detached, or an apartment complex.
ERECT — To build, construct, attach, place, suspend or affix, and shall
also include the painting of wall signs and the painting of signs or
displays on the exterior surface of the building, structure or material
surface.
§ 176-86 INSURANCE § 176-88
168:571
EXTERNALLY LIGHTED — Any sign whose sole source of artificial
illumination is outside the display portion of the sign.
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any sign not attached to a building, erected,
constructed or maintained on a post or pole, or other bracing or
supporting device.
FUNCTIONAL SIGNS — Directional, information or public service
signs, such as signs advertising locations of rest rooms, telephones
or similar facilities of public convenience, including entry and exit
signs from parking areas. Functional signs shall not include any name
or business or message other than the directional or informational
material.
INTERNALLY LIGHTED — Any sign whose sole source of artificial
illumination is contained within the display portion of the sign.
MOBILE SIGN — A sign which is not permanently attached to a building
or not placed in the ground in such a fashion as to be permanent in
a manner conforming to the Uniform Construction Code or which is
located or attached to a trailer, on wheels, or other similar attachment
such that the sign may be moved from place to place, either within the
lot or to another location.
MULTIPLE OCCUPANCY AND TENANCY SIGN — A single sign relating
to a use or facility, such as a shopping center, industrial park or office
complex, where there is more than one occupancy and/or tenancy
of uses, where said multiple occupancy and tenancy uses a common
parking facility and/or a common private drive or roadway and where
the names and professions or business names of the various tenants
and/or occupants are displayed.
OFFICIAL SIGN — Any sign, symbol or device, erected, constructed or
maintained by the federal, state, county or local government, or any
agency thereof, for the purpose of informing or guiding the public or for
the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A sign of an owner of real property or of a
licensed real estate broker designating a property "for sale" or "for
lease."
ROOF SIGN — An attached sign erected, constructed or maintained
upon or over the roof of any building, where the principal support of
said sign is the roof structure.
SIGN HEIGHT — In the case of a freestanding sign, the height of the
sign will be computed from grade level to the greatest height at any
one point in the sign. In the case of an attached sign, no sign can be
higher than the level of a second floor window in a two-or-more story
building, nor can it be higher than the lowest point of the roofline in a
single-story building.
SIGN SIZE — The square foot area of a sign computed by multiplying its
greatest width by its greatest length, exclusive of supporting structures
and bracing devices, unless such supporting structures and bracing
§ 176-88 WATERFORD CODE § 176-88
168:572
devices are illuminated or are in the form of a symbol or contain
words or symbols, in which case the supporting structure shall also be
computed in determining sign size. Two- or three-sided signs carrying
exactly the same message on each side shall be measured by using the
surface area of one side in the case of two-sided signs or two sides in
the case of three-sided signs. When there is a different message on each
side of the sign, each side will be considered and used in computing
sign size, or each side will be considered a separate sign.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign which is not permanently attached to a
building structure or permanently affixed to a freestanding structure
and which may be erected for a limited period of time in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
WARNING SIGN — A sign indicating no trespassing or no fishing and/
or hunting and an existing danger where a warning is legally required.
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign erected, constructed or maintained in or
on a window of a building, visible from outside the building, whether
illuminated or nonilluminated.
C. Prohibited signs. The following signs shall be prohibited in the
Township and, if in existence, shall not be permitted to continue:
(1) No outdoor, off-site commercial advertising sign or billboard shall
be permitted in the Township except lawful off-site commercial
advertising signs in existence as of January 14, 1981, in the R1, R2,
R3, R4, PI, PHB, OC, TC, OP, and NB Zones. All other existing offsite
commercial advertising signs shall be immediately removed
unless a waiver of strict compliance has been issued providing a
certificate was issued by the Commission allowing them to remain.
(2) Flashing, blinking, twinkling, animated, moving or projected signs
of any type or signs which present an illusion of movement. A sign
that displays a static time and/or temperature display is permitted
if the sign on which the time and/or temperature display is located
is an otherwise permitted sign under this chapter.
(3) No sign shall be erected or maintained on a lot, tract or parcel,
including any improvement thereon, unless the message on the
sign directly relates to the use, sale or lease of said lot, tract or
parcel. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit off-tract signs
for churches or fraternal organizations, setting forth the location of
the church or the meeting place and meeting hours of the church or
fraternal organization.
(4) Banners, flags, pennants, tents and similar devices, except upon
occasion of the opening of a new business use in a commercial or
industrial district, when banners, pennants or flags may be used for
a period not to exceed 14 days to announce the opening of said
business and except for special sales events or promotions, for a
period not to exceed 14 days, not more than four times per
calendar year.
§ 176-88 INSURANCE § 176-88
168:573
(5) All mobile signs, as defined herein, are prohibited.
(6) No sign shall be placed in such a position that it causes or is likely
to cause danger to vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any street,
sidewalk or right-of-way. No sign other than an official sign may be
placed within the right-of-way of any Township or county road.
(7) No sign shall be attached, affixed or painted on trees, fences, rocks,
curbs, walks, hydrants, benches or bridges, except for warning
signs, as defined herein, indicating no trespassing and the like.
(8) No signs with any lighting or control mechanism that may cause
radio or television interference shall be erected in the Township.
(9) No vehicle shall be regularly parked, stopped or located in such a
manner as to be used as or considered as a sign.
(10) Permanent window signs are prohibited except as otherwise
permitted herein.
(11)No signs which in any way simulate official, directional or warning
signs erected or maintained by the State of New Jersey, Camden
County or Waterford Township or by any railroad, public utility or
agency concerned with the protection of the public health or safety
shall be erected in the Township.
(12)No signs, except such directional signs or devices required by the
federal aeronautical authorities, shall be placed, inscribed or
supported upon a roof or upon any structure which extends above
the roof, and no sign shall project above the main cornice line of the
building to which it may be affixed.
D. Nonconforming signs.
(1) It is the intent and purpose of this chapter that, as soon as legally
possible, all existing signs not conforming to this section be
eliminated or brought into conformity.
(2) Any sign located within the Township which does not conform with
the provisions of this chapter, but which did conform at the time it
was erected, shall be deemed a legal nonconforming sign and may
continue in use until losing said legal nonconforming status as
defined in Subsection D(3) below.
(3) A lawful nonconforming sign shall immediately lose its status if:
(a) The sign is altered in any way in structure or size.
(b) The sign is replaced.
(c) Damage to the sign has occurred which, when repaired, would
exceed 1/3 of the replacement value as of the date of such
damage.
§ 176-88 WATERFORD CODE § 176-88
168:574
(4) If any of the events occur under Subsection D(3) above, the sign
shall be immediately brought into compliance with this chapter or
it shall be removed.
(5) Periodic maintenance as required by § 176-88F shall not be
considered an alteration resulting in the loss of a sign's legal
nonconforming status.
E. Structural requirements. All signs shall be of sound construction and
shall be permanently affixed to either the ground or building in a
manner conforming to the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
F. Maintenance. All signs shall be periodically maintained by the owner of
said sign, including painting, repairing and cleaning as necessary. Any
sign that, because of improper maintenance, is deemed to be in a state
of disrepair, such that the sign is no longer functional, visible or
dangerous to the safety of others, in the discretion of the Township
Zoning Official or Construction Official, shall be repaired by the owner
of said sign within 14 days of a notice requiring said repair. Otherwise,
the sign shall be removed.
G. Sign content. All signs shall indicate only the principal name of the
establishment, proprietor or owner and may include a brief description
of the principal goods or service or use thereof and a logo or trademark
by which the business or owner is identified. No sign shall have a
message or logo that in and of itself is lewd and licentious or advocates
an act in violation of any municipal, county, state or federal law.
H. Abandoned uses. All signs which identify an owner, proprietor,
establishment or business which is no longer in existence or operation
shall be removed within 60 days from the date said operation or
establishment of business ceases to exist or operate.
I. Illuminated signs. Illuminated signs shall be arranged such that no light
or glare is directed or reflected to adjoining lots or streets or into
residential windows. Any beam or beacon, lighted exteriorly, shall be
lighted downwards and shall be shielded to prevent spillage off the lot
or onto streets, parking and driveway areas; however, no sign with red,
green, blue or amber illumination in a beam or beacon resembling an
emergency light shall be erected or used in any location.
J. Real estate signs. One real estate sign for each lot frontage is
temporarily permitted in all districts, provided that it complies with all
of the following requirements:
(1) It is nonilluminated.
(2) It must pertain only to the lease or sale of the principal building lot
upon which it is placed.
(3) It shall not exceed 12 square feet in area, except in residential
districts, in which case it shall not exceed six square feet in area.
§ 176-88 INSURANCE § 176-88
168:575
(4) It shall be removed within seven days after closing or settlement on
said property or the execution of the lease.
K. Agricultural establishment signs. Signs or billboards advertising
agricultural commercial establishments, in any district, shall be
permitted, provided that
(1) No more than two signs shall be placed in any one direction along
each road directly approaching the agricultural establishment; and
(2) No sign along a four-lane state or federal highway shall exceed 50
square feet in area, and no sign along any other road shall exceed
32 square feet in area.
(3) No sign shall exceed the height of 15 feet.
L. Temporary signs.
(1) All temporary signs shall be nonilluminated.
(2) Temporary signs, advertising events, such as business openings,
fairs, bazaars, auctions, or other special activities, including
political signs or posters, shall be erected or placed so as not to
obstruct or obscure visibility at corners or intersections or
otherwise cause a traffic safety hazard. Such signs are allowed 30
days prior to the event being advertised and must be removed
within 10 days following the conclusion of the event. Signs erected
by an ongoing business as a means of furthering its business
activity or by an ongoing business or an individual as a means of
selling real property shall not fall within this special activity
designation.
(3) Temporary signs of contractors, mechanics or artisans are
permitted only during the period when the contractors, artisans
and mechanics are actively performing work on the lands and
premises where the signs are placed. The sign shall have a
maximum size of 12 square feet inclusive of all mechanics or
artisans performing work on the same premises. No sign shall be
placed upon land or property without having first received written
permission from the property owner and a construction permit has
been issued for the parcel on which the sign is placed.
(4) Temporary window signs advertising or describing sales or special
merchandise are permitted, provided that the same sign does not
remain in the window for a period longer than 30 days and that all
of the signs collectively do not exceed 30% of all available window
space on the wall on which the window signs are located.
(5) One temporary development sign is permitted only for major
subdivisions. Said sign is subject to the following standards:
(a) The temporary development sign shall not exceed 20 square
feet in size and six feet in height.
§ 176-88 WATERFORD CODE § 176-88
168:576
(b) The sign shall include only the name of the subdivision; the
offer for sale of the lots or homes therein; and the name and
telephone number of the developer, financing institution,
realtor or other agent to contact with reference to the sale.
(c) The temporary development sign may be installed only after
final subdivision approval has been granted and at the same
time as the first building permit is issued on the first lot sold.
The sign must be removed with 10 days of the issuance of the
last certificate of occupancy or the sale of the last lot and
replaced, if desired, with a permanent development sign in
accordance with the standards of this chapter if approved by
the Planning Board. Notwithstanding anything herein to the
contrary, no temporary development sign shall remain longer
than two years from the date of final major subdivision
approval unless an extension is granted by the Planning Board.
(d) The temporary sign shall be located at the entrance of the
subdivision on property owned by the developer. No temporary
development sign may be installed that interferes with traffic.
If there is more than one entrance, the developer may move the
one sign periodically to a different entrance as sections are
sold and new sections opened. Upon acceptance of the roads or
upon the sale of lands on which the sign is located, such that
the sign becomes located on private property owned by other
than the developer, or within a Township or county right-ofway,
the sign shall be removed subject to the right to move the
sign to another location as above, and subject to the overall
time restrictions hereinabove.
(6) One temporary site sign is permitted only for major site plans in the
PI District. Said sign is subject the standards of this chapter and
shall be approved by the Planning Board at the time of final site
plan approval. No temporary site sign shall interfere with traffic. If
there is more than one entrance, the developer may move the one
sign to a different entrance as buildings are sold or rented and
other buildings opened. Nothing herein shall prevent the
subsequent use of real estate signs as permitted under § 176-88J to
advertise the further sale or lease of the stores, shops, offices or
business units.134
(7) Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, any
licensed real estate broker may place a temporary direction sign
for the sole purpose of providing directions to properties offered for
sale or lease.
(a) A "temporary direction sign" is defined as a removable,
freestanding sign, to be placed in or on the ground, not
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-88 INSURANCE § 176-88
168:577
exceeding 18 inches in height and 24 inches in width and no
higher than 30 inches out of the ground, constructed of metal,
heavy cardboard or wood, indicating thereon the location of
or directions to a residential property in the Township and
announcing an open house utilized in connection with the
marketing of that property. No more than one temporary
direction sign shall be located on any one lot or within 500
feet of any other temporary direction sign along any Township
right-of-way.
(b) A temporary directional sign may be installed on the day an
open house is being conducted. It is expressly understood that
the temporary direction sign must be removed no later than
6:00 p.m. of the day of the open house.
(c) A temporary direction sign, as defined herein, shall not include
any illumination, nor any balloons, streamers or other
decorative accessory.
(d) A temporary direction sign shall be set back from the paved
cartway a minimum distance of three feet and located so that
visibility at intersections is in no way diminished.
(e) All other provisions of this chapter remain in full force and
effect.
M. Historic signs. Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary,
signs on structures of historic significance for historic informational
purposes, upon which the name of the original or historic inhabitant or
builder and the date of construction of said structure is set forth and/or
the historical significance of the structure are permitted, provided that
said signs shall not exceed two square feet.
N. Signs for nonconforming uses. Upon application for a use variance or
other approval to permit a nonconforming use on a property in any
district where the use is not permitted, the sign for said use must be
approved by the Planning Board.
O. Signs for nonprofit institutions. Notwithstanding the sign standards for
the district in which the property is located, any property used for a
church, school, lodge, club, veterans organization or similar use which
is organized and operated not for profit, pursuant to Title 15 of N.J.S.A.,
may have one sign per street frontage identifying the use by name. Said
sign may be freestanding or attached and may contain messages
describing upcoming events, times of service or meetings, inspirational
messages and the like. The maximum size of a freestanding sign shall
be 30 square feet with a maximum height of 10 feet. An attached sign
may not exceed 10% of the wall surface area of the wall on which said
sign is placed.
P. Information and direction signs.
§ 176-88 WATERFORD CODE § 176-88
168:578
(1) A nameplate not exceeding one square foot in area and an address
and/or street number not exceeding two square feet in area, both
within the property line, which may be attached or freestanding,
are permitted in any residential district.
(2) Street number designations, postal boxes, "private property," "no
hunting," on-site direction, parking and warning signs are
permitted in all districts but are not considered in calculating sign
area. No such signs shall exceed two square feet in area.
Q. Development signs.
(1) One permanent development sign, not exceeding 24 square feet
and six feet height, stating the name of the subdivision only shall be
permitted in a major subdivision.
(2) During construction, a temporary development sign is permitted
only in accordance with the standards of § 176-88L(5). The
permanent development sign, if desired, may be installed at any
time after the first construction permit is issued.
(3) The location of the permanent development sign must be approved
by the Planning Board at the time of the preliminary subdivision
approval. The sign may be installed at the main entrance to the
subdivision and may be located within an island or other entrance
design on land specifically dedicated to the Township or
homeowners' association specifically for the purpose of the sign
location.
R. Commercial and business signs.
(1) A commercial or business sign shall be provided in accordance with
the requirements set forth below.
(2) In multiple occupancy shopping centers, individual facademounted
tenancy signs shall be uniform in size, scale and design,
and shall not exceed 25 square feet in area.
(3) Attached wall signs shall not exceed an area equivalent to 5% of the
first-floor portion of the front facade or 75 square feet, whichever is
less.
(4) Ground-mounted signs shall not exceed 15 feet height, shall be set
back a minimum of 20 feet from the property line and shall not
exceed 50 square feet.
(5) Principal identification signs for shopping centers may have
tenancy identification and shall not exceed 20 feet in height or 75
square feet.
(6) Permitted commercial and business signs may be illuminated either
from the interior or exterior, but not both.
§ 176-88 INSURANCE § 176-88
168:579
(7) If a business or use is located on a lot with more than one street
frontage, said business or use may have either one additional
attached sign or one additional freestanding sign in accordance
with this section.
S. Street signs. There shall be at least one street sign furnished at each
intersection. All signs shall be installed under light standards where
possible, be free of visual obstruction, and shall be four-way, with street
names parallel to the named street. Street signs shall be installed on a
particular street prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a
residence on that street.
T. Traffic signs. The design and placement of traffic control signs shall
follow the requirements specified in the "Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices for Streets and Highways" published by USDOT and
adopted by NJDOT.
U. Permit required. It shall be unlawful to erect, alter, relocate or
otherwise have a sign within the Township of Waterford, except those
hereinafter exempt, without first making application for and obtaining a
permit from the Construction Official. Exemptions:
(1) Residential nameplate and address.
(2) Official signs, as defined in § 176-88B.
(3) Warning signs, as defined in § 176-88B.
(4) Functional signs, as defined in § 176-88B.
(5) Temporary signs, as defined in § 176-88B, if used in accordance
with the provisions of § 176-88L.
V. Variance. In the event that a proposed sign does not comply with the
provisions of this chapter, an application for variance may be made to
the Planning Board.
W. Enforcement.
(1) Upon discovery of an alleged violation of this section, the Zoning
Official shall serve written notice on the owner of the sign and/or
the owner, lessee, or party in interest of the property where the
sign is located, ordering the sign to be brought into compliance or
removed within 30 days of the date of the notice, or seven days if
the alleged violation concerns a temporary sign. The notice shall
include notification that if the sign is not brought into compliance
or removed within such time, a summons will be issued, and that
subsequent violations shall not require further notification or time
to conform.
(2) Should the owner of a sign and/or the owner, lessee, or party in
interest of the property where a sign is located violate the
provisions of this chapter subsequent to the initial notice, a
§ 176-88 WATERFORD CODE § 176-88
168:580
§ 176-89. Site clearing, grading and soil protection.
§ 176-90. Soil test borings.
All determinations of the depth to seasonal high water table shall be based
upon soil analyses considering soil test borings taken on the site. Although
it is preferred that the soil borings be taken between February 1 and May
31 of the calendar year, borings may be taken at any time if sufficient
mottling is present to determine the seasonal high water table. Soil borings
shall be taken by a soils scientist or a licensed professional engineer who
summons shall issue for such subsequent violation without further
notice and opportunity to conform, and the Zoning Official may
summarily remove the signs violating this section.
(3) In the event the Zoning Official, with the concurrence of the
Construction Official, determines that the presence of any sign,
either by reason of its construction, location or lack of maintenance
and repair, presents a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of
the residents of the Township, or where a sign is in violation of
Subsection W(1) above, the Zoning Official shall be empowered to
immediately effectuate the removal of said sign, and the expenses
and costs of such removal shall be borne by the owner of the sign
and/or the owner, lessee, or party in interest of the property upon
which the sign is located.
(4) In addition to any fine imposed for a violation of this section, the
sentencing court shall order the removal of the sign or the sign
being brought into compliance at the owner's sole expense.
A. Clearing standards. All clearing and soil disturbance activities, whether
or not an application for development is required pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:50-4 and this chapter, shall be limited to that which is necessary to
accommodate an activity, use or structure which is permitted by this
chapter.
B. Grading. No grading construction or regrading shall be permitted
which creates or aggravates water stagnation or a drainage problem on
adjacent properties. Grading shall be limited to areas shown on an
approved plan.
C. Topsoil and subsoil protection.
(1) No topsoil shall be removed from the site, except as provided
herein. Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be
redistributed over the disturbed areas of the development and shall
be stabilized by seeding or planting or another method shown on
the approved plan.
(2) Excess subsoil, when approved by the Township Engineer, may be
transferred to another site within the Township. No subsoil may be
relocated outside the Township.
§ 176-88 INSURANCE § 176-90
168:581
shall certify and seal the results thereof. The Township reserves the right to
verify all test borings and soil tests, including requiring additional borings
or the monitoring of existing borings with the Township, Pinelands, or
County Board of Health personnel present. The applicant shall be permitted
to provide any additional information and/or data to verify the feasibility of
any system to function without a deleterious effect upon or damage to water
quality.
§ 176-91. Stream and lake sampling.
All applicants for development encompassing or abutting lakes and streams
shall submit, at the time of submission, lake and stream samples, including,
but not limited to, temperatures; dissolved oxygen; pH; alkalinity; benthic
algal; nitrate/nitrogen; nitrogen; total Kjeldahl; chloride; invertebrate
collection; phosphorus; and fecal coliform count.
§ 176-92. Streets, deceleration lanes, and shoulders.
A. These tests shall be submitted at the time of preliminary submission to
the Commission and the Township.
B. Tests shall be prepared by a qualified testing laboratory.
C. Tests shall be taken at the intersection of any tract boundary and the
inflowing streams and at the outfall points where the watercourse
leaves the tract.
D. If the development is approved, at the discretion of the Board, a second
set of tests shall be taken by the developer, upon the acceptance of the
improvements, at a time decided by the Board but not more than two
years beyond the acceptance of the improvements. All results and
comparisons shall be given to the Township Engineer for review.
A. Streets.
(1) All development shall be serviced by paved public streets. The
arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan and Zoning
Map shall be arranged to provide for appropriate extension of
existing streets and should conform with the topography, as far as
practicable, and allow for continued extension into adjoining
undeveloped tracts.
(2) When a new development adjoins land capable of being further
developed, suitable provisions shall be made for optimum vehicular
access for the remaining and/or adjoining tract to existing or
proposed streets, including the possibility of a sketch of a feasible
plan for vehicular access to the adjoining lands.
(3) Minor streets shall be designed to discourage through traffic.
§ 176-90 WATERFORD CODE § 176-92
168:582
(4) In all residential districts, development bounded by an arterial or
collector street shall control access to said streets by having all
driveways intersect minor streets.
(5) In all developments, the minimum street right-of-way shall be
measured from lot line to lot line, but in no case shall a new street
that is a continuation of an existing street be continued at a width
less than the existing street. In addition, where any arterial or
collector street intersects another arterial or collector street, the
cartway requirement shall be increased by 10 feet on the right side
of the street(s) approaching the intersection for a distance of 300
feet from the intersection of the center lines.
(6) In the event that a development adjoins or includes existing
Township streets that do not conform to the street width
requirements of this chapter, additional land along both sides of
said street sufficient to conform to the right-of-way requirements
shall be required in the development design. If the development is
along one side only, at least 1/2 of the required extra width shall be
required. Moreover, a portion of the existing street or road
adjoining or included within a development shall be improved,
including excavation, grading, base and surface courses, in
accordance with the road improvement standards of this chapter.
(7) Township streets shall be constructed in accordance with the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.19.
B. Street classification.
(1) All streets shall be classified according to the following schedule:
Type of Street
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Minimum Cartway
Width
(feet)
Arterial 80 60
Collector 60 40
Minor 50 30
Cul-de-sac 50 30
(2) The minimum right-of-way and cartway widths for streets serving
multifamily, commercial and industrial developments shall be
determined on an individual basis and shall in all cases be of
sufficient width and design to safely accommodate the maximum
traffic, parking and loading needs and maximum access for firefighting
vehicles and equipment, all of which shall be subject to the
approval of the Planning Board Engineer and Township Fire
Marshal.
C. Culs-de-sac.
§ 176-92 INSURANCE § 176-92
168:583
(1) Permanent culs-de-sac shall provide a turnaround at the end with a
right-of-way radius equal to the street right-of-way, but in no case
less than 50 feet, and a cartway radius of not less than 50 feet and
shall be tangent with the right side of the street.
(2) A temporary cul-de-sac shall provide a similar turnaround as in
Subsection C(1) above, and provisions shall be made to either leave
the turnaround in existence after the street is extended or to have
the turnaround removed and to have the excess right-of-way revert
to the adjoining properties when the street is extended.
(3) Unless waived by the Board, a cul-de-sac shall not extend 600 feet
measured from the center line of the intersection street to the
center point of the turnaround.
D. Street grades.
(1) The minimum grade for all streets shall be 0.5%; however, 0.75%
should be used where topographic conditions permit.
(2) All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of
sufficient radius and greater than 100 feet to provide a smooth
transition and a minimum sight distance of 100 feet.
(3) Maximum street grade shall vary by road hierarchy with flatter
grades required for roads with higher ADTs, in accordance with the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:21 Table 4.6.
E. Street intersections.
(1) Street intersections shall be as near at right angles as possible and
in no case shall be less than 75° at the point of intersection. Any
development abutting an existing street that is classified as an
arterial or collector street shall be permitted no more than one new
street every 800 feet on the same side of the street within the
boundaries of the tract being subdivided. In the spacing of streets,
consideration shall be given to the location of existing intersections
on both sides of the development.
(2) Intersections shall be rounded at the curbline or edge of pavement
with a curve having a radius not less than 20 feet.
(3) When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one
point more than 10° and not more than 45°, they shall be connected
by a curve with a radius of not more than 100 feet for minor streets
and 300 feet for arterial and collector streets.
(4) Streets intersecting another street from opposite sides shall not be
offset unless there is a minimum of 125 feet between the rights-ofway.
(5) Approaches to all intersections shall follow the straight line for at
least 100 feet measured from the curbline of the intersecting street
§ 176-92 WATERFORD CODE § 176-92
168:584
to the beginning of the curve. A tangent of at least 100 feet shall be
introduced between reverse curves on all streets.
(6) Street intersections should be designed with a flat grade wherever
practical. Maximum grade within intersections should be 5%,
except for collectors that should be 3%.
F. Grid pattern street systems.
(1) As few dwelling units as possible shall face the shorter linking
streets.
(2) Continuous street frontage shall not exceed 1,200 feet. This
distance can be increased to a maximum of 1,600 feet if a public
paved pedestrian access of a minimum width of 10 feet is provided
near the midpoint giving access to an adjacent street.
G. P-loop street systems.
(1) The entrance leg of a P-loop shall not exceed 600 feet in length.
(2) The loop of a P-loop street shall not exceed 2,800 feet in length.
(3) An emergency access a minimum of 20 feet in width shall be
provided between the loop of the P-loop street and an adjacent
street.
H. Alleys. Unless specifically required by governmental regulation or
unless evidence can be presented that rear lanes or alleys will be
adequately maintained, the provision of rear lanes or alleys shall be
discouraged by the Planning Board.
I. Street names. No street shall have a name that duplicates or so nearly
duplicates in spelling or phonetic sound the name of an existing street
within the Township or a nearby street of an adjacent municipality. The
continuation of an existing street shall have the same name. The names
of new streets must be approved by the Department of Planning and
Zoning.
J. Street paving.
(1) All Township streets shall be constructed of two inches bituminous
concrete surface course, mix I-2 on four inches bituminous
stabilized base on six inches dense graded aggregate (quarry
blend) subbase.
(2) A reduction of this requirement may be permitted upon the
examination by the Township Engineer of the results of field CBR
tests submitted by the applicant.
K. Deceleration lanes. When a street within a major subdivision intersects
with an arterial or collector street, or where a driveway serves as an
entrance to a development providing 50 or more parking spaces, a
deceleration lane shall be provided for traffic turning right into the
§ 176-92 INSURANCE § 176-92
168:585
§ 176-93. Swimming pools, hot tubs and spas.
For the purpose of this section the term "pool" shall include on-ground, inground
swimming pools, whirlpools, hot tubs and spas.
street or driveway from the arterial or collector street. The deceleration
lane is to be at least 200 feet long and at least 13 feet wide measured
from the proposed edge of the pavement of the arterial or collector
street.
L. Shoulders.
(1) The shoulder is the portion of the roadway contiguous with the
traveled way which can be used to accommodate stopped vehicles,
for emergency use, bikeways, and for lateral support of subbase,
base, and surface courses.
(2) Shoulder requirements shall vary according to street hierarchy and
intensity of development. With greater intensity of development,
there is more need to provide a strip for cars and service vehicles to
pull off from the traveled way, to stop safely for deliveries, and for
pedestrian and bicycle movement (where sidewalks are not
provided).
(3) When shoulders are not paved, they shall be stabilized with grass in
accordance with § 176-72F.
(4) When required, shoulder width shall be determined by the
Municipal Engineer, but in no case less than four feet.
(5) Shoulders shall be required along all streets without sidewalks.
(6) No obstructions shall be placed in the shoulder area of any street.
A. No commercial pool shall be constructed or installed unless approved
by the appropriate Board as part of a site plan approval. All swimming
pools, spas, whirlpools and hot tubs shall be classified into types in
accordance with their particular use and shall meet the appropriate
design standards as set forth by the National Swimming Pool Institute,
the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, or the Swimming Pool
Code of New Jersey, latest edition, whichever is more stringent.
B. No private outdoor pool shall be installed on any lot unless said lot
contains a residence and said pool shall be accessory to such residence.
A pool may be installed on a contiguous lot in common ownership with
the lot containing the residence.
C. Pools shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from all side and rear
property lines and shall not be located in a front yard. In the case of
properties having frontage on more than one street, the pool shall be
set back at least the same distance from the street line as required for
the principal building. There shall be no minimum distance requirement
between the pool and principal building.
§ 176-92 WATERFORD CODE § 176-93
168:586
§ 176-94. Trailers.
§ 176-95. Utility services.
D. In accordance with the requirements of the current requirements of the
New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, an outdoor private pool shall
be provided with a fence, a wall, a building wall or a combination
thereof which completely surrounds it and obstructs access to it.135
E. All filter systems shall be enclosed or separated to prevent use as an
access to the pool.
F. The location of pools shall not interfere with access to any building or
the operation of any on-lot water supply, waste disposal system, or
drainage easement.
G. Pools shall be constructed and operated in accordance with all
applicable health, safety and sanitary regulations for water filtration,
circulation and treatment.
H. Pools shall conform with the requirements of this chapter regarding
fencing and outdoor lighting.
A. Trailers and other stationary structures of a similar nature for storage,
warehouse space, sales area, office or other use, for residential or
commercial purposes, are prohibited except where expressly permitted
during construction of a development or project.
B. In emergency situations, such as fire, water or storm damage sufficient
to make a residence inhabitable, the Zoning Official may issue a
temporary use permit to place a trailer on a residential lot in
conjunction with construction permits for renovation of the property.
A. Connections. All public utility services shall be connected to an
approved public utilities system where one exists. The developer shall
arrange with the servicing utility for the underground installation of the
distribution supply lines and service connections in accordance with the
provisions of the applicable standard terms and conditions
incorporated as part of its tariff, as the same are on file with the New
Jersey State Board of Public Utility Commissioners; provided, however,
that lots not part of a new major subdivision or site plan which abut
existing streets where overhead electric, CATV or telephone
distribution supply lines and service connections have heretofore been
installed may be supplied with electric, CATV or telephone service from
these overhead lines, but any new service connections for the utilities'
overhead lines shall be installed underground. In cases where extension
or replacement of service is needed to existing or new buildings in
established subdivisions or developments, the present method of
service may be continued. In the case of existing overhead utilities,
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-93 INSURANCE § 176-95
168:587
§ 176-96. Ventilation.
No use shall obstruct the natural ventilation of adjacent uses nor
contaminate the air with excessive heat or odor. Further, no air conditioners
or exhaust fans shall be permitted to discharge exhausted air unless set
back from all property lines at least 10 feet or equipped with baffles to
deflect the discharged air away from the adjacent use. Air conditions and
vents on rooftops shall be screened from view.
§ 176-97. Vibration.
§ 176-98. Visual considerations.
however, should a road widening or an extension of service or such
other condition occur as a result of the development which necessitates
the replacement or relocation of such utilities, the developer shall
cause the replacement or relocation to be underground.
B. Location.
(1) New utility distribution lines and telephone lines to locations not
presently served by utilities shall be placed underground, except
for those lines which are located on or adjacent to active
agricultural operations.
(2) Aboveground generating facilities, switching complexes, pumping
stations, and substations shall be screened with vegetation from
adjacent uses in accordance with this section.
(3) All electric utility transmission lines shall be located on existing
towers or underground to the maximum extent practical.
(4) The center line of all relocated or newly installed telephone poles
are to be set back five feet from the edge of pavement on
noncurbed roads.
(5) In all developments, easements along rear property lines or
elsewhere for utility installation shall be required. Such easements
shall be at least 10 feet wide and located in consultation with the
companies or municipal departments concerned.
A. Standard. Ground-transmitted vibrations shall be measured with a
seismograph or complement of instruments capable of recording
vibration displacement and frequency in the three mutually
perpendicular directions, simultaneously.
B. Vibration level restrictions. Vibration levels shall not exceed a particle
velocity of 0.05 inch per second in any district. During the hours of 9:00
p.m. to 7:00 a.m. in residential districts, vibration levels shall not
exceed a particle velocity of 0.02 inch per second. Measurements shall
be made at the points of maximum vibration intensity and/or beyond
adjacent lot lines or neighboring uses, whichever is more restrictive.
§ 176-95 WATERFORD CODE § 176-98
168:588
§ 176-99. Waste management.
A. Careful attention shall be given to the quality of design of all buildings,
land uses and street furniture (such as streetlighting, outdoor
equipment and signs). Among the elements that the Planning Board
must comment upon are the design of residential and nonresidential
land uses and buildings, community facilities, parks and landscaping
and the design of street furniture. The nature, size, shape, lighting and
style of all outdoor signs must be found to be in harmony with their
surroundings and consistent with the provisions of § 176-88.
B. Community favorable aesthetic and appearance factors shall be
encouraged by the Planning Board to persist on a continuous basis.
C. The visual relationship and space between buildings shall be examined
as it relates to its surroundings.
D. Buildings shall be situated to take advantage of desirable views.
E. Building materials, their colors and textures, shall be harmonious with
their surroundings.
A. Trash enclosures. Refuse stations, where required, must be designed
and located to be convenient for garbage removal, attractive, durable
and inoffensive to the occupants of adjacent dwelling units.
(1) All multifamily and nonresidential uses shall provide for the
outdoor storage of refuse according to the following requirements:
(a) Trash enclosures shall be a minimum of 100 square feet per
dumpster enclosure or, in the case of large capacity dumpsters,
sufficiently sized to completely enclose the receptacle.
Enclosures shall be six feet high.
(b) All enclosures shall be constructed on a concrete pad a
minimum of six inches thick, Class B. The pad shall extend a
minimum of 10 feet from the front of the enclosure.
(c) Nonresidential enclosures shall be of masonry construction
architecturally compatible with the principal structure.
Residential enclosures may be constructed of wood or chain
link fencing if sufficient room is allocated for trash truck access
to dumpsters in the enclosure. All commercial trash enclosures
must be equipped with locking gates of steel construction.
When large-capacity dumpsters are utilized, a steel, locking
access door within the gate or elsewhere shall be provided.
(d) Trash enclosures shall be located to provide straight-on access
while not impeding pedestrian or vehicular circulation. Trash
enclosures should not be located adjacent to site accessways
or primary drive aisles.
§ 176-98 INSURANCE § 176-99
168:589
(e) All enclosures shall have a vegetative buffer in accordance
with § 176-52C(3).
(f) Where the Board determines that the types and quantities of
refuse generated by the proposed use are such that they may
be safely stored internally, the requirement for a external/
outdoor trash enclosure may be waived.
(g) All trash enclosures shall be subject to accessory structure
setback requirements of this chapter.
(2) All uses shall provide for source separation of waste pursuant to
the New Jersey Mandatory Source Separation and Recycling Act of
1987 (Laws of 1987, Chapter 102), N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16.
B. Storage.
(1) In multifamily developments, not more than one outdoor garbage
and refuse pickup station shall be permitted for each 10
independent dwelling units, except where a building contains less
than 10, and each of such size and capacity as will provide
adequate and well-located storage in the rear or side of the
buildings housed in an appropriate structure, and all such units,
together with all garbage and refuse disposal from the
development, shall be serviced and picked up and otherwise
disposed of by the owner of said development.
(2) No hazardous or toxic substances, including hazardous wastes,
shall be stored, transferred, processed, discharged, disposed or
otherwise used in the Township. The land application of waste or
waste-derived materials is prohibited in the Pinelands Area, except
as expressly authorized in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.79. Waste management
facilities shall only be permitted in the Township in accordance
with the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.
(3) In the nonresidential districts, no article or material shall be kept,
stored, or displayed outside the confines of a building, except
where permitted elsewhere in this chapter and unless the same is
so screened by a special buffer planting, berm arrangement or
fence, or combination thereof, as approved by the Board, so that it
is not visible from any adjacent property or public street.
(4) Outdoor storage, where permitted, is only permitted in rear yards.
(5) All materials or wastes that might create a pollutant or hazard shall
be enclosed in appropriate containers to eliminate such possibility.
No flammable, combustible or explosive substance shall be stored
on a property except under conditions approved by the Fire Official
in accordance with the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
§ 176-99 WATERFORD CODE § 176-99
168:590
§ 176-100. Water management.
(6) Any outdoor storage of flammable material, which is permitted and
is properly screened, shall be at least 50 feet from any property
line.
(7) Household waste shall be stored is watertight containers.
(8) Trash containers shall not be stored in front or side yards.
C. Disposal.
(1) In all developments other than single-family, duplex or twins, the
owner shall be responsible for contracting services for
maintenance, pickup and disposal of all garbage and refuse.
(2) Household waste shall not be placed at the curb until 6:00 p.m. the
night before collection.
(3) No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they can be transferred off the lot, directly or
indirectly, by natural forces such as precipitation, evaporation or
wind, or where they can contaminate or render undesirable an
underground aquifer, or where they will destroy aquatic life.
(4) No disposal of solid or liquid waste by application to land shall be
permitted in the Township and the operation of a landfill for said
purposes is expressly prohibited.
(5) Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the fertilization of
plants, vegetation and other agricultural activity for agricultural
purposes.
(6) Nothing herein shall prevent disposal by the Township, or as
authorized by the Township, of any waste, including, but not limited
to, composting, sludge disposal, spray irrigation or other lawful
governmental disposal in connection with an active agricultural
operation and in accordance with the requirements of the DEP and
CMP.
A. Interbasin transfer of water between watersheds shall be avoided to the
maximum extent practical. In areas served by central sewers, watersaving
devices, such as water-saving toilets, showers and sink faucets,
shall be installed in all new development. Existing development shall
comply with this requirement whenever renovation or plumbing
permits are issued by the Construction Official.
B. Water shall not be exported from the Township except as otherwise
provided in N.J.S.A. 58:1A-7.1.
C. All wells and all increases in diversion from existing wells which require
water allocation permits from the NJDEP shall be designed and located
§ 176-99 INSURANCE § 176-100
168:591
§ 176-101. Water quality.
to minimize impacts on wetlands and surface waters and meet the
requirements of 7:50-6.86 of the CMP.
A. General water quality standards.
(1) All development permitted under this chapter shall be designed
and carried out so that the quality of surface water and
groundwater shall be protected and maintained. Agricultural use
shall not be considered development for the purposes of this
subsection.
(2) Except as specifically permitted and authorized in this chapter, no
development shall be permitted which degrades surface water or
groundwater quality or which establishes new point sources of
pollution.
(3) No development shall be permitted which does not meet the
minimum water quality and potable water standards of the State of
New Jersey or the United States.
B. Minimum standards for point and nonpoint source discharges. The
following point and nonpoint sources may be developed and operated in
the Pinelands:
(1) Development of new or the expansion of existing commercial,
industrial and wastewater treatment facilities, or the development
of new or the expansion of existing nonpoint sources, except those
specifically regulated in Subsection B(2) through (5) below,
provided that:
(a) There will be no direct discharge into any surface water body.
(b) All discharge from the facility is of a quality and quantity such
that groundwater exiting from the parcel of land or entering a
surface body of water will not exceed two ppm (parts per
million) nitrate/nitrogen.
(c) All public wastewater treatment facilities are designed to
accept and treat septage.
(d) All storage facilities, including ponds or lagoons, are lined to
prevent leakage into groundwater.
(2) Development of new wastewater treatment or collection facilities
which are designed to improve the level of nitrate/nitrogen
attenuation of more than one existing on-site wastewater treatment
system where a public health problem has been identified may be
exempted from the standards of Subsection B(1)(b) above, provided
that:
(a) There will be no direct discharge into any surface water body;
§ 176-100 WATERFORD CODE § 176-101
168:592
(b) The facility is designed only to accommodate wastewater from
existing residential, commercial and industrial development;
(c) Adherence to Subsection B(1)(b) above cannot be achieved due
to limiting site conditions or that the costs to comply with the
standard will result in excessive user fees.
(d) The design level of nitrate/nitrogen attenuation is the
maximum possible within the costs to comply within the cost
limitations imposed by such user fee guidelines but in no case
shall groundwater exiting from the parcel or entering a surface
body of water exceed five ppm nitrate/nitrogen.
(3) Improvements to existing commercial, industrial and wastewater
treatment facilities which discharge directly into surface waters,
provided that:
(a) There is no practical alternative available that would adhere to
the standards of Subsection B(1)(a) above.
(b) There is no increase in the existing approved capacity of the
facility.
(c) All discharges from the facility into surface waters are such
that the nitrate/nitrogen levels of the surface waters at the
discharge point do not exceed two ppm. In the event that
nitrate/nitrogen levels in the surface waters immediately
upstream of the discharge point exceed two ppm, the
discharge shall not exceed two ppm nitrate/nitrogen.
(4) Individual on-site septic wastewater treatment systems which are
not intended to reduce the level of nitrate/nitrogen in the
wastewater, provided that:
(a) The proposed development to be served by the system is
otherwise permitted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter;
(b) The design of the system and its discharge point and the size of
the entire contiguous parcel on which the system or systems is
located will ensure that groundwater exiting from the entire
contiguous parcel or entering a surface body of water will not
exceed two ppm nitrate/nitrogen, calculated pursuant to the
Pinelands dilution model dated December 1993, as amended,
subject to the provisions of § 176-101B(4)(c) below. The entire
contiguous parcel may include any contiguous lands to be
dedicated as open space as part of the proposed development
but may not include previously dedicated road rights-of-way or
any contiguous lands that have been deed restricted pursuant
to § 176-15 or 176-16.
(c) Only contiguous lands located within the same zoning district
and Pinelands management area as the proposed system or
§ 176-101 INSURANCE § 176-101
168:593
systems may be utilized for septic dilution purposes, except for
the development of an individual single-family dwelling on a lot
existing as of January 14, 1981, nonresidential development on
a lot of five acres or less existing as of January 14, 1981, or
cluster development as permitted by N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.19.
(d) The depth to seasonal high water table is at least five feet.
(e) The system will be maintained and inspected in accordance
with the requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.85 and § 176-101C
below.
(f) The technology has been approved for use by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
(g) Flow values for nonresidential development shall be
determined based on the values contained in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-7.4,
as amended, except that number of employees may not be
utilized in calculating flow values for office uses. In the event
that N.J.A.C. 7:9A-7.4 does not provide flow values for a specific
use, but a flow value is assigned for that use in N.J.A.C.
7:14A-23.3(a), the flow value specified in N.J.A.C. 7:14A-23.3(a)
shall be used in calculating flow.
(5) Individual on-site septic wastewater treatment systems which are
intended to reduce the level of nitrate/nitrogen in the wastewater,
provided that:
(a) The standards set forth in Subsection B(4)(a) and (c) through
(g) above are met.
(b) If the proposed development is nonresidential, it is located
outside the Preservation District, Agricultural District, RR
District, RNB District and Recreation Conservation District.
(c) The design of the system and its discharge point, and the size
of the entire contiguous parcel on which the system or systems
is located will ensure that groundwater exiting from the entire
contiguous parcel or entering a surface body of water will not
exceed two ppm nitrate/nitrogen, calculated pursuant to the
Pinelands dilution model dated December 1993, as amended,
subject to the provisions of Subsection B(4)(c) above and the
assumptions and requirements set forth in N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.84(a)5iv. The entire contiguous parcel may include any
contiguous lands to be dedicated as open space as part of the
proposed development but may not include previously
dedicated road rights-of-way or any contiguous lands that have
been deed restricted pursuant to § 176-15 or 176-16.
(6) Permit required. No person shall locate, construct or alter any
individual sewage disposal system until a permit for the location,
construction or alteration of said system shall have been approved
§ 176-101 WATERFORD CODE § 176-101
168:594
and issued by the Camden County Department of Health and any
required construction permits have been issued by the Township
Construction Official.
(a) The Camden County Department of Health may issue a permit
if an application for the same is accompanied by a certificate
made by an engineer licensed to practice professional
engineering in New Jersey, stating that the design of the
individual sewage disposal system as proposed is in
compliance with the code and in compliance with the
standards of this chapter.
(b) New individual disposal systems shall not be placed in
operation, nor shall new dwellings or buildings or additions
thereto be sold or occupied which must rely on such a system
for sewage disposal until the Camden County Department of
Health has issued a certificate indicating that the system has
been located and constructed in compliance with the terms of
the permit and this chapter.
(7) Alternate design pilot program treatment systems, provided that:
(a) The proposed development to be served by the system is
residential and is otherwise permitted pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter;
(b) The design of the system and its discharge point and the size of
the entire contiguous parcel on which the system or systems is
located will ensure that groundwater exiting from the entire
contiguous parcel or entering a surface body of water will not
exceed two parts per million nitrate/nitrogen, calculated
pursuant to the Pinelands dilution model, dated December
1993, as amended, subject to the provisions of Subsection
B(7)(c) below. The entire contiguous parcel may include any
contiguous lands to be dedicated as open space as part of the
proposed development but may not include previously
dedicated road rights-of-way or any contiguous lands that have
been deed restricted pursuant to § 176-15 or 176-16;
(c) Only contiguous lands located within the same zoning district
and Pinelands Management area as the proposed system or
systems may be utilized for septic dilution purposes, except for
the development of an individual single-family dwelling on a lot
existing as of January 14, 1981, nonresidential development on
a lot of five acres or less existing as of January 14, 1981, or
cluster development as permitted by N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.19;
(d) The depth to seasonal high water table is at least five feet;
(e) Any potable water well will be drilled and cased to a depth of at
least 100 feet, unless the well penetrates an impermeable clay
§ 176-101 INSURANCE § 176-101
168:595
aquiclude, in which case, the well shall be cased to at least 50
feet;
(f) No more than 10 alternate design pilot program treatment
systems utilizing the same technology shall be installed in the
development of any parcel if those systems are each serving
one single-family dwelling;
(g) Each system shall be equipped with automatic dialing
capability to the manufacturer, or its agent, in the event of a
mechanical malfunction;
(h) Each system shall be designed and constructed so that samples
of effluent leaving the alternate design pilot program septic
system can be readily taken to confirm the performance of the
technology;
(i) The manufacturer or its agent shall provide to each owner an
operation and maintenance manual approved pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:50-10.22(a)2iv;
(j) Each system shall be covered by a five-year warranty and a
minimum five-year maintenance contract consistent with those
approved pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-10.22(a)2v that cannot be
cancelled and is renewable and which includes a provision
requiring that the manufacturer or its agent inspect the system
at least once a year and undertake any maintenance or repairs
determined to be necessary during any such inspection or as a
result of observations made at any other time;
(k) The property owner shall record with the deed to the property
a notice consistent with that approved pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:50-10.22(a)2vi that identifies the technology, acknowledges
the owner's responsibility to operate and maintain it in
accordance with the manual required in Subsection B(7)(i)
above, and grants access, with reasonable notice, to the local
board of health, the Commission and its agents for inspection
and monitoring purposes. The recorded deed shall run with the
property and shall ensure that the maintenance requirements
are binding on any owner of the property during the life of the
system and that the monitoring requirements are binding on
any owner of the property during the time period the
monitoring requirements apply pursuant to the pilot program
or any subsequent regulations adopted by the Commission that
apply to said system; and
(l) No system shall be installed after August 5, 2007.
C. Individual wastewater treatment facility and petroleum tank
maintenance.
§ 176-101 WATERFORD CODE § 176-101
168:596
(1) The owner of every on-site septic waste treatment facility shall, as
soon as suitable septage disposal facility capacity is available, in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 325 of the Solid Waste
Management Act, N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq., and Section 201 of the
Clean Water Act:
(a) Have the facility inspected by a technician at least once every
three years.
(b) Have the facility cleaned at least once every three years.
(c) Once every three years submit to the Zoning Official a sworn
statement that the facility has been inspected and cleaned and
is functional, setting forth the name of the person who
performed the inspection and cleaning and the date of such
inspection.
(2) The owner of every commercial petroleum storage tank shall
comply with the requirements of Chapter 102 of the Laws of 1986
and N.J.S.A. 7:14B.
D. Surface water runoff. In addition to the requirements of § 176-59,
surface water runoff is permitted, provided that:
(1) The total runoff generated from any net increase in impervious
surfaces by a ten-year storm of a twenty-four-hour duration shall be
retained and infiltrated on site. Runoff volumes shall be calculated
in accordance with the United States Natural Resources
Conservation Service Technical Release No. 55 or the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook, Section 4.
(2) The rates of runoff generated from the parcel by a two-, ten- and
one-hundred-year storm, each of a twenty-four-hour duration, shall
not increase as a result of the proposed development. Runoff rates
shall be calculated in accordance with the United States Natural
Resources Conservation Service Technical Release No. 55 or the
NRCS National Engineering Handbook, Section 4.
(3) Surface water runoff shall not be directed in such a way as to
increase the volume and rate of discharge into any surface water
body from that which existed prior to development of the parcel.
(4) Excessively and somewhat excessively drained soils, as defined by
the Natural Resources Conservation Service, should be avoided for
recharge of runoff wherever practical.
(5) A minimum separation of two feet between the elevation of the
lowest point of the bottom of the infiltration or detention facility
and the seasonal high water table is met, or a lesser separation
when it is demonstrated that the separation, either due to soil
conditions or when considered in combination with other
§ 176-101 INSURANCE § 176-101
168:597
§ 176-102. Water supply.
stormwater management techniques, is adequate to protect
groundwater quality.
(6) A four-year maintenance guarantee is provided for the entire
stormwater management system by the applicant. In addition, the
applicant shall fund or otherwise guarantee an inspection and
maintenance program for a period of no less than 10 years. The
program shall identify the entity charged with responsibility of any
necessary maintenance and the method to finance said program.
A. Where public water is accessible, water mains shall be constructed in
such a manner that adequate water service is available to each lot or
building within the development. The entire system shall be designed in
accordance with the requirements and standards of the municipal and
state agency having authority and shall be subject to their approval.
The system shall also be designed with adequate capacity and sustained
pressure and in a looped system with no dead-end lines, whenever
possible.
B. Water shall be accessible to all lots in a development. For the purpose of
this section "accessible" shall mean that the property to be developed is
no further from an existing water main than the number of feet arrived
at by multiplying the number of units in a proposed residential
development by 200, or, in the case of subdivisions in which more than
20 units are proposed, "accessible" shall mean that the property to be
developed is within one mile of an existing water main. To the extent
reasonable and practicable, all nonresidential developments shall be
served by public water.
C. No more than 25 residential units or the equivalent shall be permitted
on the dead end of a water main on a permanent basis. If a development
exceeds the allowable limits for the number of units on a water main
dead end, it is the applicant's obligation to loop the water main or
provide a second source of potable water acceptable to the Township.
D. Where no public water is accessible, water shall be furnished on an
individual lot basis. If wells are installed on each lot and the lot also
contains its own sewage disposal facilities, the wells shall be of the
drilled type. Any potable water well will be drilled and cased to a depth
of at least 100 feet, unless the well penetrates an impermeable clay
aquiclude, in which case the well shall be cased to at least 50 feet.
E. Well installation, sealing and testing shall be in accordance with the NJ
Standards for Construction of Water Supply Systems in Realty
Improvements (Chapter 199 of Public Laws of 1954), as amended, and
in accordance with the guidelines and resolutions adopted by the
Camden County Department of Health. Prior to being placed in
consumer use and prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any
building served by the well, the developer shall certify to the Camden
§ 176-101 WATERFORD CODE § 176-102
168:598
§ 176-103. Wetlands and wetlands buffers.
County Department of Health that he complied with all applicable state
and municipal regulations.
F. It is the developer's responsibility to maintain all water supply
improvements for partially completed developments.
G. It is the developer's responsibility to extend any on-tract public water
supply to the limits of the tract boundary line to service future
development and to conform to the Township Master Plan. See § 176-53
for additional standards.
H. Fire hydrants shall be spaced to provide necessary fire flow, and the
average area per hydrant typically should not exceed 120,000 square
feet. In addition, hydrants shall be spaced so that each residence shall
be within 600 feet of a hydrant.
(1) Hydrants shall be located at all low points and at all high points
with adequate means of drainage provided.
(2) Hydrants shall be located at the ends of lines, and valves of full line
size shall be provided after hydrant tees at the ends of all dead
lines and lines which may be extended in the future.
(3) The size, type, and installation of hydrants shall conform to
Waterford Township Municipal Utilities Authority specifications.
A. Wetlands are defined as those lands which are inundated or saturated
by water at a magnitude, duration and frequency sufficient to support
the growth of hydrophytes. Wetlands include lands with poorly drained
or very poorly drained soils, as designated by the Natural Resources
Conservation Service, or soils drainage Class 1. Wetlands include
coastal wetlands and inland wetlands, including submerged lands.
Inland wetlands include, but are not limited to: Atlantic white cedar
swamps, hardwood swamps, pitch pine lowlands, bogs, inland marshes,
lakes and ponds, rivers, streams and intermittent streams. Wetlands in
Waterford Township, as shown on Map 7, are defined using the
outermost extent of either lowland vegetation or wet soils.
B. Development shall be prohibited in all wetlands in the Township except
as specifically authorized in this section.
C. Horticulture of native Pinelands species and berry agriculture shall be
permitted in all wetlands subject to the requirements of § 176-45.
D. Beekeeping shall be permitted in all wetlands.
E. Forestry shall be permitted in all wetlands subject to the requirements
of § 176-67.
F. Fish and wildlife activities and wetlands management in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.10. [Amended 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
§ 176-102 INSURANCE § 176-103
168:599
G. Low-intensity recreational uses which do not involve use of a structure,
including hunting, fishing, trapping, hiking, boating and swimming and
other low-intensity recreational uses, provided that any development
associated with those other uses does not result in a significant adverse
impact on the wetland as set forth in Subsection L below.
H. Docks, piers, moorings and boat launches for the use of landowners
shall be permitted in all wetlands, provided that the use will not result
in a significant adverse impact, as set forth in Subsection L hereof, and
conforms to all state and federal regulations.
I. Commercial or public docks, piers, moorings and boat launches shall be
permitted, provided that:
(1) There is a demonstrated need for the facility that cannot be met by
existing facilities.
(2) The development conforms with all state and federal regulations.
(3) The development will not result in a significant adverse impact, as
set forth in Subsection L hereof.
J. Bridges, roads, trails and utility transmission and distribution facilities
shall be permitted in wetlands, provided that:
(1) There is no feasible alternative route or site for the facility that
does not involve development in a wetland or, if none, that another
feasible route or site which results in less significant adverse
impacts on wetlands does not exist;
(2) The public need cannot be met by existing facilities or modification
thereof;
(3) The use represents a need that overrides the importance of
protecting the wetland;
(4) Development of the facility will include all practical measures to
mitigate the adverse impact on the wetland; and
(5) The resources of the Pinelands will not be substantially impaired as
a result of the facility and its development.
K. No development, except for those uses which are specifically
authorized in this section, shall be carried out within 300 feet of any
wetland, unless it has been demonstrated that the proposed
development will not result in a significant adverse impact on the
wetland, as set forth in Subsection L below. A municipal variance is not
required if the Pinelands Commission accepts a buffer less than 300
feet and that buffer is stipulated in a certificate of filing.
L. A significant adverse impact shall be deemed to exist where it is
determined that one or more of the following modifications of a wetland
will have an irreversible effect on the ecological integrity of the wetland
§ 176-103 WATERFORD CODE § 176-103
168:600
and its biotic components, including, but not limited to, threatened or
endangered species of plants or animals:
(1) An increase in surface water runoff discharging into a wetland.
(2) A change in the normal seasonal flow patterns in the wetland.
(3) An alteration of the water table in the wetland.
(4) An increase in erosion resulting in increased sedimentation in the
wetland.
(5) A change in the natural chemistry of the groundwater or surface
water in the wetland.
(6) A loss of wetland habitat.
(7) A reduction in wetland habitat diversity.
(8) A change in wetlands species composition.
(9) A significant disturbance of areas used by indigenous and
migratory wildlife for breeding, nesting or feeding.
M. Determination under Subsection L above shall consider the cumulative
modifications of the wetland due to the development being proposed
and any other existing or potential development which may affect the
wetland.
§ 176-103 INSURANCE § 176-103
168:601

ARTICLE IX
Conditional Uses, Exceptions and Modifications
§ 176-104. Conditional uses.
A. Before a construction permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued
for any conditional use permitted by this chapter, application shall be
made to the Department of Planning and Zoning in accordance with
§ 176-36.
B. Where required, public notice and a hearing shall be required as
stipulated in § 176-19D, and the notice shall include reference to all
matters being heard by the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall
grant or deny the application for a conditional use permit within 95
days of submission of a complete application to the Department of
Planning and Zoning, or within such further time as may be consented
to by the applicant. The Planning Board shall review site plan
submittals simultaneously with the conditional use application. Failure
of the approving authority to act within the required time period shall
constitute approval of the application.
C. General requirements.
(1) Applications for conditional use shall satisfy all procedural
requirements and standards for site plan review and shall include
appropriate off-tract information to permit the Planning Board to
make an informed decision whether all the conditions herein are
met.
(2) With the exception of professionals as listed in this section, all
conditional uses shall apply for any license required by the
Township.
(3) The proposed development will be in harmony with adjacent
activities and land uses.
(4) Access to and from the tract shall be adequately safe and the
adjacent road system shall be capable of accommodating the
proposed traffic load, particularly during peak hours.
(5) The design of the proposed development shall take the physical
constraints of the tract, including topography, drainage, soil
conditions and existing vegetation into consideration.
(6) On-tract circulation shall be adequate, safe and efficient for all uses
and vehicles.
(7) A landscaped buffer shall be provided along the rear and side lot
lines in accordance with § 176-52. Front yard landscaping shall be
equal to at least 25% of the front yard area. Such landscaping shall
be reasonably distributed throughout the entire front yard area.
§ 176-104 INSURANCE § 176-104
168:603
(8) With the exception of hangers for landing strips, building facades
shall not consist of metal siding. Long expanses of building facades
shall be broken up with variations in architectural design and
landscaping.
(9) With the exception of home occupations, signs shall be permitted in
accordance with § 176-88.
(10) All other applicable requirements of this chapter shall apply.
(11) Stipulated lot sizes and setbacks are the minimum requirement for
principal and accessory buildings.
D. Adult uses.136
(1) Statement of policy. It is recognized there are some uses commonly
known as "adult uses" which, because of their very nature, are
recognized as having serious objectionable operational
characteristics, particularly when such uses are located near
residential areas or in other inappropriate locations or without
sufficient showing that such uses in a specified location will comply
with conditions and standards for location and operation of such
uses. Therefore, special regulations of these objectionable adult
uses is deemed necessary to ensure that adverse effects will not
contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the Township. In no
manner is the fact that the Township regulates any or all of the
adult uses described herein or prohibits or allows them in any
respect to be construed as approval of or condoning such uses.
(2) Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
ADULT BOOK STORE — An establishment, from which minors
are excluded, having a substantial or significant portion of its
stock-in-trade, books, magazines or other periodicals, films or other
viewing material or sexual paraphernalia which are distinguished
or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting,
describing or related to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, as defined herein, or an establishment in which
a segment or section of the premises is diverted to the sale, rental,
display or viewing of such material.
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE/LIVE ENTERTAINMENT
THEATER — An enclosed building with a capacity of less than
50 persons, from which minors are excluded, used for presenting
material, films, movies, video or live shows, distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas,
as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein. This
definition shall also apply to an enclosed building which contains
136. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 175, Sexually Oriented Businesses.
§ 176-104 WATERFORD CODE § 176-104
168:604
any number of individual viewing booths not in excess of the
number of the maximum permitted by separate ordinance of
Waterford Township, in which a person may privately or
individually view material, films, movies, videos or live shows
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, as defined herein.
PERSON — Any individual, proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, association or other legal entity.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — A sexually oriented business
shall have the meaning as set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:33-12.2a(1) and
2C:34-6a. In addition, this definition shall include a business
engaged in the sale of obscene material as defined in N.J.S.A.
2C:34-2 or a business engaged in the sale of objects, material
or graphic representations depicting a specified sexual activity or
specified anatomical area, as defined herein.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Specified anatomical area
shall have the meaning set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:33-12a(3) and
2C:34-6c.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY — Specified sexual activity shall
have the meaning set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:33-12a(4) and 2C:34-6d.
(3) Restrictions on location.
(a) No person shall operate an adult bookstore, similar adult use
or a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of an existing
adult bookstore, similar adult use or sexually oriented
business, place of public worship, school or school bus stop,
municipal our county playground or place of public resort and
recreation, an area zoned for residential use, or any premises
licensed for the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages. The
foregoing distance limitation shall be measured by a straight
line drawn from the nearest point of the lot boundary on which
the proposed adult bookstore, adult use or sexually oriented
business is to be located to the nearest point of the lot or
district boundary, as the case may be, of the other use or
district, and such uses, district boundary lines and dimensions
shall be indicated on a site plan, which must be approved by
the Planning Board.137
(b) Such adult use must be located in a freestanding building
which will include fifty-foot landscaped front, sides and rear
buffers to separate it from all other businesses, sufficient to
impede the view of the interior of the premises in which the
business is located.
137. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-104 INSURANCE § 176-104
168:605
(c) Lot size shall be at least one acre with improved road frontage
of 150 feet. Front yard set back shall be 100 feet. Side and rear
yard setbacks shall be 50 feet.
(d) The interior of the adult use building shall be designed so that
no interior contents of the building are visible at any time from
the outside through windows, door openings or in any other
manner.
(e) The interior of any building in which an adult use is located
shall be adequately lighted and ventilated and shall be
constructed so that every portion thereof is readily visible
without obstruction to the clerk, or other person in charge,
from the counter, booth, cash register or other place where
such clerk or employee is normally situated.
(f) All New Jersey Uniform Construction Code requirements,
applicable health, safety and welfare ordinance requirements
shall be satisfied by the applicant.138
(g) Impervious lot coverage shall not exceed 25%.
(h) No structure or activity shall be permitted within the required
front yard setback except for access drives.139
(4) Additional regulations governing adult uses.140
(a) A premises and all activities conducted therein shall in all
respects comply with the laws of the State of New Jersey and
the Township Municipal Code.
(b) No person under the age of 18 shall be admitted to any
premises at any time for any purpose. The owner or operator
shall conspicuously post a sign at the entrance of the building
giving notice of this regulation.
(c) The license to conduct said adult business shall be posted in a
conspicuous place inside the premises.
(d) The hours of operation for an adult use, as defined in this
section, shall not be earlier than 9:00 a.m. nor later than 12:00
midnight, prevailing time, on weekdays and Saturday. All
premises shall be closed on Sundays.
(e) No smoking shall be permitted in any adult mini-motion
picture/live entertainment theater at any time. No
138. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
139. Editor's Note: Original § 176-104.1D, Approval and licensing requirements, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Land Use Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-104 WATERFORD CODE § 176-104
168:606
consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted at any
time in any adult use as defined in this section.
(f) No owner or operator shall cause or permit any premises to be
operated in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance as
defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:33-12 or as defined pursuant to the
Municipal Code.
(g) All premises with coin-operated machines or other similar type
of devices shall only be permitted by issuance of a separate
license in accordance with Chapter 89, Amusement Devices, of
the Municipal Code.
(h) Any police officer, health officer, Uniform Construction Code
Official or Subcode Official, Zoning Official, or similar
authorized official of the Township shall be authorized to enter
such premises at any time for purposes of inspection and/or
enforcement of the provisions of this section and the laws of
the State of New Jersey and Municipal Codes, as applicable.141
E. Agricultural commercial establishments and farmers' markets. For the
purpose of this section, the definition of "agricultural commercial
establishment" shall be as stated in § 176-9. Roadside retail sales and
service establishments shall be referred to as "farmers' markets."
(1) No portion of any structure proposed for development of a farmers'
market will be more than 300 feet, measured along a line parallel to
the roadway, from the closest part of a farmers' market in existence
on February 7, 1979.
(2) The sales area of an agricultural commercial establishment shall
not exceed 5,000 square feet.
(3) An agricultural commercial establishment or farmers' market shall
satisfy the following requirements in addition to requirements
otherwise applicable in this chapter:
(a) Lot size shall be one acre with improved road frontage of 200
feet. Rear and side yard setbacks shall be 30 feet.
(b) Front yard setback shall be 50 feet. No structure or activity
shall be permitted within the required front yard setback
except for access drives.
(c) Impervious lot coverage shall not exceed 25%.
(d) One off-street parking space shall be provided for every 200
square feet of sales area (indoor and/or outdoor).
141. Editor's Note: Original § 176-104.1F, Fees; § 176-104.1G, License term; transferability;
renewal; § 176-104.1H, Approval or disapproval of application for license; and
§ 176-104.1I, Revocation of license, which immediately followed this subsection, were
repealed at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-104 INSURANCE § 176-104
168:607
F. Airport facilities.
(1) Private landing strips shall be permitted on parcels containing 25
acres or more dedicated exclusively for such use, providing they
comply with all applicable state and federal aviation regulations.
(2) The facility shall be permitted to include runway, taxiway, a
heliport, hanger for inside shelter, service and repair of aircraft,
tie-down areas for securing aircraft outdoors, and a fueling area.
(3) All existing development on the subject parcel shall be permitted to
remain and shall be deemed conforming, notwithstanding any
other provision of this chapter.
(4) Any and all development on the subject parcel occurring after the
date of adoption of these regulations shall conform to the following:
(a) No building, structure, pavement or parking area shall be
located within 50 feet of any property line.
(b) No building shall be closer than 25 feet to another building to
allow sufficient access for emergency vehicles and equipment.
(c) Impervious lot coverage shall not exceed 20%.
(d) Taxiways and runways shall be seeded with grass in
accordance with § 176-72F.
(e) Runways shall be designed in accordance with the
requirements of state and federal aviation regulations.
(f) Warning and safety signs shall be placed where needed.
(g) No signs or vegetation shall interfere with flight pattern.
(h) In addition to the requirements of site plan submittal, the
following information shall be submitted:
[1] The location, use and height above grade of any
obstruction in the area contiguous to the landing strip,
within at least 3,000 feet from either end of the landing
strip and within at least 500 feet from each side of the
center line of the strip.
[2] The proposed air traffic pattern, in both mapped and
narrative form.
[3] A description and mapping of the location of the screening
devices and any other provisions to be made to safeguard
the character of surrounding areas and minimize noise,
dust, vibration or any other nuisances.
[4] A description of fire-fighting and other safety equipment to
be maintained on site.
§ 176-104 WATERFORD CODE § 176-104
168:608
[5] Verification that the existing and proposed operation
conforms to applicable standards of the Federal Aviation
Administration and/or State Division of Aeronautics.
G. Automobile service and repair facilities.
(1) In addition to all other requirements for site plan approval, the
applicant shall provide the following information:
(a) Type of structure, number of bays, and accessory buildings to
be constructed;
(b) Description of equipment to be used.
(c) List of chemicals, paints and other products to be stored and
used on site.
(d) Description of method for handling and disposal of chemicals,
paints, oils, antifreeze, freon and other products.
(e) Description of fire-fighting and other safety equipment to be
maintained on site.
(f) Description and mapping of the location of the screening
devices and any other provisions to minimize noise, dust,
vibration or any other nuisances.
(2) The following standards and regulations shall apply:
(a) Lot size shall be one acre with improved road frontage of 150
feet. Front yard setback shall be 100 feet, rear yard 50 feet,
and side yard 30 feet.
(b) No structure or activity shall be permitted within the required
front yard setback except for access drives.
(c) Impervious lot coverage shall not exceed 25%.
(d) All mechanical activities must be conducted within a totally
enclosed building. No merchandise, parts, products or other
equipment or objects shall be displayed or stored outside.
(e) Parked vehicles needing service shall be screened from view
from adjacent lots and public streets. No more than 10 vehicles
per bay may be stored on site while waiting for service.
(f) Improved access driveway shall be 12 feet wide with an
additional three feet on each side clear of vegetation that will
hamper access by emergency vehicles.
(g) No motor vehicle, trailer, boat or similar equipment or part
thereof shall be displayed or parked on the premises for the
purpose of display or sale.
(h) Warning and safety signs shall be placed where needed.
§ 176-104 INSURANCE § 176-104
168:609
H. Automobile new and/or used sales and service establishments.
(1) In addition to all other requirements for site plan approval, the
applicant for a new or used car sales and service establishment
shall provide the following information:
(a) Type of structure, number of bays, and accessory buildings to
be constructed;
(b) Description of equipment to be used in service area.
(c) List of chemicals, paints and other products to be stored and
used on site.
(d) Description of method for handling and disposal of chemicals,
paints, oils, antifreeze, freon and other products.
(e) Description of fire-fighting and other safety equipment to be
maintained on site.
(f) Description and mapping of the location of the screening
devices and any other provisions to minimize noise, dust,
vibration or any other nuisances.
(2) The following standards and regulations shall apply:
(a) Lot size shall be five acres with improved road frontage of 200
feet. Front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be 100 feet.
(b) No structure shall be permitted within the required front yard
setback except for access drives.
(c) Setback for display of new or used vehicles shall be 30 feet
from any public right-of-way.
(d) Impervious lot coverage shall not exceed 20%.
(e) All mechanical activities must be conducted within a totally
enclosed building. Except for the sale of vehicles, no
merchandise, parts, products or other equipment or objects
shall be displayed or stored outside.
(f) Parked vehicles needing service shall be screened from view
from adjacent lots and public streets.
(g) Warning and safety signs shall be placed where needed.
I. Boardinghouse.
(1) For the purpose of this section, the term "boardinghouse" shall
include the terms "rest home" and "rooming house." Any residence
which provides living space for more than two boarders, exclusive
of owner/operator occupied space, shall be deemed a
boardinghouse.
§ 176-104 WATERFORD CODE § 176-104
168:610
(2) A boarder is any person not a member of the family of the owners/
operator to whom space is provided for a fee.
(3) A boarding home shall satisfy the following requirements in
addition to requirements otherwise applicable in this chapter:
(a) The minimum area and yard requirements applicable to the
particular zoning district shall be increased by 16.67% for each
person housed in a boardinghouse over and above six persons,
excluding the owner/operator.
(b) Any person, firm or corporation owning and operating a
boardinghouse shall be licensed by the State of New Jersey in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 55:13B-7.
(c) Title 5, Chapter 27 (N.J.A.C. 5:27), "Regulations Governing
Rooming and Boarding Houses," authorized by N.J.S.A.
55:13B-1 et seq, is hereby incorporated by reference.
(d) A boardinghouse shall meet all the requirements of the New
Jersey Uniform Construction Code.142
(e) The following design requirements shall be incorporated
within the submitted plan:
[1] Each boardinghome for six or more people shall be
connected to public water and sewer facilities;
[2] Off-street parking spaces shall be provided as set forth in
§ 176-79E. The Planning Board shall give due
consideration to provisions for visitation and, when
applicable, the number of resident staff in order to ensure
that the parking facilities are ample. The Planning Board
may require more space or, if evidence is provided, waive
strict adherence to this standard.143
J. Campgrounds, low-intensity and intensive recreational facilities.
(1) Campgrounds shall be permitted, provided that:
(a) In the preservation area the parcel will contain no more than
one campsite per two acres. If clustered, the parcel shall not
exceed a net density of six campsites per acre.
(b) In the forest area the parcel will contain no more than one
campsite per gross acre. If clustered, the parcel shall not
exceed a net density of 10 campsites per acre.
142. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Use Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 176-104 INSURANCE § 176-104
168:611
(c) Clearing of vegetation, including ground cover and soil
disturbance, shall not exceed 5% of the parcel.
(d) No more than 1% of the parcel will be covered with
impermeable surfaces.
(e) If the campground is adjacent to a water body, water samples
shall be taken at the beginning and end of the camping season.
The results of these tests shall be submitted to the Zoning
Official.
(2) Low-intensity recreational uses.
(a) The parcel proposed for low-intensity recreational use has an
area of at least 50 acres.
(b) The recreational use does not involve the use of motorized
vehicles except for necessary transportation.
(c) Access to bodies of water is limited to no more than 15 linear
feet of frontage per 1,000 feet of water body frontage.
(d) Clearing of vegetation, including ground cover and soil
disturbance, does not exceed 5% of the parcel; and
(e) No more than 1% of the parcel will be covered with impervious
surfaces. [Amended 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
(3) Expansion of intensive recreational uses.
(a) The intensive recreational use was in existence on February 7,
1979, and the capacity of the use will not exceed two times the
capacity of the use on February 7, 1979;
(b) The use is necessary to achieve recreational use of a particular
element of the existing Pinelands environment; and
(c) The use is environmentally and aesthetically compatible with
the character of the Pinelands Forest Area if the use is located
in the RC District, or with the character of the Pinelands
Agricultural Production Area if the use is located in the AG
District, and the characteristics of the particular basin in which
the use is to be located, taking into consideration the
proportion of cleared and developed land, ambient water
quality, ecologically sensitive areas and unique resources, and
will not unduly burden public services.
K. Car wash. A car wash shall satisfy the following requirements in
addition to requirements otherwise applicable in this chapter:
(1) Lot size shall be one acre with improved road frontage of 200 feet.
Rear and side yard setbacks shall be 30 feet.
§ 176-104 WATERFORD CODE § 176-104
168:612
(2) Front yard setback shall be 50 feet. No structure or activity shall be
permitted within the required front yard setback except for access
drives.
(3) Impervious lot coverage shall not exceed 25%.
(4) All mechanical activities must be conducted within a totally
enclosed building, other than individual car vacuums. No
merchandise, products or other equipment or objects shall be
displayed or stored outside.
(5) Car vacuums shall be located in the rear yard area and shall not
interfere with on-site traffic circulation.
(6) Off-street parking:
(a) One access lane for each mechanized car wash entrance, with
each lane having a minimum queuing capacity for 12 vehicles.
(b) One separate space for each waxing, upholstery cleaning or
similar specialized service area;
(c) One space for each employee; and
(d) All vehicle entrances shall be from the rear of the building, and
all parked and waiting vehicles must be accommodated on the
lot.
(7) Every mechanized car wash exit shall have two spaces provided
outside the building for drying purposes and customer pickup.
These spaces shall not interfere with any required or necessary exit
lanes.
(8) No motor vehicle, trailer, boat or similar equipment or part thereof
shall be displayed or parked on the premises for the purpose of
display, sale or storage.
(9) A car wash shall use a gray water recirculation system for water
conservation.
L. Child-care center. A child-care center shall satisfy the following
requirements in addition to requirements otherwise applicable in this
chapter:
(1) Lot size shall be one acre with 100 feet frontage on an improved
road. The principal structure shall have a front yard setback of 100
feet. Side and rear yard setbacks shall be 30 feet.
(2) Child-care centers shall be located on the first floor of a building
and may be extended to the second floor. Basements and cellars
may only be used for ancillary storage of equipment and materials.
§ 176-104 INSURANCE § 176-104
168:613
(3) An outdoor play area of 100 square feet per child shall be adjacent
to the center and shall be adequately fenced or otherwise protected
from hazards, traffic and driveways.
(4) There shall be one bathroom stall for every 15 children at the
center or one bathroom in each classroom.
(5) There shall be no more than 15 children in a classroom.
(6) There shall be at least two employees for each group of 15 children.
(7) The hours of operation shall be limited from 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
(8) One parking space shall be provided for each employee, plus one
space for every eight children. Adequate space shall be provided on
site for the loading and unloading of children.
(9) Location of access driveways, landscaping, signage and general
site plan design shall be compatible with the neighborhood in
which the center is to be located. The location of any child-care
center shall be appropriately situated in relation to the use or area
it is intended to serve.
(10) Where a child-care center is provided as an accessory use to a
principal use located on the same lot, regardless of whether the
child-care center is situated as part of a principal building or as the
entire use of an accessory building, the gross floor area devoted to
the center shall be considered common area for the purpose of
determining the maximum permitted floor area ratio and lot
coverage. The floor area occupied by the center shall be excluded
in calculating any parking requirement for the principal use and
the permitted square footage of the principal use; provided,
however, that the parking requirements for child-care centers are
in addition to the parking requirements of the principal use.
(11) Child-care centers shall not be located on a parcel of land
containing wetlands or wetland buffers.
(12) Child-care centers shall comply with all state standards and
licensing requirements.
(13) Child-care centers for more than six children shall be connected to
public water and sewer facilities.
M. Fast-food restaurants. A fast-food restaurant shall satisfy the following
requirements in addition to requirements otherwise applicable under
this chapter:
(1) Lot size shall be one acre, with no drive-through window, and 1 1/2
acres with a drive-through window. Improved road frontage shall
be 300 feet. Rear and side yard setbacks shall be 30 feet.
§ 176-104 WATERFORD CODE § 176-104
168:614
(2) Front yard setback shall be 50 feet. No structure or activity shall be
permitted within the required front yard setback except for access
drives.
(3) Impervious lot coverage shall not exceed 40%.
(4) Drive-through windows shall not be located in an area that will
interfere with parking provisions, and shall provide an approach
lane having a minimum queuing capacity for six vehicles.
(5) One parking space shall be provided for every 30 square feet of
gross floor area, plus one space for each employee on the largest
shift.
(6) Fast-food restaurants shall be connected to public water and sewer
facilities.
N. Gas stations.
(1) In addition to all other requirements for site plan approval, the
applicant shall provide the following information:
(a) Number of tanks to be installed;
(b) Dimensions and capacity of each tank;
(c) Depth at which the tanks will be placed below ground;
(d) Number of pumps to be installed;
(e) Type of structure and accessory buildings to be constructed;
and
(f) Number of automobiles to be garaged.
(2) The following standards and regulations shall apply:
(a) Lot size shall be 40,000 square feet with improved road
frontage of 200 feet. Front, rear and side yard setbacks shall
be 30 feet.
(b) No structure or activity shall be permitted within the required
front yard setback except for access drives.
(c) Impervious lot coverage shall not exceed 40%.
(d) All mechanical activities, other than those conducted at a
filling pump, must be conducted within a totally enclosed
building. No merchandise, products or other equipment or
objects shall be displayed or stored outside. Parked vehicles
needing service shall be screened from view from adjacent lots
and public streets. No more than five vehicles per bay may be
stored on site while waiting for service.
§ 176-104 INSURANCE § 176-104
168:615
(e) All gasoline filling pumps shall be located at least 50 feet from
any property line.
(f) Fuel tanks shall be installed underground and meet all federal,
state and municipal requirements.
(g) Driveways shall not be more than 24 feet wide at any point.
Driveways must be at least 25 feet from any side lot and
intersection of street lines. There may be more than two access
driveways to the particular use along any one street, up to a
maximum of three per site, provided that the center lines of the
two entrance drives on one street frontage are no less than 60
feet apart.
(h) Appropriate areas of the station or garage traversed by motor
vehicles shall be hard surfaced.
(i) No parking for a fee shall be permitted.
(j) The distance between gasoline filling stations and/or public
garages, measured along the center line of the road upon
which they front between the nearest property lines projected
to the road center line, shall not be less than 2,500 feet.
(k) Spillage separators for oil and fuel shall be provided.
(l) No motor vehicle, trailer, boat or similar equipment or part
thereof shall be displayed or parked on the premises for the
purpose of display or sale.
O. Home occupation. Persons employed by any company, business, agency,
or government who are part of a program permitting employees to work
from their homes are not subject to the requirements of this section,
providing the home office is restricted to computer and telephone
communication; no customers or clients come to the home; and no
merchandise is stored in and sold from the home.
(1) Permitted home occupations are:
(a) Professional office of a physician, dentist, chiropractor,
chiropodist, optometrist, attorney, minister, accountant,
psychiatrist, psychologist, architect or engineer.
(b) Consultants (i.e., computer, environmental, investigative, etc.).
(c) Seamstress or tailor.
(d) Salesperson, provided that products are not stored on site.
(e) Tutor in academic studies.
(f) Manufacturer's representative, provided that no products are
stored on site.
§ 176-104 WATERFORD CODE § 176-104
168:616
(g) Family day-care homes for no more than five children,
exclusive of the caregiver's children.
(h) General and subcontractors in the building trades, providing
no vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies are stored on
site.
(2) In addition to other requirements of this chapter, home occupations
shall meet all of the following standards and conditions:
(a) There shall be no display of advertising or signs identifying the
home occupation or business. A professional may have a
nameplate not exceeding one square foot in size.
(b) No more than one person, who must be a resident of the home
in which the business is being conducted, shall conduct any
business on the site. In the case of a professional office, the
professional may have one employee, such as a secretary,
nurse or receptionist.
(c) The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within two
rooms or 25% of the total gross habitable floor area of the
home, whichever is less, or in an accessory structure.
(d) No mechanical equipment or other merchandise shall be
stored or sold on the premises.
(e) No more than one client, customer, patient or visitor to the
business shall be seen at any one time. There shall be adequate
off-street parking for any such clients, customers, etc., and any
employee permitted.
(f) In the case of contractors, no employees shall leave their
vehicles on site to use a company vehicle during working
hours. No more than one commercial vehicle, registered in the
name of the property/business owner, may be parked at the
residence.
(g) The home occupational use shall not alter the residential or
aesthetic quality of the neighborhood.
P. Hospitals, philanthropic clinics, residential health care facilities,
nursing homes and convalescent centers.
(1) In addition to all other requirements for site plan approval, the
applicant shall provide a statement setting forth the need for, and
particulars on, the operation of the structures. The Planning Board
must conclude the proposed use in the specific location is
necessary and will service the community.
(2) The following standards and conditions shall apply:
§ 176-104 INSURANCE § 176-104
168:617
(a) Lot size shall be five acres. Front, rear and side yard setbacks
shall be 100 feet.
(b) No structure or activity shall be permitted within the required
front yard setback except for access drives.
(c) Impervious lot coverage shall not exceed 25%.
(d) Off-street parking shall be provided at the ratio of 1 1/2 spaces
for every bed.
(e) The facility shall be connected to public water and sewer
facilities.
Q. Pinelands resource-related industrial or manufacturing facility.
(1) The property proposed for development shall be at least five acres.
(2) The principal raw material for the proposed use shall be naturally
found or otherwise produced in the Pinelands.
(3) The use shall not require or will not generate subsidiary or satellite
development in the Township.
R. Places of worship.
(1) The proposed use shall be a bona fide nonprofit religious use.
(2) The proposed location will not adversely affect the safe and
comfortable enjoyment of property rights of surrounding parcels.
(3) The design of any structure(s) to be erected in connection with
such use must blend with the general character of the residential
area.
(4) Lot size shall be five acres. Front, rear and side yard setbacks shall
be 100 feet.
(5) Impervious lot coverage shall not exceed 25%.
(6) Off-street parking shall be provided at the ratio of one space for
every three seats.
S. Public utility installations. For the purpose of this chapter, the term
"public utilities" shall include such uses as telephone dial equipment
centers, cellular towers, water towers, power substations and other
utilities that service the public, such as sewage treatment plants, but
shall exclude dumps, sanitary landfills, service yards and storage yards.
(1) The proposed installation shall be reasonably necessary for the
satisfactory provision of service by the utility to the neighborhood
or area in which the particular use is located.
(2) Lot size shall be sufficient to accommodate the particular use, but
in no case less than 5,000 square feet.
§ 176-104 WATERFORD CODE § 176-104
168:618
(3) The design of any building in connection with such facilities must
not adversely affect the safe, comfortable enjoyment of property
rights in the surrounding area.
(4) Adequate fences and other safety devices must be provided as may
be required. Fences, when used to enclose public utility facilities
such as electrical power substations, shall be built in accordance
with the applicable requirements of the New Jersey Board of Public
Utility Commissioners and the National Electrical Code in effect at
the time of construction.
(5) Off-street parking shall be provided to meet the use.
T. Quasi-public and recreational buildings and uses.
(1) For the purpose of this chapter, the term "quasi-public and
recreational buildings" shall include and be limited to clubhouses,
playgrounds, swimming pools, tennis courts and other such
activities operated by nonprofit membership organizations.
(2) The applicant shall provide a statement setting forth the need for
the operation of the use and a complete list of the charter
membership, including names and resident addresses.
(a) The proposed use shall be a bona fide nonprofit organization
operated solely for the recreation and enjoyment of the
members of said organization.
(b) The proposed location will not adversely affect the safe and
comfortable enjoyment of property rights of surrounding
parcels.
(c) The design of any structure(s) to be erected in connection with
such use must blend with the general character of the
residential area.
(d) Lot size shall be five acres. Front, rear and side yard setbacks
shall be 100 feet.
(e) No recreation activity or facility shall be located within 100
feet of an adjacent residential property line.
(f) Impervious lot coverage shall not exceed 25%.
(g) Off-street parking shall be provided at the ratio of one space
for every three seats.
U. Schools.
(1) For purposes of this chapter, parochial, private or public schools
may include institutions of higher learning, but shall not include
trade or business schools. In order to approve an application for a
school use the Planning Board must conclude that:
§ 176-104 INSURANCE § 176-104
168:619
(a) There is a specific need for the facility.
(b) The facility is primarily designed to serve the needs of the
community.
(c) The applicant has demonstrated that adequate public service
infrastructure will be available to serve the use.
(2) In addition to all other requirements for site plan approval, the
applicant shall:
(a) Submit a statement that shall indicate the grade levels of the
public to be housed in the building or buildings and the
contemplated eventual enrollment of the school.
(b) Elementary schools shall provide parking at the ratio of two
spaces for each classroom, but not less than one space for each
teacher and staff member; intermediate schools shall provide
parking at the ratio of 1 1/2 spaces for each classroom, but not
less than one space for each teacher and staff member; and
secondary schools shall provide parking at the ratio of 2 1/2
spaces for each classroom, but not less than two spaces for
each teacher and staff member. These requirements may be
increased if, in the judgment of the Planning Board, the
unavailability of bus service, the particular location of the
subject property, and/or the relatively high percentage of
pupils driving or anticipated to be driving cars to the school
make such increased requirements desirable.
(c) No driveways shall open onto a public street within 75 feet of
an intersection of such street with another public street.
(d) Illumination for night athletic activities shall be shielded from
illuminating adjoining streets and residential areas.
(3) The following standards and conditions shall apply:
(a) Lot size shall be 50 acres. Front, rear and side yard setbacks
shall be 100 feet.
(b) The site shall not contain wetlands or wetlands buffer areas.
(c) All drop off and pick up areas shall be on site.
(d) The facility shall be connected to public water and sewer
facilities.
(e) Impervious lot coverage shall not exceed 25%.
V. Nonclustered residential development in the RC and RR Districts.
Single-family detached dwellings which are not clustered in accordance
with the standards of § 176-136 may be permitted as a conditional use
in the RC and RR Districts, provided that: [Added 9-12-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-15]
§ 176-104 WATERFORD CODE § 176-104
168:620
§ 176-105. General exceptions and modifications.
(1) The Planning Board finds that:
(a) Clustering of the proposed dwellings would be inconsistent
with the minimum environmental standards set forth at
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6; or
(b) Clustering of the proposed dwellings would disrupt the
contiguity of the forest ecosystem to a greater degree than
nonclustered development.
(2) Minimum lot size requirements:
(a) RC Zone: 37.6 acres.
(b) RR Zone: 5.7 acres.
A. Height limitations.
(1) No structure, including radio and television transmission and other
communication facilities which are not accessory to an otherwise
permitted use, shall exceed a height of 35 feet.
(2) The height limitation in Subsection A(1) above shall not apply to
any of the following structures, provided that such structures are
compatible with uses in the immediate vicinity: silos, barns and
other agricultural structures; church spires; cupolas; domes;
monuments; water towers; fire observation towers; electric
transmission facilities and supporting structures; windmills;
chimneys; smokestacks; derricks; conveyors; flag poles; masts;
aerials; solar energy facilities; and similar structures required to be
placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy;
provided, however, that the height of any tower or similar structure
shall not exceed the distance from the nearest property line to the
base of the tower or structure.
(3) The height limitation in Subsection A(1) above shall not apply to the
antenna and any supporting structure of a local communication
facility of greater than 35 feet, provided that the standards set
forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.4(c) are met.
B. Public election voting places. The provisions of this chapter shall not be
construed to interfere with the temporary use of any property as a
voting place in connection with a municipal or other public election.
C. Public utility lines. Public utility lines for the transportation and
distribution and control of water, electricity, gas, oil, steam, telegraph
and telephone communications, and their supporting members, other
than buildings or structures, shall not be required to be located on a lot
nor shall this chapter be interpreted as to prohibit the use of a property
in any zoning district for the above uses.
§ 176-104 INSURANCE § 176-105
168:621
D. Variances and waivers.
(1) Variances. Departures from the literal zoning requirements
specified in the district regulations of this chapter may be granted
by the Planning Board in accordance with the applicable provisions
specified in § 176-18H.
(2) Waivers. The Planning Board shall have the power to grant such
exceptions from the requirements of design standards and review
procedures of this chapter, as may be reasonable and within the
general purpose and intent of the applicable provisions, if the
literal enforcement of one or more of the provisions is
impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question.
(3) Pinelands compliance. Notwithstanding the above jurisdictional
exceptions, no such exception shall apply to the Commission's
application requirements or development standards nor shall it
affect the Township's compliance with the CMP.
§ 176-105 WATERFORD CODE § 176-105
168:622
ARTICLE X
Plans, Studies, Surveys and Reports
§ 176-106. Cultural resource survey.
A. Guidelines for this survey are contained in Appendix B of the "Cultural
Resource Management Plan," dated April 1991, as amended.
B. An applicant may request a letter of interpretation from the
Commission in order to determine the presence of recorded
archaeological sites on his property in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.A.C. 7:50-4, Part VI, of the CMP.
C. Where archaeological or historic resources are present, the applicant
shall take all reasonable steps in planning his development to protect
the resource the provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.156(c). In addition, if at
any time after construction has been commenced archaeological data is
discovered on a site, the developer shall immediately cease
construction, notify the Township and the Pinelands Commission and
take all reasonable steps to protect the archaeological data in
accordance with the guidelines for the Recovery of Scientific,
Prehistoric, Historic and Archaeological Data: Procedures for
Notification Reporting and Data Recovery (36 CFR 66).
D. The survey shall include:
(1) A statement as to the presence of any properties listed on the
National and State Registers of Historic Places on the site or within
the area of the project's potential environmental impacts;
(2) A thorough search of state, local and any other pertinent
inventories to identify sites of potential significance;
(3) A review of the literature and consultation with professional and
avocational archaeologists knowledgeable about the area;
(4) Thorough pedestrian and natural resources survey;
(5) Archaeological testing as necessary to provide reasonable evidence
of the presence or absence of historic resources of significance;
(6) Adequate recording of the information gains and methodologies
and sources used; and
(7) A list of personnel involved and qualifications of the person(s)
performing the survey.
E. Documentation of resources. The following information will be required
to document resources, which are not found to be significant, but which
are otherwise found to present graphic evidence of a cultural activity:
(1) A narrative description of the resource and its cultural
environment;
§ 176-106 INSURANCE § 176-106
168:623
§ 176-107. Environmental impact statement.
(2) Photographic documentation to record the exterior appearance of
buildings, structures and engineering resources;
(3) A site plan depicting, in correct scale, the location of all buildings,
structures and engineering resources; and
(4) A New Jersey state inventory form as published by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection for buildings and a
narrative description of any process or technology, if necessary, to
elaborate upon the photographic record.
A. General provisions. The impact on the environment generated by land
development necessitates a comprehensive analysis of the variety of
problems that may result and the actions that can be taken to minimize
the problems. It is further recognized that the level of detail required
for various types of applications will vary depending upon the size of
the development, the nature of the site, the location of the development
and the information already in the possession of the Township.
Therefore, having determined that some flexibility is needed in
preparing the environmental impact statement, the requirements for
such document pertaining to different types of development
applications are listed below:
(1) All agricultural operations conducted in accordance with a plan
approved by the Soil Conservation District and all silvaculture
operations conducted in accordance with a plan prepared by a
professional forester are specifically exempt from the
environmental impact statement requirements.
(2) Any variance applications to the Planning Board not involving a site
plan or subdivision application shall not require an environmental
impact statement unless specifically requested by the Board. The
Board shall inform the applicant regarding any information that
may be required.
(3) Any application for minor site plan approval shall not require an
environmental impact statement unless specifically requested by
the Board. The Planning Board shall inform the applicant regarding
any information that may be required.
(4) All minor subdivisions, preliminary major subdivisions and/or
preliminary major site plan applications shall be accompanied by
an environmental impact statement, if wetlands are present on or
within 300 feet of the subject site.
B. Submission requirements. When an environmental impact statement is
required, the applicant shall retain one or more competent
professionals to perform the necessary work. The qualifications and
background of the professionals shall be provided, and the method of
investigation shall be described. All applicable material on file in the
§ 176-106 WATERFORD CODE § 176-107
168:624
Township pertinent to evaluation of regional impacts also shall be
considered. Furthermore, as much original research as necessary shall
be conducted to develop the environmental impact statement. All
environmental impact statements shall consist of written and graphic
materials, which clearly present the required information utilizing the
following format:
(1) Project description.
(a) Indicate the purpose and scope of the proposed project.
Enumerate the benefits to the public, which will result from the
proposed project and describe the particular suitability of the
site for the intended use. A description of the proposed project
shall be presented to indicate the extent to which the site must
be altered, the kinds of facilities to be constructed and the uses
intended. The resident population, working population and
visitor population shall be estimated. The compatibility or
incompatibility of the proposed project shall be described in
relation to the following:
[1] Township Master Plan.
[2] Master Plan of adjacent municipalities.
[3] Camden County Master Plan.
[4] Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan.
[5] Other pertinent planning documents.
(b) The recommended regulations appropriate to the subdivision
or site as indicated by the Design and Performance Standards
of this chapter and supported by natural resource information.
(2) Site description and inventory. Provide a description of the
environmental conditions on the site, including the following items:
(a) Types of soils. List and describe each soil type on the site. If
applicable, provide percolation data. Where the proposed area
of land disturbance will involve soils with moderate or severe
limitations relative to the type of use proposed, a complete
mapping of all soil types where the moderate and severe
limitations exist shall be provided.
(b) Topography. Describe the topographic conditions on the site
and within 300 feet of the site.
(c) Geology. Describe the geologic formations and features
associated with the site.
(d) Vegetation. Describe the existing vegetation on the site. A map
shall be prepared showing the location of major vegetative
groupings, such as woodlands, open fields and wetlands.
§ 176-107 INSURANCE § 176-107
168:625
Where woodlands are delineated, the forest types shall be
indicated.
(e) Wildlife. Identify and describe any unique habitats of
endangered or protected species.
(f) Subsurface water. Describe the subsurface water conditions on
the site both in terms of depth to groundwater and water
supply capabilities. The location, depth, capacity and water
quality of all existing water wells on the site and within 500
feet of the site shall be indicated.
(g) Distinctive scenic and/or historic features. Describe and map
those portions of the site that can be considered to have
distinctive scenic and/or historic qualities.
(h) Existing development features. Describe any existing features
on the site that are not considered to be part of the natural
environment, including, but not necessarily limited to, roads,
driveway accesses, housing units, accessory structures, utility
lines, ground disturbance, etc.
(i) Miscellaneous. When warranted, an analysis shall be
conducted of existing air quality and noise levels as prescribed
by the NJDEP.
(3) Impact. Submit a report on the negative and positive impacts
during and after construction. Indicate those negative impacts that
are unavoidable. The specific concerns that shall be considered
include the following and shall be accompanied by specific
quantitative measurements where possible and necessary:
(a) Soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from surface runoff.
(b) Flooding and floodplain disruption.
(c) Degradation of surface water quality.
(d) Groundwater pollution.
(e) Reduction of groundwater capabilities.
(f) Sewage disposal.
(g) Solid waste disposal.
(h) Vegetative destruction.
(i) Disruption of wildlife habitats of endangered and protected
species.
(j) Destruction or degradation of scenic and historic features.
(k) Air quality degradation.
§ 176-107 WATERFORD CODE § 176-107
168:626
(l) Noise levels.
(m) Energy utilization.
(4) Environmental performance controls.
(a) Describe what measures will be employed during the planning,
construction and operation phases which will minimize or
eliminate negative impacts that could result from the proposed
project. Of specific interest are:
[1] Drainage plans which shall include soil erosion and
sedimentation controls.
[2] Sewage disposal techniques.
[3] Water supply and water conservation proposals.
[4] Energy conservation measures.
[5] Noise reduction techniques.
(b) By reference to the summary conclusions and
recommendations, the statement shall identify specifically
which of the four categories and subcategories of regulations
described below are or are not applicable to the proposed
subdivision; and where a category or regulation is deemed to
be applicable, a description shall be furnished of the action
proposed to be taken or avoided to minimize any adverse effect
on the environment or ecology. The categories and
subcategories involved are those set forth below designated
Categories A through D, as follows:
[1] Category A: regulations to avoid hazard to life and
property from Subcategory 1, flood; and Subcategory 2,
fire.
[2] Category B: regulations to prevent hazard to life and
health resulting from human activities related to the use of
Subcategory 1, surface waters; Subcategory 2, water
table; and Subcategory 3, nutrient application.
[3] Category C: regulations to minimize loss of unique, scarce
and valuable resources: Subcategory 1, historic;
Subcategory 2, vegetation; Subcategory 3, wildlife;
Subcategory 4, scenic; Subcategory 5, water recharge;
and Subcategory 6, geologic.
[4] Category D: regulations to minimize social costs by proper
management of Subcategory 1, aquifers; Subcategory 2,
soil loss; Subcategory 3, vegetation; Subcategory 4,
recreation and use of vegetation; Subcategory 5, wildlife
habitats; and Subcategory 6, land use.
§ 176-107 INSURANCE § 176-107
168:627
§ 176-108. Resource conservation plan.
In the Agricultural District a resource conservation plan shall be prepared
by the operator of every agricultural use, or the appropriate Soil
Conservation District, located in an area which has been designated by any
agency of federal, state or local government as having substandard surface
or groundwater. If prepared by the operator, such plan shall be submitted
to the Soil Conservation District for review. The resource conservation plan
shall be reviewed, updated and revised as necessary and shall provide for
the use of recommended management practices as found in, but not limited
to, the following publications:
(5) Licenses, permits and other approvals required by law. The
applicant shall list all known licenses, permits and other forms of
approval required by law for the development and operation of the
proposed project. The list shall include approvals required by the
Township, as well as agencies of the county, state and federal
governments. Where approvals have been granted, copies of said
approvals shall be attached. Where approvals are pending, date of
filing for approval.
(6) Documentation. All publications, file reports, manuscripts or other
written sources of information which were first consulted and
employed in compilation of the environmental impact statement
shall be listed. A list of all agencies and individuals from whom all
pertinent information was obtained orally or by letter shall be listed
separately. Dates and locations of all meetings shall be specified.
(7) Distribution of statement. Four copies shall be submitted to the
Department of Planning and Zoning for distribution to the
following:
(a) Administrative Review Committee for review and comment.
(b) Environmental Commission for review and comment.
(c) Board Solicitor.
(d) Board Engineer.
C. Board action. The Board shall review the comments and reports
submitted by the above distributees regarding the information
furnished in the environmental impact statement in the context of the
overall design of the proposed development and the relationship of the
proposed development to the environment. The information is to be
used solely to help ensure that the proposed development will cause no
reasonably avoidable damage to any environmental resource.
A. Erosion and runoff: Natural Resources Conservation Service Technical
Guide.
§ 176-107 WATERFORD CODE § 176-108
168:628
§ 176-109. Traffic and air quality impact statement.
B. Animal waste: Natural Resources Conservation Service Animal Waste
Management Field Manual.
C. Fertilizers and pesticides: Rutgers University, Cook College,
Cooperative Extension Service Annual Recommendations.
A. General provisions.
(1) The impact on existing road systems generated by land
development necessitates a comprehensive analysis of the variety
of problems that may result and the actions that can be taken to
minimize the problems. All preliminary major subdivision
applications resulting in the generation of more than 10 lots and/or
all preliminary major site plan applications shall be accompanied
by a traffic impact statement unless specifically waived by the
Board. Any application for subdivision approval where less than 10
lots are involved and all applications for minor site plan approval
shall not require a traffic impact statement unless specifically
requested by the Board.
(2) The Board may waive the requirement for a traffic impact
statement totally or partially only if sufficient evidence is submitted
to the Board indicating that the proposed project will have a
negligible traffic impact, or, alternatively, that a complete report
need not be prepared and submitted in order to evaluate
adequately the specific traffic impact to be generated by the
proposed development. The burden of demonstrating the
exceptions shall rest, at all times, with the applicant who must
affirmatively demonstrate to the Board the basis for a waiver
request.
B. Contents of report. In addition to the submission requirements of
Article VII, the following information relative to the impact of the
proposed development on air quality to ensure that all state ambient air
quality standards in N.J.A.C. 7:27 et seq. for carbon monoxide shall not
be exceeded at places of maximum concentration and at sensitive
receptors:
(1) A summary of ambient air quality in the vicinity of the facility,
expressed in terms of levels of sulfur dioxide, particulates and
carbon monoxide concentrations, compared with all applicable
ambient air quality standards. This data may be obtained from onsite
monitoring or, upon approval of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Division of Environmental Quality, from
the nearest New Jersey State monitoring site.
(2) Projects of traffic to be generated by the proposed development for
average daily, morning peak hour(s), afternoon peak hour(s) and
any other peak traffic condition deemed applicable as a result of
§ 176-108 INSURANCE § 176-109
168:629
the type and/or location of the proposed generator. Traffic
generation rates should be based upon local indices, where
applicable, or rates promulgated by the Institute of Transportation
Engineers, where local indices are not available. All rates should
be documented in the report. Also, the method and data upon
which traffic approach route distributions are based shall be fully
documented. Any assumptions regarding the diversion of existing
traffic to alternative routes should be clearly specified in the
report.
(3) The report shall contain documentation of existing conditions on
adjacent streets serving immediate site access/egress, including
roadway pavement width, rights-of-way, curb parking conditions,
site visibility, grade and curvatures of roadway and traffic control
devices. Existing traffic volumes or average daily and peak hour
conditions shall be presented with the source of data denoted.
(4) Assessment of the traffic impact of the proposed development,
including estimates of levels of services, shall be provided. In
preparing these estimates, assumptions regarding the annual
growth rate of existing traffic should be fully documented for a
period of 10 years. Capacity determination shall be based upon
normally accepted standards, with the basis of these estimates
clearly indicated. All substantial applications for development in
Waterford Township and neighboring municipalities, which have
recently been built, are under construction, have been approved for
construction, or are being considered for approval, shall be
factored in the analysis. In the event the project is staged over a
period of time, independent estimates for each stage shall be
provided.
(5) In the event that roadway deficiencies are identified for existing
and/or future conditions, specific recommendations for the
resolution of these problems shall be addressed in the report. The
report shall contain a listing of any and all actions to be taken by
the applicant to resolve or minimize traffic problems and, as such,
shall be considered a firm offer by the applicant to take such
actions subject to Board approval.
(6) A description of parking facilities, including locations, number of
parking spaces, number of parking levels, and whether the parking
area is to be open or covered.
(7) An analysis of emissions from space heating, including:
(a) Type and amount of fuel used and pollution emission factors
used to calculate emissions.
(b) The emission rates of sulfur dioxide, particulates, carbon
monoxide, hydrocarbons, and oxides of nitrogen in tons per
day averaged over a five month heating season.
§ 176-109 WATERFORD CODE § 176-109
168:630
(8) An analysis of motor vehicle emissions to be generated by the
proposed development and, where appropriate, by growth induced
by the proposed development based on annual average daily traffic
and space heating emissions expressed as tons per day of carbon
monoxide, hydrocarbons, nitrogen oxide, sulfur dioxide, and
particulates. The latest data available from the United States
Environmental Protection Agency's Publication AP-42, Compilation
of Air Pollution Emission Factors, is to be used to calculate
emissions if more definitive information is not available.
(9) An analysis of the effect of carbon monoxide emissions on air
quality, including anticipated carbon monoxide concentrations
compared with ambient air quality standards and with
concentrations in the absence of the proposed development at
places of maximum concentration and at critical locations,
including monitoring sites and sensitive receptors such as
hospitals, schools, nursing homes, residences and playgrounds.
This analysis should be prepared pursuant to the procedures
established in the United States Environmental Protection
Agency's publications Guidelines for Air Quality, Maintenance,
Planning and Analysis, Volume 9: Evaluating Indirect Sources,
Publication No. EPA-450/4-750-001 OAQPS No. 1.2-028, or
equivalent procedure.
(10) An analysis of the availability of public transportation and, for
housing projects, the accessibility, including distance, safety and
convenience of route, by automobile and by other modes of
transportation of the following facilities:
(a) Medical, including professional offices and hospitals.
(b) Recreational.
(c) Educational.
(d) Commercial, including personal shopping.
(e) Places of employment.
(11) A description of measures taken in planning the proposed
development which are intended to reduce vehicle miles traveled,
including, but not limited to, those measures described in the
United States Environmental Protection Agency's publication
Guidelines for Air Quality Maintenance, Planning and Analysis,
Volume 3: Control Strategies (Chapter II, Section E) Publication
No. EPA-450/4-74-003 (OAQPS No. 1.2-002) and in Section
108(f)(i)(A) of the Clean Air Act Amendment of 1977, 43 U.S.C.
§ 7410.
(12) A description of measures taken in planning the proposed
development which are intended to reduce emissions from the
completed development in accordance with the Soil Erosion and
§ 176-109 INSURANCE § 176-109
168:631
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. Applicable standards
for dust control are available in the N.J. Department of
Agriculture's publication Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control in New Jersey.
(13) Information evidencing compliance with the provisions of N.J.A.C.,
Title 7, Chapter 27 (New Jersey Air Pollution Control Regulations),
and 45 FR 52676 through 52748 (8-7-80) (Environmental
Protection Agency Regulations for Prevention of Significant
Deterioration).
(14) Any alteration or amendment to the development application which
would substantially alter specific land uses, site acreage, building
floor area, highway access design or any other feature which could
cause a significant change in traffic generation rates shall require
the submission of a revised traffic and air quality impact statement.
C. Licenses, permits and other approvals required by law. The applicant
shall list all known licenses, permits and other forms of approval
required by law for the development and operation of the proposed
project. The list shall include approvals required by the Township, as
well as agencies of the county, state and federal governments. Where
approvals have been granted, copies of said approvals shall be
attached; where approvals are pending, date of filing for approval.
D. Documentation. All publications, file reports, manuscripts or other
written sources of information which were first consulted and employed
in compilation of the environmental impact statement shall be listed. A
list of all agencies and individuals from whom all pertinent information
was obtained orally or by letter shall be listed separately. Dates and
locations of all meetings shall be specified.
E. Distribution of study.
(1) Four copies shall be submitted to the Department of Planning and
Zoning for distribution to the following:
(a) Administrative Review Committee for review and comment.
(b) Environmental Commission for review and comment.
(c) Board Solicitor.
(d) Board Engineer.
(2) When state or county highways are adjacent to and/or potentially
impacted by the proposed project, the applicant shall provide a
copy of the report to NJDOT and Camden County DOT for review
and comment.
F. Board action. The Board shall review comments and reports submitted
by the above distributees regarding the information furnished in the
traffic and air quality impact statement in the context of the overall
§ 176-109 WATERFORD CODE § 176-109
168:632
design of the proposed development and the traffic impact of the
proposed development on the affected road system. The information
is to be used to determine whether or not the proposed development
will create any negative impact(s) upon the roadway system, adjacent
properties or the zone plan of the municipality.
§ 176-109 INSURANCE § 176-109
168:633

ARTICLE XI
Zoning Districts and District Regulations
§ 176-110. Zoning districts.
§ 176-111. Zoning Map.
The zoning districts in the schedule above are established by the
designations, locations and boundaries thereof set forth and indicated on
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the Township of Waterford is hereby
divided into 18 districts:
RR Rural Development District
R1 Residential District, Single-Family
R2 Residential District, Single-Family
R3 Residential District, Single-Family
R4 Residential District, High-Density
OC Office Campus District
OP Office Professional District
NB Neighborhood Business District
TC Town Commercial District
PHB Planned Highway Business
PI Planned Light Industrial/Professional District
AG Agricultural District
PV Pinelands Village District
PD Preservation District
PF Public Facility District
RC Recreation/Conservation District
RNB Rural Neighborhood Business District
RPF Rural Public Facilities District
B. All of these districts are located within the designated area of the New
Jersey Pinelands. The R1, R2, R3, R4, OC, OP, NB, TC, PHB Districts are
in the regional growth area.
C. No residential or nonresidential use shall be located on a parcel of land
less than one acre unless served by a centralized wastewater treatment
facility.
D. Notwithstanding the minimum lot areas set forth below, no such
minimum lot area for nonresidential use in the RC, AG, PV, PD, RNB and
RPF Districts shall be less than that needed to meet the water quality
standards of § 176-101D, whether or not the lot may be served by a
centralized sewer treatment or collection system.
§ 176-110 INSURANCE § 176-111
168:635
the Zoning Map. The map shall be known as the "Zoning Map of the
Township of Waterford" and is made a part of this chapter by reference.
§ 176-112. Interpretation of boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to any of the boundaries shown on the map, the
following rules shall apply:
§ 176-113. Principal dwellings and buildings and uses per lot.
Unless otherwise specifically permitted within this chapter, no more than
one principal dwelling or one principal building shall be permitted on one
lot. No more than one principal use shall be permitted on one lot.
§ 176-114. Provisions of other more restrictive laws and ordinances.
Any federal, state, county, or municipal laws and regulations with respect to
buildings and/or land that are more restrictive than those set forth herein
shall take precedence over the provisions of this chapter.
§ 176-115. Application of district regulations.
A. Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow street center line,
railroad rights-of-way, streams and lot or property lines as they exist on
plats of record at the time of the enactment of this chapter, unless
otherwise indicated by dimensions on the Zoning Map.
B. Dimensions on the Zoning Map are in feet and measured horizontally
and, when measured from a street, are measured from the street rightof-
way line even if the center line of that street is used for the location
of the zoning district line.
C. Where boundaries are not fixed by dimensions and where they
approximately follow lot lines, and do not scale more than 10 feet
distant therefrom, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundaries
unless specifically shown otherwise.
D. Where boundaries divide lots, the location of such boundaries, unless
the same is indicated by dimensions shown on the map, shall be
determined by the use of the scale.
E. Where a district boundary line divides one or more lots which are in
single ownership, the use regulations applicable to the less restrictive
district shall not extend more than 50 feet over the portion of the lot in
the more restricted district.
F. The exact location of any disputed zoning district boundary line shall be
determined by the Planning Board.
G. The zoning standards, controls and designations apply to every
structure, lot and use within each district and the district lines extend
vertically in both directions from ground level.
§ 176-111 WATERFORD CODE § 176-115
168:636
§ 176-116. Uses restricted in all zones.
A. No building shall hereafter be used, erected, altered, converted,
enlarged, added to, moved or reduced, wholly or in part, nor shall any
lands be designed, used or physically altered for any purpose or in any
manner except in conformity with this chapter.
B. When a lot is formed from part of a lot already occupied by a building,
any subdivision shall be designed not to impair any requirements of this
chapter with respect to the existing building.
C. No open space contiguous to any building shall be encroached upon or
reduced in any manner, except in conformity to the yard, lot area,
building location, percentage of lot coverage, off-street parking space
and such other regulations in this chapter.
D. Nothing herein shall prevent the expansion of any dwelling and
accessory use or buildings existing at the time of the adoption of this
chapter, provided such expansion meets the use, lot and yard
requirements of this chapter.
A. As stipulated in § 176-5, all uses not expressly permitted in this chapter
are prohibited.
B. While not intended to be an all-inclusive list, in order to avoid any
questions as to the intent of this chapter, the following uses are
expressly prohibited in all zoning districts and upon all lands
throughout Waterford Township unless such use is recognized as a
preexisting use in the Master Plan of Waterford Township or a
certification of prior nonconforming use is issued by the Planning
Board.
(1) Pig farm, except in AG District in compliance with § 176-48.
(2) Mobile home.
(3) Mobile home park.
(4) Acetylene gas manufacture.
(5) Ammonia, chlorine or bleaching powder manufacture.
(6) Arsenal.
(7) Asphalt, manufacturing or refining.
(8) Blast furnace.
(9) Carbo, lamp black, shoe blacking or stove polishing manufacture.
(10) Celluloid and other cellulose products manufacture.
(11) Coke ovens.
(12) Creosote treatment or manufacture.
§ 176-115 INSURANCE § 176-116
168:637
(13) Distillation of coal, wood or bones.
(14) Explosives, fireworks or match manufacture.
(15) Fat rendering.
(16) Fertilizer manufacture or potash refining.
(17) Junkyards and automobile graveyards.
(18) Glue or gelatine manufacture and recovery from fish or animal fat.
(19) Hazardous waste storage facilities.
(20) Incineration, reduction or open dumping of offal, garbage or
refuse.
(21) Landfill.
(22) Lime, gypsum, cement, plaster or plaster of paris manufacture.
(23) Linoleum or oilcloth manufacture.
(24) Ore reduction.
(25) Paint, oil, varnish, turpentine, shellac or enamel manufacture.
(26) Petroleum refining.
(27) Printing ink manufacture.
(28)Raw hides or skins storage, curing or tanning, not including
taxidermy.
(29) Rubber manufacture from crude or scrap material.
(30) Smelting of iron, copper, tin, zinc or lead.
(31) Slaughter house.
(32) Soap, soda and washing compound manufacture.
(33) Starch, glucose or dextrine manufacture.
(34) Stockyards.
(35) Sulphurous, sulfuric, nitric or hydrochloric acid manufacture.
(36) Tallow, grease, lard or candle manufacture or refining.
(37) Tar distillation or manufacture of dyes.
(38) Tar roofing or waterproofing manufacture.
(39)Wool pulling or scouring.
§ 176-116 WATERFORD CODE § 176-116
168:638
§ 176-117. Public utility uses.
Public utility uses, such as water filtration plants, sewerage disposal plants,
pumping stations, high-voltage transmission lines, towers and substations,
but no service or storage yards, may be permitted in any zoning district,
except for the PD, AG and RR Districts, the forest and rural development
areas of the RC District and the rural development area of the PI District, in
compliance with § 176-104S.
§ 176-118. General requirements for accessory uses and structures.
(40) Any other industrial use that adversely affects air or water quality
and is proven to be a detriment to the health, safety and welfare of
the residents of Waterford Township.
C. Except as otherwise authorized in this chapter, the extraction or mining
of mineral resources other than sand, gravel, clay and ilmenite is
prohibited.
A. Such accessory uses and structures customarily appurtenant to a
principal permitted use may be incidental storage buildings, required
off-street parking and loading and unloading facilities. All accessory
uses and structures should be subordinate in area, intent and purpose
to the principal structure as building served. [Amended 9-12-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-13]
B. Accessory uses and structures in all districts shall be on the same lot as
the principal use or building unless the proposed lot to be developed for
accessory purposes is contiguous to the principal lot and does not meet
the minimum size requirements for development of a principal building
or the lots are combined into one lot by recording of a deed.
C. Nonresidential.
(1) No accessory use shall be established and no structure or building
shall be placed or constructed on a nonresidential property without
a zoning permit and, where required, a construction permit. All
applications shall be subject to administrative review for approval
or referral to the Planning Board.
(2) Detached accessory buildings shall not be placed beyond the front
wall of the principal building. For purposes of this section, the front
wall shall be the area of a principal building with the main entrance
and street address designation.
(3) Accessory buildings and structures shall not be placed in
easements unless specifically permitted by this chapter.
(4) Accessory buildings shall not be used for human habitation.
(5) The height of a detached accessory building shall not exceed the
height of the principal building.
§ 176-116 INSURANCE § 176-118
168:639
(6) The total permitted impervious coverage of lot shall not be
exceeded.
(7) Accessory buildings shall maintain the same set back requirements
of principal buildings.
(8) Business structures or uses shall not display goods for sale or rent
outside of the structure in which such activity is carried on except
for sidewalk sales or promotions as specifically authorized under
the provisions of § 176-12C.
(9) Reverse parking, where existing or proposed buildings are located
nearest the street line and parking facilities are located behind, is
encouraged in all districts. Reverse parking is a technique that
allows a neighborhood's streetscape and visual character to remain
relatively unaffected by the impact of commercial development.
(10) Sustainable energy facilities as defined in § 176-44E. [Added
9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-13]
D. Residential.
(1) An attached accessory building or structure shall comply with the
requirements applicable to a principal building.
(2) Horse barns shall be permitted accessory buildings on parcels in
compliance with § 176-48. Maximum height shall be 22 feet.
(3) Accessory buildings shall not be used for any commercial purpose.
(4) Accessory buildings shall not be used for human habitation.
(5) No accessory building or structure shall be installed on any lot
without a zoning permit and, when applicable, a construction
permit.
(6) Unless otherwise restricted, the height of a detached accessory
building shall not exceed the height of the principal building.
(7) The total permitted coverage of lot by buildings shall not be
exceeded.
(8) Detached accessory buildings shall not be placed beyond the front
wall of the principal building. For purposes of this section, the front
wall shall be the area of a principal building with the main entrance
and street address designation.
(9) Accessory buildings and structures shall not be placed in
easements or required landscaped buffer areas unless specifically
permitted by this chapter.
(10) Detached residential accessory building requirements in all
districts:
§ 176-118 WATERFORD CODE § 176-118
168:640
Size of Building
(square feet)
Side Yard*
(feet)
Rear Yard*
(feet)
0 to 130 5 5
131 to 500 10 10
Over 500 As required for principal buildings
* Note: In the case of easements or buffer areas, setbacks shall
apply to the interior delineation line of such easement or buffer.
(11)No detached accessory building shall be located nearer than 10
feet to a principal building.
(12) Any detached accessory structure exceeding 400 square feet shall
be required to meet the same minimum setback requirements as a
principal structure in that specific zone. [Added 9-12-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-13]
(13) The proposed height of any accessory structure shall be no greater
than 75% of the principal structure, unless otherwise restricted
within the current code. [Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-13]
(14) Mitigative strategies, such as privacy fencing and/or screening
landscaping, may be required depending on specific conditions,
including a request for bulk standard relief. [Added 9-12-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-13]
(15) Unimpeded, stable access to the structure shall be provided for
emergency vehicles. [Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-13]
(16)Water and/or sanitary sewerage service is prohibited from
accessory structures. [Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-13]
(17) Any increase over the 865 square feet shall be accompanied by a
narrative justification and shall only be considered if situated
within the rear yard of the associated principal structure. [Added
9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-13]
(18) Sustainable energy facilities as defined in § 176-44E. [Added
9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-13]
E. Residential accessory uses permitted. In addition to the requirements
of § 176-44, all accessory buildings, structures and uses shall comply
with the following:
(1) Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas in compliance with
§ 176-93.
(2) Tennis courts and other recreational facilities customarily
associated with residential dwelling units. Fencing for tennis courts
§ 176-118 INSURANCE § 176-118
168:641
§ 176-119. Permitted densities and pinelands development credit
requirements in Regional Growth Area. [Amended 2-8-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-7144]
must be a minimum of 10 feet from side and rear property
boundaries.
(3) Sheds for the storage of objects owned by the residents of the
property, not exceeding 12 feet in height.
(4) Private garages, maximum of three-car capacity, with gross floor
area not exceeding 865 square feet. Not more than one detached
private garage shall be permitted per lot.
(5) Noncommercial greenhouses.
(6) Fences and walls in compliance with § 176-64.
(7) Satellite dish antennas in compliance with § 176-44D.
(8) Sustainable energy facilities as defined in § 176-44E. [Added
9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-13]
A. Permitted density in the following residential districts shall be as set
forth below.
District
Maximum Density
(dwelling units per acre)
R1 2.25
R2 3
R3 4.50
R4 5.25
B. Pinelands development credits shall be acquired and redeemed for 30%
of all housing units in the R1, R2, R3 and R4 Zones. The use and
redemption of Pinelands development credits shall be in accordance
with § 176-15.
C. If the number of required Pinelands development credits pursuant to
Subsection B above is not evenly divisible by 0.25, the required number
of Pinelands development credits shall be increased to the next highest
increment of 0.25 for developments of five or more units and decreased
to the next lowest increment of 0.25 for developments of four or fewer
units, provided that the resulting obligation shall be at least 0.25
Pinelands development credits.
D. Notwithstanding the requirements in Subsections B and C above, no
Pinelands development credits shall be required for the development of
144. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also changed the title of this § 176-119 from "Base
densities; Pinelands development bonus credits" to its current title.
§ 176-118 WATERFORD CODE § 176-119
168:642
§ 176-120. Design and performance standards.
§ 176-121. Substandard lots.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, a residence may be
constructed in the RR, OC, RC, and AG Districts without regard to the
density limitations of this chapter, provided that:
§ 176-122. Residential districts (RR, R1, R2, R3, R4).
one housing unit on a lot existing as of the effective date of this section
that conforms to the density requirements of Subsection A above and
the minimum lot area requirements of § 176-122.
E. All applications for development in which Pinelands development
credits are to be utilized shall be subject to review and approval by the
Planning Board.
A. All development proposed in any district shall comply with Article VIII.
B. No building or structure shall exceed the maximum height of 35 feet
unless in full compliance with § 176-105A.
C. All signs, where and as permitted, shall comply with the requirements
of § 176-88.
A. The dwelling unit will be the principal residence of the property owner
or a member of the immediate family of the property owner;
B. The parcel has been in the continuous ownership since February 7,
1979, of the person whose principal residence the dwelling unit will be,
a member of that person's immediate family, or a partnership or
corporation in which members of that person's immediate family
collectively own more than a majority interest in such partnership or
corporation;
C. The parcel was not in common ownership with any contiguous land on
or after February 8, 1979, that contains substantial improvements; and
D. The parcel includes all vacant contiguous lands in common ownership
on or after February 8, 1979.
E. The size of the parcel is at least one acre.
A. Principal uses.
(1) RR District:
(a) Single-family detached houses, provided that clustering of the
permitted units shall be required in accordance with § 176-136
whenever two or more units are proposed as part of a
residential development. [Amended 9-12-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-15]
§ 176-119 INSURANCE § 176-122
168:643
(2) R1 District:
(a) Single-family detached houses.
(3) R2 District:
(a) Single-family detached houses.
(4) R3 District:
(a) Single-family detached houses.
(5) R4 District:
(a) Single-family detached.
(b) Duplex dwellings.
(c) Twins.
(d) Townhouses.
(e) Senior citizen housing.
(6) No residential dwelling unit in the R1, R2, R3, or R4 Districts shall
be located on a parcel of less than one acre unless served by either:
(a) A centralized wastewater treatment plant; or
(b) A community on-site wastewater treatment system serving two
or more residential dwelling units which meets the standards
of § 176-101B(5) or (7), provided that the overall residential
density on the parcel does not exceed one dwelling unit per
acre.
(7) Preexisting nonresidential uses approved by Planning Board.
(8) Community residences as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2.
B. Conditional uses.
(1) Office space for a resident professional and home occupation
occupying not more than 25% of total first floor area and in
compliance with § 176-104O.
(2) Nursing and convalescent homes in compliance with § 176-104P.
(3) Veterinary hospitals.
(4) Public buildings, but not including correctional institutions,
workshops or warehouses.
(5) Agricultural commercial establishments in compliance with
§ 176-104E, provided that the products sold are grown on the
premises.
§ 176-122 WATERFORD CODE § 176-122
168:644
(6) Public utility installations that involve no commercial office space
or storage yards, except that sewer treatment and collection
facilities shall be permitted in the RR District in compliance with
§ 176-104S.
(7) Private clubs, golf courses, lodges or social buildings operated for
the benefit of members only.
(8) Places of worship and accessory residential structures, in
compliance with § 176-104R.
(9) Public schools, playgrounds, parks and libraries in compliance with
§ 176-104T and U.
(10) Noncommercial stable in compliance with § 176-48B.
(11) Truck garden.
(12) In the RR Zone, nonclustered residential development in
accordance with § 176-104V. [Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-15]
C. Area and bulk requirements.
(1) RR Rural Residential Zone.
(a) Maximum density: one unit per 5.7 acres. [Amended
9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
[1] Minimum lot area: 5.7 acres for existing lots of record.
Developments of two or more units in the RR Rural
Residential Zone must be clustered on one acre lots in
accordance with § 176-136.
(b) Minimum setback requirements:
[1] Front yard: 200 feet.
[2] Side yard: 35 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 50 feet.
(c) Minimum road frontage: 200 feet.
(d) Minimum mean lot width: 200 feet.
(e) Maximum coverage of lot by impervious surfaces including
buildings: 10%
(f) Preexisting developed substandard lots shall meet the
requirements under Subsection C(2)(b) through (e) of the R1
Zone.
(2) R1 Residential Zone.
§ 176-122 INSURANCE § 176-122
168:645
(a) Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet. [Amended 2-8-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-7]
(b) Minimum setback requirements.
[1] Front yard: 40 feet.
[2] Side yard: 20 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 30 feet.
(c) Minimum road frontage: 125 feet.
(d) Minimum mean lot width: 125 feet.
(e) Maximum coverage of lot by impervious surface including
buildings: 20%.
(f) Preexisting developed substandard lots shall meet the
requirements under Subsection C(4)(b) through (e) of the R3
Zone.
(3) R2 Residential Zone.
(a) Minimum lot area: 10,250 square feet. [Amended 2-8-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-7]
(b) Minimum setback requirements:
[1] Front yard: 35 feet;
[2] Side yard: 15 feet;
[3] Rear yard: 30 feet.
(c) Minimum road frontage: 100 feet.
(d) Minimum mean lot width: 100 feet.
(e) Maximum coverage of lot by impervious surface including
buildings: 30%.
(f) Preexisting developed substandard lots shall meet the
requirements under Subsection C(4)(b) through (e) of the R3
Zone.
(4) R3 Residential Zone. [Amended 2-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-7]
(a) Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet.
(b) Minimum setback requirements:
[1] Front yard: 30 feet;
[2] Side yard: 10 feet;
[3] Rear yard: 25 feet.
§ 176-122 WATERFORD CODE § 176-122
168:646
(c) Minimum road frontage: 50 feet.
(d) Minimum mean lot width: 50 feet.
(e) Maximum coverage of lot by impervious surface including
buildings: 30%.
(5) R4 Residential Zone.
(a) Minimum lot area.
[1] Single-family: 12,500 square feet.
[2] Duplex/twin: 15,625 square feet.
[3] Townhouse: 3,125 square feet.
[4] Minimum lot area with PDCs:
[a] Single-family: 7,500 square feet.
[b] Duplex/twin: 9,500 square feet.
[c] Townhouse: 2,250 square feet.
(b) Minimum setback requirements:
[1] Single-family:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet;
[b] Side yard: eight feet;
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet.
[2] Duplex/Twin:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet;
[b] Side yard: eight feet;
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet.
[3] Townhouse:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet;
[b] Side yard: interior units N/A; exterior units, 10 feet.
[4] Rear yard: 25 feet.
(c) Minimum road frontage:
[1] Single-family: 50 feet.
[2] Duplex/twin: 50 feet.
[3] Townhouse: 20 feet.
§ 176-122 INSURANCE § 176-122
168:647
§ 176-123. Office Campus District (OC).
(d) Minimum mean lot width:
[1] Single-family: 50 feet.
[2] Duplex/twin: 50 feet.
[3] Townhouse:
[a] Interior unit: 20 feet;
[b] Exterior unit: 30 feet.
(e) Maximum coverage of lot by impervious surface, including
buildings:
[1] Single-family: 30%.
[2] Duplex/twin: 30%.
[3] Townhouse: 30%
A. Principal uses.
(1) Any office use (professional, business, administrative, finance or
similar use).
(2) Research facilities of a nonnoxious or hazardous nature.
(3) Banks when associated with permitted office campus uses.
(4) Restaurants (excluding fast food) when associated with permitted
office campus uses.
(5) Institutional.
(6) Residential uses existing prior to the adoption of this chapter.
Preexisting substandard lots shall meet the setback requirements
of the R3 Zone.
(7) Senior citizen housing at a maximum base density of three dwelling
units per acre. Density may be increased to a maximum of 5.25
dwelling units per acre through the use of PDCs in accordance with
§ 176-15.
(8) High technology and light manufacturing uses associated with
applied research in the areas of medicine and pharmaceuticals,
communications, energy, transportation, and similar fields, so long
as it can be clearly demonstrated that such uses will not generate
adverse impacts to the physical environment and/or adjacent uses.
[Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-13]
B. Conditional uses.
§ 176-122 WATERFORD CODE § 176-123
168:648
§ 176-124. Neighborhood Business District (NB).
(1) Any use of the same general character as any of the abovepermitted
uses.
(2) Commercial recreational facilities that promote the working
environment of a permitted office campus use.
(3) Warehousing as an accessory use to a permitted Office Campus
District use. Said warehousing must be contained within the same
structure as the permitted use.
C. Area and bulk requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area: 60,000 square feet. [Amended 9-12-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-13]
(2) Minimum setbacks:
(a) Front yard: 75 feet.
(b) Side yard: 30 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 25 feet.
(3) Minimum road frontage: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum mean lot width: 150 feet.
(5) Maximum coverage of lot by impervious surfaces, including
buildings: 30%.
A. Principal uses.
(1) Retail or personal service establishments, including, but not limited
to:
(a) Appliance sales.
(b) Banks.
(c) Bakeries.
(d) Barbershops and beauty parlors.
(e) Book, card and stationery stores.
(f) Candy and cigar stores.
(g) Drugs, dry goods and variety stores.
(h) Dry cleaners and laundries.
(i) Florists.
(j) Food stores.
§ 176-123 INSURANCE § 176-124
168:649
(k) Garden supplies.
(l) Hardware stores.
(m) Locksmiths.
(n) Newsstands.
(o) Business and professional offices.
(p) Pet stores.
(q) Photographic supplies, services and equipment.
(r) Professional and general businesses offices.
(s) Radio, television and appliance sales and service.
(t) Shoe sales and repair service.
(u) Soda fountains.
(v) Tailors and dressmakers.
(w) Wearing apparel stores.
(2) Residential uses existing prior to the adoption of this chapter.
Preexisting substandard lots shall meet the setback requirements
of the R3 Zone.
B. Conditional uses.
(1) Restaurants, excluding fast food, subject to exhaust systems being
vented to avoid creating a nuisance to adjoining uses or properties,
and subject to compliance with Article VIII.
(2) Businesses where alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed
subject to compliance with Article VIII. No outside service or
seating area will be permitted to avoid noise that will create a
nuisance to adjoining uses and properties.
(3) Adult uses in compliance with Chapter 175, Sexually Oriented
Businesses, of the Township of Waterford Code, and § 176-104D.
(4) Automobile service and repair facilities in compliance with
§ 176-104H.
(5) Places of worship in compliance with § 176-104R.
(6) Quasi-public and recreational buildings and uses in compliance
with § 176-104T.
(7) Schools in compliance with § 176-104U.
(8) Residential health care facilities, with the exception of assisted
living facilities, in compliance with § 176-104P.
§ 176-124 WATERFORD CODE § 176-124
168:650
§ 176-125. Town Commercial District (TC).
C. Area and bulk requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum setbacks:
(a) Front yard: 50 feet.
(b) Side yard: 25 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 25 feet.
(3) Minimum road frontage: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum mean lot width: 100 feet.
(5) Maximum coverage of lot by impervious surfaces, including
buildings: 60%.
A. Principal uses.
(1) Retail or personal service establishments including, but not limited
to:
(a) Appliance sales.
(b) Banks.
(c) Bakeries.
(d) Barbershops and beauty parlors.
(e) Book, card and stationery stores.
(f) Candy and cigar stores.
(g) Drugs, dry goods and variety stores.
(h) Dry cleaners and laundries.
(i) Florists.
(j) Food stores.
(k) Garden supplies.
(l) Hardware stores.
(m) Locksmiths.
(n) Newsstands.
(o) Business and professional offices.
(p) Pet stores.
§ 176-124 INSURANCE § 176-125
168:651
(q) Photographic supplies, services and equipment.
(r) Radio, television and appliance sales and service.
(s) Shoe sales and repair service.
(t) Soda fountains.
(u) Tailors and dressmakers and wearing apparel stores.
(2) Residential uses existing prior to the adoption of this chapter.
B. Conditional uses.
(1) Restaurants subject to exhaust systems being vented to avoid
creating a nuisance to adjoining uses or properties, and subject to
compliance with Article VIII.
(2) Fast-food restaurants in compliance with § 176-104M.
(3) Businesses where alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed
subject to compliance with Article VIII. No outside service or
seating area will be permitted to avoid noise that will create a
nuisance to adjoining uses and properties.
(4) Adult uses in compliance with Chapter 175, Sexually Oriented
Businesses, of the Township of Waterford Code, and § 176-104D.
(5) Child-care center in compliance with § 176-104L.
(6) Residential uses as accessory to a principal commercial use of a
structure so long as the commercial use occupies a minimum of
60% of the total floor area of the structure, the residential use is
limited to a single unit, both uses are served by central sewerage
service and adequate off-street parking serving the residential use
is provided. [Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-13]
C. Area and bulk requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet.
(2) Minimum setbacks:
(a) Front yard: 10 feet.
(b) Side yard: 10 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 20 feet.
(3) Minimum road frontage: 50 feet.
(4) Minimum mean lot width: 50 feet.
(5) Maximum coverage of lot by impervious surfaces, including
buildings: 60%.
§ 176-125 WATERFORD CODE § 176-126
168:652
§ 176-126. Planned Highway Business District (PHB).
A. Principal uses.
(1) Commercial retail centers, individual retail units, and personal
service establishments fronting on arterial or major collector
rights-of way;
(2) Light manufacturing and assembly.
(3) Research, design, and experimental equipment operations
laboratories.
(4) Warehousing.
(5) Trades, general and professional office buildings.
(6) Wholesale.
(7) Conference center/lodging complex.
(8) Any combination of the above within a building or tract.
(9) Theaters, recreation/entertainment complex.
(10) Residential uses existing prior to the adoption of this chapter.
B. Conditional uses.
(1) Adult uses in compliance with Chapter 175, Sexually Oriented
Businesses, of the Township of Waterford Code, and § 176-104D.
(2) Automobile service and repair facilities in compliance with
§ 176-104G.
(3) New and used automobile and truck sales in compliance with
§ 176-104H.
(4) Car wash in compliance with § 176-104K.
(5) Fast food restaurants in compliance with § 176-104M.
(6) Gas stations in compliance with § 176-104N.
(7) Hospitals, philanthropic clinics, nursing homes and convalescent
centers in compliance with § 176-104P.
(8) Commercial-scale solar power arrays and support equipment
conditioned upon documented findings that appropriate buffering
and mitigation if any other adverse impacts to adjacent uses is
demonstrated. [Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-13]
(9) Commercial solar-generating facilities subject to the following
standards: [Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-13]
(a) Minimum lot setback of 100 feet.
§ 176-126 INSURANCE § 176-126
168:653
(b) Minimum lot size of five acres.
(c) Maximum coverage by the proposed array field: 60%.
(d) Adequate security provisions.
(e) Adequate access provisions.
(f) Commercial solar-generating facilities shall be located and
screened in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.36(a)2.
[Amended 3-13-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-1]
C. Area and bulk requirements.
(1) Minimum tract for planned development: 10 acres.
(a) Minimum interior lot area: one acre.
(b) Minimum setbacks:
[1] Front yard:
[a] Interior right-of-way: 40 feet.
[b] Exterior right-of-way: 100 feet.
[2] Side yard:
[a] Interior: 40 feet.
[b] Exterior: 75 feet.
[3] Rear yard:
[a] Interior: 40 feet.
[b] Exterior: 75 feet.
(c) Minimum road frontage (exterior): 100 feet.
(d) Minimum mean lot width: 100 feet.
(e) Maximum building coverage: 50%.
(f) Maximum lot coverage: 80%.
(g) Maximum tract coverage: 75%.
(2) Individual site development.
(a) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(b) Minimum setbacks:
[1] Front yard:
[a] County or state right-of-way: 100 feet.
§ 176-126 WATERFORD CODE § 176-126
168:654
§ 176-127. Planned Light Industrial District (PI).
[b] Other: 60 feet.
[2] Side yard: 40 feet (except 100 feet when abutting
residential zones).
[3] Rear yard: 60 feet (except 100 feet when abutting
residential zones).
(c) Minimum road frontage: 150 feet.
(d) Minimum mean lot width: 150 feet.
(e) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
(f) Maximum lot coverage: 65%.
A. Principal uses:
(1) Office buildings and research facilities.
(2) Warehousing, including shipping and receiving of goods and
supplies.
(3) Manufacturing, fabrication and assembly.
(4) Automobile service and repair facilities in compliance with
§ 176-104G.
(5) Residential uses existing prior to the adoption of this chapter.
(6) Commercial recreational and entertainment facilities.
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Adult uses in compliance with § 176-104D.
(2) Automobile sales and service establishments in compliance with
§ 176-104H.
(3) Car wash in compliance with § 176-104K.
(4) Gas station in compliance with § 176-104N.
(5) Hospital, philanthropic clinic, nursing home and convalescent
center in compliance with § 176-104P.
(6) Pinelands resource-related industrial or manufacturing facility in
compliance with § 176-104Q.
(7) Public utility installations in compliance with § 176-104S.
(8) Hotels and motels on parcels of at least three acres.
§ 176-126 INSURANCE § 176-127
168:655
(9) Commercial scale solar generating facilities subject to the
following conditions: [Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-13;
amended 3-13-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-1]
(a) Facilities may occupy any previously disturbed portions of a
parcel that have not subsequently been restored. The clearing
of additional lands to accommodate a proposed solar energy
facility may also be permitted, provided the percentage of
cleared land on any parcel does not exceed 30%, taking into
consideration both existing and proposed clearing.
(b) Facilities should be sited to avoid lands with high ecological
values, such as undisturbed woodlands, wetlands, rare or
critical floral/faunal species habitats.
(c) Additional approval conditions required include:
[1] A minimum setback of 300 feet from any public right-ofway
to the facility.
[2] A minimum setback of 500 feet from any wild and scenic
river to the facility.
[3] A minimum setback of 500 feet to any occupied residential
use or residentially zoned parcel.
[4] A minimum setback of 500 feet to any low-intensity
recreational facilities and campgrounds.
[5] A visual impact analysis depicting the proposed array from
a series of perspectives, including all wild and scenic
rivers, public rights-of-way, low-intensity recreational
facilities and campgrounds, and residential properties
within 0.5 mile of the subject parcel emphasizing how
glare is to be minimized and to indicate buffering
provisions.
[6] Description of natural and/or installed buffers designed to
shield the array from wild and scenic rivers, public rightsof
way, low-intensity recreational facilities and
campgrounds, and residential uses within close proximity.
[7] A tree survey which provides an inventory of all mature
(six inches of greater dbh) trees being removed to
accommodate the array, along with a compensatory
planning and maintenance plan indicating how and where
these specimens are to be replaced.
[8] A description of how the project would be accessed for
maintenance, as well as by fire, police and EMS personnel.
[9] A description and details of perimeter security measures.
§ 176-127 WATERFORD CODE § 176-127
168:656
§ 176-128. Recreation/Conservation District (RC).
C. Area and bulk requirements.
(1) See § 176-126C(1) and (2) as to bulk requirement other than
minimum lot size.
(2) This district is not part of the regional growth area of the Township
and is not serviced by public sewer. All proposed development must
meet the environmental standards of two ppm for nitrate dilution at
property boundaries. Minimum lot size requirements will be
established based upon specific use area required to meet these
standards.
A. Principal uses:
(1) Single-family detached houses, provided that clustering of the
permitted units shall be required in accordance with § 176-136
whenever two or more units are proposed as part of a residential
development. [Amended 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
(2) Single-family units on lots of 3.2 acres, in accordance with
§ 176-57A, or on one acre in accordance with § 176-57B or 176-121.
(3) Agricultural.
(4) Agricultural employee housing as an element of and necessary to
an active agricultural operation.
(5) Forestry.
(6) Low-intensity recreational uses in compliance with § 176-104J(2).
(7) Expansion of intensive recreational uses in compliance with
§ 176-104J(3).
(8) Public service infrastructure intended to primarily serve the needs
of the Pinelands. Centralized wastewater treatment and collection
facilities shall be permitted to service the Recreation/Conservation
District only in accordance with § 176-101.
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Institutional uses in compliance with § 176-104U, provided that:
(a) The use does not require or will not generate subsidiary or
satellite development in the forest area;
(b) The applicant has demonstrated that adequate public service
infrastructure will be available to serve the use; and
(c) The use is primarily designed to serve the needs of the forest
area in which the use is to be located.
§ 176-127 INSURANCE § 176-128
168:657
§ 176-129. Agricultural District (AG).
(2) Pinelands resource-related industrial or manufacturing uses,
excluding resource extraction and uses that rely on sand or gravel
as raw products, in compliance with § 176-104Q.
(3) Campgrounds, not to exceed one campsite per gross acre, provided
that the campsites may be clustered at a net density not to exceed
10 campsites per acre.
(4) Agricultural commercial establishments in compliance with
§ 176-104E and providing that the principal goods or products
available for sale were produced in the Pinelands; and
(5) Roadside retail sales and service establishments (farmers' markets)
in compliance with § 176-104E, and provided that the proposed use
will not unduly burden public services, including (but not limited
to) water, sewer and roads.
(6) Continuation of existing resource extraction operations in
accordance with the standards of N.J.A.C. 7:50-6, Part VI, and
§ 176-12G.
(7) Nonclustered residential development in accordance with
§ 176-104V. [Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
C. Area and bulk requirements:
(1) Minimum lot size: 3.2 acres.
(2) Density: one dwelling unit per 37.6 acres.
(3) Minimum setbacks:
(a) Front yard: 200 feet. See § 176-52G for additional design
standards;
(b) Side yard: 50 feet;
(c) Rear yard: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum road frontage: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum mean lot width: 200 feet.
(6) Maximum coverage of lot by impervious surfaces, including
buildings: 20%.
A. Principal uses:
(1) Single-family units on lots of 3.2 acres, in accordance with
§ 176-57A, or on one acre in accordance with § 176-57B or 176-121.
(2) Residential dwelling units at a density of one unit per 10 acres,
provided that:
§ 176-128 WATERFORD CODE § 176-129
168:658
(a) The dwelling is accessory to an active agricultural operation;
(b) The dwelling is for an operator or employee of the farm who is
actively engaged in and essential to the agricultural operation;
(c) The dwelling is to be located on a lot that is under or qualified
for agricultural assessment;
(d) The dwelling is located on a lot which has an active production
history or where a farm management plan has been prepared
which demonstrates that the property will be farmed as a unit
unto itself or as part of another farm operation in the area;
(e) A residential lot has not been subdivided from the property
within the previous five years unless the lot has been
subdivided pursuant to § 176-57; and
(f) No more than one lot may be created for a dwelling pursuant to
this subsection at any one time.
(3) Agriculture.
(4) Agriculture employee housing as an element of and accessory to an
active agricultural operation.
(5) Forestry.
(6) Low-intensity recreational uses in compliance with § 176-104J(2).
(7) Expansion of intensive recreational uses in compliance with
§ 176-104J(3).
(8) Agricultural commercial establishments in compliance with
§ 176-104E and provided that the principal goods or products
available for sale were produced in the Pinelands.
(9) Agricultural products processing facilities.
(10) Public service infrastructure.
(11) Centralized wastewater treatment and collection facilities shall be
permitted to service the Agricultural District only in accordance
with § 176-101.
(12) Pinelands development credits.
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Pinelands resource-related industrial or manufacturing uses,
excluding resource extraction and uses that rely on sand or gravel
as raw products, in compliance with § 176-104Q.
(2) Airports and heliports which are accessory to agricultural uses and
are used exclusively for the storage, fueling, loading and operation
§ 176-129 INSURANCE § 176-129
168:659
of aircraft as a part of an ongoing agricultural operation, in
compliance with § 176-104F.
(3) Fish and wildlife management, and wetlands management.
[Amended 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
(4) Residential dwelling units at a gross density of one unit per 40
acres, provided that:
(a) The units shall be clustered on one-acre lots;
(b) The remainder of the parcel, including all contiguous lands in
common ownership, which is not assigned to individual
residential lots shall be permanently dedicated for agricultural
uses through recordation of a restriction on the deed to the
property; and
(c) The restriction on the deed to the parcel, including any rights
to be redeemed for future residential development, shall be
done in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-5, Part IV, to sever any
Pinelands development credits allocated to the parcel.
(5) Commercial-scale solar array projects subject to the following
conditions: [Added 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-13]
(a) Facilities may occupy up to 20% of a parcel, but cannot exceed
10 acres overall.
(b) Facilities should be sited to avoid:
[1] Prime farmlands as classified by the Natural Resource
Conservation Service (NRCS).
[2] Development should avoid lands with high ecological
values, such as undisturbed woodlands, wetlands, rare or
critical floral/faunal species habitats.
[3] These lands within the district utilized for facilities will not
be eligible for Pinelands development credits (PDCs)
unless the energy facilities are decommissioned in the
future.
(c) Additional approval conditions required include:
[1] A minimum setback of 300 feet from any public right-ofway
to the array.
[2] A minimum setback of 500 feet to any occupied residential
use or residentially zoned parcel.
[3] A visual impact analysis depicting the proposed array from
a series of perspectives, including all public rights-of-way
and residential properties within 0.5 mile of the subject
§ 176-129 WATERFORD CODE § 176-129
168:660
§ 176-130. Pinelands Village District (PV).
parcel emphasizing how glare is to be minimized and to
indicate buffering provisions.
[4] Description of natural and/or installed buffers designed to
shield the array from both public rights-of-way, as well as
residential uses in proximity to it.
[5] A tree survey which provides an inventory of all mature
(six inches or greater dbh) trees being removed to
accommodate the array, along with a compensatory
planting and maintenance plan indicating how and where
these specimens are to be replaced.
[6] A description of how the project would be accessed for
maintenance, as well as by fire, police and EMS personnel.
[7] A description and details of perimeter security measures.
C. Area and bulk requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: see § 176-129A(1) and (2) and B(4) above.
(2) Minimum setbacks:
(a) Front yard: 200 feet [see § 176-52G for additional design
standards and § 176-129C(6) for additional bulk
requirements].
(b) Side yard: 40 feet [see § 176-129C(6)].
(c) Rear yard: 50 feet [see § 176-129C(6)].
(3) Minimum road frontage: 200 feet [see § 176-129C(6)].
(4) Minimum mean lot width: 200 feet [see § 176-129C(6)].
(5) Maximum coverage of lot by impervious surfaces, including
buildings: 20%.
(6) Any permitted development on an undersized, nonconforming lot in
the AG District must meet the bulk and setback requirements set
forth for the R1 District.
A. Principal uses: Any use permitted in the Residential Districts or Town
Commercial District, provided that:
(1) Public service infrastructure necessary to support the use is
available or can be provided without any development in the
Preservation District (PD).
(2) The character and magnitude of the use is compatible with existing
structures and uses in the Pinelands Village.
§ 176-129 INSURANCE § 176-130
168:661
§ 176-131. Preservation District (PD).
B. Conditional uses: as permitted in the Residential or Town Commercial
Districts.
C. Area and bulk requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(2) Minimum setbacks:
(a) Front yard: 60 feet.
(b) Side yard: 35 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 50 feet.
(3) Minimum road frontage: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum mean lot width: 100 feet.
(5) Maximum coverage of lot by impervious surfaces, including
buildings: 15%.
A. Principal uses:
(1) Residential dwellings on lots of 3.2 acres, in accordance with
§ 176-57A.
(2) Agricultural employee housing as an element of and accessory to
an active agricultural operation.
(3) Berry agriculture and horticulture of native plants and other
activities compatible with the existing soil and water conditions
that support traditional Pinelands berry agriculture.
(4) Forestry.
(5) Beekeeping.
(6) Fish and wildlife management and wetlands management.
[Amended 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
(7) Low-intensity recreational uses, provided that:
(a) The parcel proposed for low-intensity recreational use has an
area of at least 50 acres.
(b) The recreational use does not involve the use of motorized
vehicles except for necessary transportation.
(c) Access to bodies of water is limited to no more than 15 linear
feet of frontage per 1,000 feet of water body frontage.
§ 176-130 WATERFORD CODE § 176-131
168:662
(d) The parcel will contain no more than one campsite per two
acres, provided that the campsites, if clustered, will not exceed
a net density of six per acre.
(e) Clearing of vegetation, including ground cover and soil
disturbance does not exceed 5% of the parcel; and
(f) No more than 1% of the parcel will be covered with impervious
surfaces. [Amended 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
(8) Expansion of intensive recreational uses, provided that:
(a) The intensive recreational use was in existence on February 7,
1979, and the capacity of the use will not exceed two times the
capacity of the use on February 7, 1979;
(b) The use is necessary to achieve recreational use of a particular
element of the existing Pinelands environment; and
(c) The use is environmentally and aesthetically compatible with
the character of the Preservation Area District and the
characteristics of the particular basin in which the use is to be
located, taking into consideration the proportion of cleared
and developed land, ambient water quality, ecologically
sensitive areas and unique resources, and will not unduly
burden public services.
(9) Public service infrastructure that is necessary to serve only the
needs of the Preservation Area uses. Centralized wastewater
treatment and collection facilities shall be permitted to service the
Preservation District only in accordance with § 171-101.
(10) Continuation of resource extraction operations in accordance with
the standards of N.J.A.C. 7:50-6, Part VI.
(11) Pinelands development credits.
B. Area and bulk requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: 3.2 acres or one acre (see § 176-57A and B).
(2) Minimum setbacks:
(a) Front yard: 200 feet.
(b) Side yard: 50 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 100 feet.
(3) Minimum road frontage: 200 feet.
(4) Minimum mean lot width: 200 feet.
(5) Maximum coverage of lot by impervious surfaces, including
buildings: 5% for 3.2 acres; 15% for one acre.
§ 176-131 INSURANCE § 176-132
168:663
§ 176-132. Public Facilities (PF).
§ 176-133. Office Professional (OP).
A. Principal uses:
(1) Schools, educational facilities, public or private.
(2) Places of worship.
(3) Nonresidential senior citizen activity center.
(4) Municipal and other governmental uses and structures.
(5) Utilities and public works facilities.
(6) Fire and emergency service facilities.
(7) Cemeteries.
(8) Those properties included in the PF District that are privately
owned as of the effective date of this chapter may be developed in
accordance with the area and bulk requirements of the PV District.
(9) Residential uses existing prior to the adoption of this chapter.
B. Area and bulk requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(2) Minimum setbacks:
(a) Front yard: 50 feet.
(b) Side yard: 25 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 35 feet.
(3) Minimum road frontage: 200 feet.
(4) Minimum mean lot width: 200 feet.
(5) Maximum coverage of lot by impervious surfaces, including
buildings: 30%.
A. Principal uses:
(1) Offices of commonly recognized professionals similar to physicians,
attorneys, dentists, accountants, architects, planners and
engineers. This shall not be construed to include real estate offices
and insurance offices, licensed public movers, general contractors,
barbering, hairstyling.
(2) Residential uses as permitted in R1 Zone in accordance with the
bulk requirements of that zone.
§ 176-132 WATERFORD CODE § 176-133
168:664
§ 176-134. Rural Public Facilities (RPF).
B. Conditional uses: Professional office uses, as noted in Subsection A(1),
may be developed and operated within single-family homes on lots of
one acre or greater with frontage along Atco Avenue, so long as the
home is the primary residence of the professional, both uses are served
by central sanitary sewer, adequate off-street parking is provided for
both uses, and the office space does not occupy more than 40% of total
structural square footage. It must be demonstrated that the proposed
hours of operation, traffic, lighting and noise impacts will not generate
adverse impacts to the local neighborhood. [Added 9-12-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-13]
C. Area and bulk requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(2) Minimum setbacks:
(a) Front yard: 60 feet.
(b) Side yard: 25 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 50 feet.
(3) Minimum road frontage: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum mean lot width: 100 feet.
(5) Maximum coverage of lot by impervious surfaces, including
buildings: 25%.
A. Principal uses:
(1) Schools, educational facilities, recreational facilities public or
private.
(2) Churches and houses of worship.
(3) Nonresidential senior citizen activity center.
(4) Municipal and other governmental uses and structures.
(5) Utilities and other public works facilities.
(6) Fire and emergency service facilities.
(7) Cemeteries.
(8) Those properties included in the RPF District that are privately
owned as of the effective date of this chapter may be developed in
accordance with the area and bulk requirements of the RR District.
(9) Residential uses existing prior to the adoption of this chapter.
§ 176-133 INSURANCE § 176-134
168:665
§ 176-135. Rural Neighborhood Business (RNB).
B. Area and bulk requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(2) Minimum setbacks:
(a) Front yard: 50 feet.
(b) Side yard: 25 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 35 feet.
(3) Minimum road frontage: 200 feet.
(4) Minimum mean lot width: 200 feet.
(5) Maximum coverage of lot by impervious surfaces, including
buildings: 25%.
A. Principal uses:
(1) Principal uses permitted in the NB District.
(2) Residential uses existing prior to the adoption of this chapter.
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Restaurants, excluding fast food, subject to exhaust systems being
vented to avoid creating a nuisance to adjoining uses or properties,
and subject to compliance with Article VIII.
(2) Businesses where alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed
subject to compliance with Article VIII. No outside service or
seating area will be permitted to avoid noise that will create a
nuisance to adjoining uses and properties.
(3) Adult uses in compliance with Chapter 175, Sexually Oriented
Businesses, of the Township of Waterford Code, and § 176-104D.
(4) Automobile service and repair facilities in compliance with
§ 176-104G.
C. Area and bulk requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(2) Minimum setbacks:
(a) Front yard: 50 feet.
(b) Side yard: 25 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 35 feet.
§ 176-134 WATERFORD CODE § 176-135
168:666
§ 176-136. Residential cluster development. [Added 9-12-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-15]
In the RC and RR Zones, clustering of single-family detached dwellings
shall be required whenever two or more units are proposed as part of a
residential development. The following standards shall apply:
(3) Minimum road frontage: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum mean lot width: 100 feet.
(5) Maximum coverage of lot by impervious surfaces, including
buildings: 30%.
A. Permitted density:
(1) In the RC Zone: one unit per 37.6 acres; and
(2) In the RR Zone: one unit per 5.7 acres.
B. The number of residential lots permitted within the cluster shall be
calculated on the basis of the size of the parcel of land and the density
permitted in Subsection A above, with a bonus applied as follows:
Parcel Size RR Zone RC Zone
Less than 50 acres 0 0
50 to 99.99 acres 15% 25%
100 to 149.99 acres 20% 30%
Greater than or equal
to 150 acres
25% 40%
C. The residential cluster shall be located on the parcel such that the
development area:
(1) Is located proximate to existing roads;
(2) Is located proximate to existing developed sites on adjacent or
nearby parcels;
(3) Is or will be appropriately buffered from adjoining or nearby
nonresidential land uses; and
(4) Conforms with the minimum environmental standards of N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.
D. Development within the residential cluster shall be designed as follows:
(1) Residential lots shall be one acre in size but may be larger if
dictated by unusual site conditions. In no case shall the average
size of residential lots within a cluster exceed 1.1 acres.
§ 176-135 INSURANCE § 176-136
168:667
(2) The minimum bulk requirements specified in § 176-130C for
residential development in the Pinelands Village District shall
apply.
(3) Individual on-site septic wastewater treatment systems which are
intended to reduce the level of nitrate/nitrogen in the waste that
comply with the standards of § 176-101B(4) may serve the lots
within the cluster development area. However, in the event that
existing agricultural uses will continue on the parcel in accordance
with Subsection E(2)(b) below, individual on-site septic wastewater
treatment systems shall comply with the standards of
§ 176-101B(5) or (7). Community on-site wastewater treatment
systems serving two or more residential dwelling units which meet
the standards of § 176-101B(5) or (7) shall also be permitted.
(4) The residential cluster development area shall include such land
and facilities as are necessary to support the development,
including wastewater facilities, stormwater management facilities
and recreation amenities; and
(5) Permitted recreation amenities may include playgrounds, tot lots,
swimming pools, tennis courts and other such recreational
facilities, which are solely for use by the residents of the cluster
development. Recreational amenities shall not be limited to the
foregoing so that the applicant may propose additional facilities. All
such facilities shall be accessory to the residential cluster
development. No advertising or commercial enterprise shall be
permitted. In no case may such amenities occupy more than 1/2
acre of land or the equivalent of one acre of land for every 25
residential lots, whichever is greater.
E. On major subdivisions, the balance of the parcel located outside of the
residential cluster development shall be owned and managed by a duly
constituted homeowners' association, a nonprofit conservation
organization, Waterford Township, or as a separate lot to be owned by
one of the owners in the cluster development. On minor subdivisions,
the balance of the parcel located outside of the residential cluster
development shall be a deed restricted separate lot to be owned by one
of the owners in the cluster development.
(1) All such land shall be permanently protected through recordation
of a deed of conservation restriction. Such restriction shall be in
favor Waterford Township or another public agency or nonprofit
conservation organization. In all cases, such restriction shall be
expressly enforceable by the Pinelands Commission; and
(2) The deed of restriction shall permit the parcel to be managed for:
(a) Low-intensity recreation, ecological management and forestry,
provided that no more than 5% of the land may be cleared, no
more than 1% of the land may be covered with impervious
surfaces and any such uses or activities are approved and
§ 176-136 WATERFORD CODE § 176-136
168:668
conducted in accordance with the requirements of Chapter
176;
(b) Where agricultural use exists on a parcel proposed for cluster
development, the following standards shall apply:
[1] For those agricultural uses in existence as of April 6, 2009,
the deed of restriction may provide for the continuation of
agricultural uses and the expansion of the area of
agricultural use by up to 50%;
[2] For those agricultural uses established after April 6, 2009,
the deed of restriction may provide for the continuation of
agricultural uses, provided the agricultural use has been
in existence for a period of at least five years prior to
submission of an application for cluster development;
[3] For those agricultural uses established after April 6, 2009
which do not meet the standards of Subsection E(2)(b)[1]
or [2] above, the deed of restriction shall permit the land to
be managed only in accordance with Subsection E(2)(a)
above and shall not provide for continuation of any
agricultural use on the parcel;
[4] The deed of restriction to be recorded pursuant to
Subsection E(2)(b)[1] or [2] above shall authorize
agricultural uses and provide that impervious surface may
not exceed that which currently exists or 3%, whichever is
greater, unless a resource management system plan has
been prepared. Before these impervious surface limits may
be exceeded, evidence of Pinelands Commission approval
of the resource management system plan shall be
provided. If the deed of restriction is in favor of Camden
County or the State Agricultural Development Committee,
evidence of their approval shall also be provided; and
[5] For parcels which meet the standards of Subsection
E(2)(b)[1] or [2] above, a provision shall be recorded in the
deed for each residential lot within the cluster
development area which acknowledges agricultural use of
the protected land outside the cluster development area
and recognizes the legal protections afforded to that use
through the deed of restriction and any applicable
statutes.
§ 176-136 INSURANCE § 176-136
168:669
Chapter 180
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 235.
§ 180-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Litter Control Ordinance."
§ 180-2. Definitions.
The following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meanings given herein unless their use in the text clearly demonstrates a
different meaning:
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Includes any handbill which:
CONSTRUCTION SITES — Includes any private or public property upon
which repairs to existing buildings, construction of new buildings or
demolition of existing structures is taking place.
ELEMENTS — Includes any element, whether created by nature or created
by man, which with reasonable foreseeability could carry litter from one
place to another. "Elements" shall include but not be limited to air current,
rain, water current and animals.
HANDBILL — Includes any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed matter or
literature which is not delivered by United States mail, except that
"handbill" shall not include a newspaper.
LITTER — Includes any uncontainerized man-made or man-used waste
which, if deposited within the township otherwise than in a litter receptacle,
Advertises for sale or promotional gifts or prizes any merchandise,
product, commodity or thing.
A.
Directs attention to any business or other activity for the purpose of
either directly or indirectly promoting the interests thereof by sales or
by other means.
B.
Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, exhibition, theatrical or
other performance or event of any kind for which an admission fee is
charged.
C.
While containing reading or pictorial matter other than advertising
matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is
distributed or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private
benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
D.
§ 176-136 WATERFORD CODE § 180-2
180:670
tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare or to impair
the environment of the people of the Township. "Litter" may include but is
not limited to any garbage, trash, refuse, confetti, debris, grass clippings
or other lawn or garden waste, newspaper, magazine, glass, metal, plastic
or paper container or other constructions material, motor vehicle part,
furniture, oil, carcass of a dead animal or nauseous or offensive matter of
any kind or any object likely to injure any person or create a traffic hazard.
Additionally, "litter" may include any used or unconsumed substance or
waste material which has been discarded, whether made of aluminum,
glass, plastic, rubber, paper or other natural or synthetic material, or any
combination thereof, including but not limited to any bottle, jar or can or
any top, cap or detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted
cigarette, cigar, match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage,
trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden
waste, newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or
other packaging or construction material but does not include the waste
of the primary processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging,
sawmilling, farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLES — Include any container which is designed to
receive litter and to prevent the escape of litter deposited therein, which
is of such size or sufficient capacity to hold all litter generated between
collection periods.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a dwelling
or premises or a part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge and
consent of the owner.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall
have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof; or shall have charge, care or control of any
dwelling unit as owner or as executor, executrix, administrator,
administratrix, trustee, receiver or guardian of the estate or as a mortgagee
in possession, regardless of how such possession was obtained. Any person
who is a lessee subletting or reassigning any part of all of any dwelling or
dwelling unit shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor and shall
have joint responsibility over the portion of the premises sublet or assigned
by said lessee.
PARK — Includes a public or private park, reservation, playground, beach,
recreation center or any public or private area devoted to active or passive
recreation.
PARKING LOTS — Includes any private or public property with provisions
for parking vehicles to which the public is invited or which the public
is permitted to use or which is visible from any public place or private
premises.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Includes any dwelling house, building or other
structure designed to be used, either wholly or in part, for private
residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway,
§ 180-2 LITTERING § 180-2
180:671
porch, steps, vestibule, mailbox or other structure belonging or appurtenant
to such dwelling house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes,
alleys or other public ways and parks, squares, plazas, grounds and
buildings frequented by the general public, whether publicly or privately
owned.
§ 180-3. Prohibited acts.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place litter of any nature upon any public or private property other than
in a litter receptacle.
B. No person shall throw, scatter or cast any kind of handbill in or upon
any public place within the township; and no person shall hand out or
distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place; provided,
however, that it shall not be unlawful for any person to hand out or
distribute handbills or any other thing which is otherwise permitted and
authorized by law in any public place to any person willing to accept
such handbill or other thing, without payment therefor.
C. No person shall deposit, fasten, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or
upon any vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to
prohibit the handing of any noncommercial handbill to the owner or
other occupant of any vehicle who is willing to accept it without
payment therefor.
D. No person shall place any handbill in or upon any private premises
which are vacant, unless attached in such a manner as not to deface the
property.
E. No person shall place any handbill upon any premises if requested by
anyone thereon not to do so or if there is placed on the premises in a
conspicuous position near any entrance thereof a sign bearing notice
indicating in any manner that the occupants of said premises do not
desire to have any such handbills left upon said premises.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or dump along any street
or road or wooded area or private property on or off any right-of-way
any household or commercial solid waste, rubbish, refuse, junk, vehicle
or vehicle parts, rubber tires, appliances or furniture in any place not
specifically designated for the purpose of solid waste storage or
disposal.
G. It shall be unlawful to permit overflowing waste disposal bins.
H. It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or contractor in charge of a
construction or demolition site to permit the accumulation of litter
before, during or immediately following completion of any construction
or demolition project.LeftCorner="§ 180-4"RightCorner="§ 180-5"
§ 180-2 WATERFORD CODE § 180-4
180:672
§ 180-4. Litter receptacles.
§ 180-5. Recovery of expenses; establishment of lien program.
A. Every owner, operator, person or persons in charge of or control of any
public place shall provide adequate litter receptacles of sizes, numbers
and types as required to contain all litter generated from the utilization
of such public places. By way of explanation and not of limitation, litter
receptacles and their servicing are required at the following public
places which exist in the township, including sidewalks used by
pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned areas, buildings held
out for use by the public, including schools, government buildings, and
railroad and bus stations; parks; drive-in restaurants; all street vendor
locations; self-service refreshment areas; construction sites; gasoline
service stations islands; shopping centers; parking lots; campgrounds
and trailer parks; marinas, boat moorage and fueling stations; boat
launching areas; public and private piers operated for public use;
beaches and bathing areas; and at special events to which the public is
invited, including sporting events, parades, carnivals, circuses and
festivals.
B. The owners, occupants or those in control of the aforesaid public
premises are responsible for the servicing of the litter receptacles in
order that adequate containerization is supplied and in order that the
area around the litter receptacles is maintained in a clean and neat
manner at all times.
A. The litter problem has become acute within the township. The cost of
litter removal has become a significant expense. It is intended that
those responsible for such expenses shall bear the costs of the same. In
the event that the owner, operator or other person or persons in
possession of the property or lands wherein the litter has accumulated
shall refuse or neglect to abate or remedy the condition of
uncleanliness, the township may cause the condition to be abated and
remedied. In those instances where the appropriate party shall have
refused or neglected to remove the prohibited materials within five (5)
days of receiving a notice of violation, the municipality may cause the
removal of the prohibited materials or litter and the cost thereof shall
be certified to the municipality. Said cost shall be a charge upon the
lands and premises where the prohibited materials were stored, and
said charges shall be recoverable in the same manner as any other civil
action.
B. In addition to the foregoing procedure, the cost for the removal of the
litter or other prohibited materials shall be assessed as a lien upon the
affected property, to be collected as taxes or liens, in accordance with
the appropriate state statutes.
§ 180-4 LITTERING § 180-6
180:673
§ 180-6. Violations and penalties.145
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before the
Municipal Court of the township, be subject to a fine not exceeding one
thousand dollars ($1,000.) or imprisonment in a county jail for a term
not exceeding ninety (90) days or a period of community service not to
exceed ninety (90) days, or any combination thereof, in the discretion of
the Municipal Judge before whom such defendant shall be convicted. A
separate offense may be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 184
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 82.
Curfew — See Ch. 112.
Drug-Free School zones — See Ch. 118.
Parks on recreation areas — See Ch. 201.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 208.
Pool and billiard parlors — See Ch. 214.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 239.
§ 184-1. Loitering prohibited. [Amended 11-7-1979 by Ord.No.
79-19]
Any person or persons loitering in a vehicle and/or standing on the street,
sidewalk, curb, highway, road, alley or other public grounds, places or
buildings or on the grounds of a place of business shall move or separate
when required to do so by the police and shall cease to occupy such position
if his conduct:
§ 184-2. Violations and penalties.146
Any person or persons, firm or corporation who or which violates any
provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days
A. Is intended to provoke a breach of the peace or whereby a breach of the
peace may be occasioned.
B. Acts in such a manner as to annoy, disturb, interfere with or obstruct or
be offensive to others.
C. Warrants alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity.
145. Editor's Note:Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
146. Editor's Note:Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 180-6 WATERFORD CODE § 184-2
184:674
or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination
thereof.
Chapter 188
BUSINESS REGISTRATION PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Registration of contractors — See Ch. 106.
Fees — See Ch. 124.
Land use, development and zoning — See Ch.
176.
§ 188-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise stated, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this
chapter, have the meanings indicated in this section:
BUSINESS ENTITY — Any new or existing commercial business, trade,
profession, occupation, or service conducted in the Township of Waterford.
BUSINESS REGISTRATION PERMIT — The permit issued to any business
entity.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
§ 188-2. Permit required.
No person or business entity shall engage in or carry on any business, trade,
profession, occupation or service, including any business entity licensed by
the State of New Jersey or the government of the United States, unless a
permit as herein provided for shall have been first obtained by said person
or business entity engaging in said business, trade, profession, occupation
or service.
§ 188-3. Application; display of permit.
A. An application for a business registration permit shall be made to the
Township Clerk of the Township of Waterford, and the permit shall
specify, by name, the person, firm or corporation to which it is granted
and the location at which such business, trade, profession, occupation
cr service is conducted. In the event the applicant is a corporation, the
name and address of its registered agent must be included on the
application.
B. The business registration permit shall be conspicuously displayed on
the premises where the business is conducted.
§ 184-2 LOITERING § 188-4
184:675
§ 188-4. Compliance with land use regulations; zoning permit.
Upon an application being made, the Township Clerk shall provide a copy
to the Township Planning and Zoning Official, who shall review the type
of business entity and the location of the business entity to determine
compliance with the Township Land Use, Development and Zoning
Ordinance. If the business entity is in compliance with the Township Land
Use, Development and Zoning Ordinance, a zoning permit shall be issued
and attached to the business registration permit. No business entity may
conduct a business, trade, profession, occupation or service without both a
business registration permit and a zoning permit.
§ 188-5. Renewal; expiration.
The business registration permit shall be renewed every two years from the
date of issue.
§ 188-6. Fee. [Amended 6-24-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-11]
On January 1 of each license renewal year which is a two-year licensing
term, all business entities operating within the boundaries of the Township
of Waterford shall pay a fee in the sum of $50 for a business registration
fee for a two-year period. This fee shall permit businesses to be in good
standing for a two-year period from the January 1 issuance date of the
registration, accordingly on a biannual basis. For any new business, the
business registration fee shall be an initial fee of $25 plus the two-year
business registration fee of $50 for the business registration period as
indicated hereinabove.
§ 188-7. License to be exclusive.
No person or persons shall be allowed to transact a business under any
permit granted pursuant to this chapter except the business for which said
permit was granted.
§ 188-8. Compliance; nontransferability.
A. No business registration permit shall be issued to any person or entity
who has not complied with the laws of the State of New Jersey or the
ordinances of the Township of Waterford as to regulations concerning
the safety of the persons who may have occasion to use the premises,
place or thing being permitted; and any person or business entity who
fails to comply with any state law or any ordinances after due notice
and an opportunity to be heard before the Township Committee shall be
subject to said permit being revoked.
B. No business registration permit provided for by this chapter shall be
transferred from one person to another person, and no permit shall
cover any other place of business other than that for which it was
issued.
§ 188-4 WATERFORD CODE § 188-8
184:676
§ 188-9. Nonapplicability.
§ 188-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any section of this
chapter shall, upon conviction before the Judge of the Municipal Court or
any other office having jurisdiction, be subject to the following fines:
Chapter 192
NOISE CONTROL
§ 192-1. Declaration of findings and policy; scope.
C. In the event of a sale of a business, an expansion of the existing
business use, a change in the existing business use, or a change in
ownership, a new application is required to be filed with the Township
Clerk.
A. This chapter shall not apply to:
(1) Persons who have a home office that is restricted to computer and
telephone communications and does not create an increase in
traffic in residential neighborhoods; or
(2) To the delivery of newspapers, magazines or periodicals.
B. This chapter shall not apply to any residents situated within the
Township who utilize their own property for the selling of farm products
locally grown within the Township.
A. First offense: $150.
B. Second offense: $300.
C. Any subsequent offense: $500.
A. Excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health, welfare, safety,
and the quality of life.
B. A substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive
sound may be substantially abated.
C. Township residents have a right to and should be ensured an
environment free from excessive sound.
D. It is the policy of Township Committee to prevent excessive sound that
may jeopardize the health, welfare, or safety of the citizens or degrade
the quality of life.
E. This chapter shall apply to the control of sound within the limits of the
Township.
§ 188-8 LOITERING § 192-2
184:677
§ 192-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
COMMERCIAL AREA — A group of commercial facilities and the abutting
public rights-of-way and public spaces.
COMMERCIAL FACILITY — Any premises, property, or facility involving
traffic in goods or furnishing of services for sale or profit, including but not
limited to:
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action, but excluding demolition of buildings or
structures.
DECIBEL (dB) — The practical unit of measurement for sound pressure
level; the number of decibels of a measured sound is equal to 20 times the
logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the sound pressure of the measured
sound to the sound pressure of a standard sound (20 micropascals);
abbreviated "dB."
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, intentional destruction, or removal of
buildings or structures.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary to deliver essential
services, including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas, electricity,
telephone, sewer facilities, or public transportation facilities, removing
fallen trees on public rights-of-way, or abating life-threatening conditions.
INDUSTRIAL FACILITY — Any activity and its related premises, property,
facilities, or equipment involving the fabrication, manufacture, or
production of durable or nondurable goods.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled or drawn on land by an
engine or motor.
MUFFLER — A sound dissipative device or system for abating the sound of
escaping gasses of an internal combustion engine.
A. Banking and other financial institutions;
B. Dining establishments;
C. Establishments for providing retail services;
D. Establishments for providing wholesale services;
E. Establishments for recreation and entertainment;
F. Office buildings;
G. Transportation;
H. Warehouses;
I. Construction companies.
§ 192-2 WATERFORD CODE § 192-2
184:678
MULTI-DWELLING-UNIT BUILDING — Any building wherein there are two
or more dwelling units.
NOISE — Any sounds of such level and duration as to be or tend to
be injurious to human health or welfare, or which would unreasonably
interfere with the enjoyment of life or property throughout the Township or
in any portions thereof, but excludes all aspects of the employer-employee
relationship concerning health and safety hazards within the confines of a
place of employment.
NOISE CONTROL ADMINISTRATOR — The Waterford Township Zoning
Officer shall be designated as the official liaison with all municipal
departments and shall be empowered to grant permits for variations in
accordance with provisions of § 192-6.
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER — Officially designated officers of the
Waterford Police Department or of the Camden County Department of
Health, trained in the measurement of sound and empowered to issue a
summons for violations of this chapter.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound that:
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, association, society, firm,
partnership, joint-stock company, the state or any political subdivision,
agency or instrumentality of the state.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley that is leased, owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are owned,
leased, or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Either:
RESIDENTIAL AREA — A group of residential properties and the abutting
public rights-of-way and public spaces.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Property used for human habitation, including
but not limited to:
A. Endangers the safety or health of any person; or
B. Disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or
C. Endangers personal or real property.
The imaginary line, including its vertical extension that separates one
parcel of real property from another; or
A.
The vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is one in
a multi-dwelling-unit building.
B.
A. Private property used for human habitation;
Commercial living accommodations and commercial property used for
human habitation;
B.
§ 192-2 LOITERING § 192-2
184:679
SOUND LEVEL — The sound pressure level measured in decibels with a
sound level meter set for A-weighting; sound level is expressed in dBA.
SOUND LEVEL METER — An instrument used to measure sound level and
conforms to Type 1 or Type 2 standards as specified by ANSI specifications
S1.4-1971.
WEEKDAY — Any day, Monday through Friday, that is not a legal holiday.
WEEKEND — Saturday and Sunday.
§ 192-3. Maximum permissible sound levels.
§ 192-4. Prohibited acts.
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing or excessive noise in
violation of this chapter, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be
exclusive, namely:
C. Recreational and entertainment property used for human habitation;
D. Community service property used for human habitation.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be
made or continued any excessive or unusually loud noise, or to create a
noise disturbance within the limits of the Township except as provided
in this section.
B. An excessive or unusually loud noise shall be defined, for purposes of
this section, as any noise or sound that emanates past the boundary or
property from which it originates and by so doing creates a disturbance
for any of the contiguous property owners, or property owners in the
near vicinity.
A. Horns and signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling
device except as a danger warning signal or as provided in the Vehicle
Code of the State of New Jersey.
B. Radios, television sets and similar devices.
(1) Operating or permitting the use or operation of any exterior radio
receiving set, musical instrument, television, phonograph, drum or
other device for the production or reproduction of sound, except as
provided for in Subsection C below, in such a manner as to cause a
noise disturbance.
(2) Or operating any such device except between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and dusk or 8:00 p.m., whichever comes first.
C. Exterior loudspeakers. Using or operating any mechanical device or
loudspeaker in a fixed or movable position exterior to any building or
mounted upon any aircraft or motor vehicle such that the sound
therefrom is plainly audible at or beyond the property boundary of the
§ 192-2 WATERFORD CODE § 192-4
184:680
source, or on a public way, except by permit. The Land Use Board shall
have the authority to restrict and control the granting of permits.
D. Street sales. Selling anything by shouting or by outcry within any area
of the Township zoned primarily for residential uses, except by permit.
E. Animals. Owning, keeping, possessing or harboring any fowl or animal
for a continued duration which, by frequent or habitual howling,
barking, meowing, squawking or other noisemaking, causes a noise
disturbance across a residential property boundary. The noise
disturbance must exist for a minimum of 30 minutes intermittently or
10 minutes consistently.
F. Loading operations. Loading, unloading, opening, or otherwise
handling boxes, crates, containers, or otherwise similar objects,
construction materials, stones, soil, lumber, blocks, bricks, or similar
type objects and work-related equipment except between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and dusk or 8:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, whichever
comes first. Trash collection is specifically governed by contract. In no
event shall solid waste or recyclables be collected before 7:00 a.m.
Commercial/retail establishments may obtain an exemption from this
provision pursuant to § 192-6.
G. Construction noise. Operating or causing to be operated any equipment
used in residential, commercial or industrial construction, repair,
excavation, alteration or demolition work on buildings, structures,
streets, alleys or appurtenances thereto, in residential or commercial
land use categories, except on Monday through Friday between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and dusk or 8:00 p.m., whichever comes first, and on
Saturdays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and dusk or 6:00 p.m.,
whichever comes first. An existing single-family home may obtain an
exemption from this provision for Sunday pursuant to § 192-6.
H. Impulsive sources. The use of explosives or firing of guns or other
explosive devices.
I. Motor vehicle racing events. Operating or permitting the operation of
motor vehicle racing events at any place except an authorized track and
in a manner approved by the Township Committee to minimize noise
disturbance.
J. Powered model vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of
powered model vehicles except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
dusk or 8:00 p.m., whichever comes first.
K. Power equipment. Operating or permitting to be operated any power
saw, sander, drill, grinder, garden equipment or tools of like nature,
used primarily for domestic purposes, outdoors in residential zones
except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and dusk or 7:00 p.m., whichever
comes first, Monday through Saturday, and between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Sunday.
§ 192-4 LOITERING § 192-4
184:681
§ 192-5. Exceptions.
§ 192-6. Conditions for variation.
L. Gas-powered vehicles. The operation of any gas-powered vehicle
without a muffler shall be deemed a violation. This shall include, but is
not limited to, the "revving" of engines.
A. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency;
(2) The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work; or
(3) The emission of sound in situations within the jurisdiction of the
Federal Occupational Safety and Health Act.
B. Noise from municipally sponsored or approved celebrations or events
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.
A. Any person who owns or operates any noise source may apply to the
Department of Community Development for a variation, provided that
the reason for the application is to take care of a verifiable emergency
situation or for a particular purpose. The Township of Waterford
reserves the right to decide whether or not a true emergency exists.
Applications for a permit of variation shall supply information,
including, but not limited to:
(1) The nature and location of the noise source for which such
application is made;
(2) The reason for which the permit of variation is requested, including
the hardship that will result to the applicant, his/her client, or the
public if the permit of variation is not granted;
(3) The nature, intensity and times of day when noise that will occur
during the period of the variation;
(4) The subsection or subsections of this section for which the permit
of variation shall apply;
(5) A description of interim noise control measures to be taken by the
applicant to minimize noise and the impacts of occurring
therefrom; and
(6) A specific schedule of the noise control measures which shall be
taken to bring the source into compliance with this section within a
reasonable time.
B. Failure to supply the information required by the Department of
Community Development shall be cause for rejection of the application.
§ 192-4 WATERFORD CODE § 192-6
184:682
§ 192-7. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
C. A copy of the permit of variation must be kept on file by the Township
Clerk for public inspection.
D. The Department of Community Development shall charge the applicant
a fee of $50 to cover expenses resulting from the processing of the
permit on the variation application.
E. The Department of Community Development may, at their discretion,
limit the duration of the permit of variation, which shall be no longer
than 10 days unless otherwise authorized. Any person holding a permit
of variation and requesting an extension of time shall apply for a new
permit of variation under the provisions of this subsection.
F. No variation shall be approved unless the applicant presents adequate
proof that:
(1) Noise levels occurring during the period of the variation will not
constitute a danger to public health; and
(2) Compliance with this section would impose an arbitrary or
unreasonable hardship upon the applicant without equal or greater
benefits to the public.
G. In making the determination on granting a variation, the Department of
Community Development shall consider:
(1) The character and degree of injury to, or interference with, the
health and welfare or the reasonable use of property which is
caused or threatened to be caused.
(2) The social and economic value of the activity for which the
variation is sought.
(3) The ability of the applicant to apply best practical noise control
measures.
(4) The approval of the application for variation by the Chief of Police
and Township Council.
H. The permit of variation may be revoked by the Department of
Community Development if the terms of the permit of variation are
violated.
I. A variation may be revoked by the Department of Community
Development if there is:
(1) Violation of one or more conditions of the variation;
(2) Material misrepresentation of fact in the variation application; or
(3) Material change in any of the circumstances relied upon by the
Department of Community Development in issuing the permit.
§ 192-6 LOITERING § 192-7
184:683
Chapter 195
PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 112.
A. Penalties.
(1) Violations of any provision of this section shall be cause for a
summons to be issued by the Police Department, Community
Development, Building Code Department.
(a) First offense: a fine not less than $250 and not to exceed $500.
(b) Second offense: a fine of not less than $500 and not to exceed
$750.
(c) Subsequent offense: a fine not less than $1,000.
(2) In addition to a summons, any individual, organization, or
establishment that fails to abide by this section when required to do
so may be subject to closure and/or a cease-and-desist order.
B. Abatement orders.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection B(2) below, in lieu of issuing a
summons as provided in Subsection A, the above-named officials
may issue an order requiring abatement of any source of sound
alleged to be in violation of this section within a reasonable time
period and according to the guidelines which the Department of
Community Development may prescribe.
(2) An abatement order shall not be issued:
(a) If any person willfully or knowingly violates any provision of
this section; or
(b) If the Department of Community Development has reason to
believe that there will not be compliance with the abatement
order.
C. Other remedies. No provision of this section shall be construed to
impair any common law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy
therefrom, of any person for injury or damage arising from any
violations of this section or from other law.
§ 192-7 WATERFORD CODE § 195-1
195:684
§ 195-1. Offenses against public peace, safety and morals.
Offenses against public peace, safety and morals include violations of
Chapter 112, Curfew, of the Code of the Township of Waterford; defacing
the property of another (graffiti); destroying any property of another;
mugging; assaults; assault and battery; loitering in groups of three or
more on any public streets, highways or alleys; littering or destruction or
defacing of public property owned by the governments of the township,
county or state; destruction of playground equipment and public parks;
the consumption of alcoholic beverages on a public street; drunkenness;
begging; lack of supervision by a parent, legal guardian or other person
having the care or custody of a minor child under the age of 17 years (a
"person" is defined to include parents, guardians or persons having custody
or control of minor children); or indecent exposure.
§ 195-2. Violations and penalties.147
It shall be unlawful for any person to offend against the public peace, safety
and morals, as defined herein, or fail to supervise any minor under the age
of 17 years after appearing before a court of competent jurisdiction for any
violation of any statute or municipal ordinance, and shall be punishable by
a fine not exceeding $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days
or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination
thereof.
§ 195-3. Responsibility of parents or legal guardians; penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person having
the care or custody of a minor child under 17 years of age, by any act or by
any word or by the failure to act or by lack of supervision and control over
said minor child, to encourage, contribute toward, cause or tend to cause
said minor child to become neglected or delinquent by reason of activity
of said minor child within the Township of Waterford so as to come or
tend to come under the jurisdiction of the Juvenile Division of the Camden
County Juvenile and Domestic Relations Court knowing that said minor had
offended the public peace, safety and morals, including any criminal statute
of the State of New Jersey or ordinance of the Township of Waterford;
said parent, legal guardian or person having custody of said minor shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment not exceeding 90
days, or both.
§ 195-4. Supervision and control over minor children; curfew
restrictions; penalties.
A. It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person
having custody and care of any minor child under the age of 17 to
assist, aid, abet, allow, permit or encourage said minor to violate the
provisions of this chapter or any other chapter of the Township of
147. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 195-1 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 195-4
195:685
§ 195-5. Apprehension of youths or minors.
Any minor under the age of 17 who is apprehended for the violation of
this chapter or any laws of the State of New Jersey, ordinances of this
municipality or any federal statute shall be brought forthwith before a
Judge of the Juvenile Division of the Camden County Juvenile and Domestic
Relations Court; and the parent, legal guardian or other person having
care and custody of said minor shall be summoned or arrested and brought
before a Judge of the Municipal Court of the Township of Waterford when
said minor child is apprehended. Said minor child shall be held in the
children's shelter or the county jail according to the direction and orders
of the Judge of the Juvenile Division of the Juvenile and Domestic Relations
Court, and the parent, legal guardian or person having the custody of said
minor child as aforesaid, who shall fail to provide supervision of said minor,
as aforesaid, after the first offense by said minor, shall be subject to the
penalties herein provided.
Chapter 201
PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 82.
Animals — See Ch. 94.
Land development and zoning — See Ch. 176.
§ 201-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide within the public parks in and
of the Township of Waterford the minimum of regulations to preserve and
protect township parks for the safe and full enjoyment of all residents of the
township.
Waterford as defined herein, either by overt act, by failing to act or by
lack of supervision and control over said minor child.
B. The fact that a child under the age of 17 years is apprehended while on
any public street, highway, alley or park during curfew, as defined in
§ 112-2 of the Code of the Township of Waterford,148 as amended and
supplemented, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section on the part of the parent, legal guardian or other person having
custody or care of said minor; and said parent, guardian or person
having the custody and care of said minor shall be punished by a fine
not exceeding $500 or imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding 90
days, or both.
148. Editor's Note: See Ch. 112, Curfew.
§ 195-4 WATERFORD CODE § 201-2
195:686
§ 201-2. General provisions.
§ 201-3. Park hours; authority to close or open.
§ 201-4. Group use and permits.
Group use of parks or a portion thereof and reservation of facilities may be
permitted, provided that the following regulations are adhered to:
A. Waiver. Upon application, the Recreation Committee or Township
Committee may waive rules, regulations or sections of this chapter
when such waiver would be in the best interests of the public or
township.
B. Additional regulations and rules. The Township Committee may make
rules and regulations for the use of parks, playgrounds and recreation
areas or parts thereof which are consistent with this chapter.
C. Motor vehicle defined. "Motor vehicle" shall mean and include all
vehicles propelled other than by muscle power and shall also include all
motor vehicles of the bicycle or tricycle type. Motor vehicles shall
include but not be limited to trucks, cars, motorcycles, motorbikes and
snowmobiles.
A. Unless waived in accordance with other provisions of this chapter,
parks shall be open from sunrise to 10:00 p.m., Monday through
Sunday. No person shall remain in any park, playground or recreational
area after 10:00 p.m. except in attendance at an organized activity so
approved; no person shall remain in the park, playground or
recreational area more than 30 minutes after the conclusion of such
activity that ends after 10:00 p.m.
B. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by
the Recreation Committee at any time and for any interval of time,
either temporarily or at regular stated intervals, and open entirely or
for certain uses as the Recreation Committee may find reasonably
necessary.
A. Application for group use or reservation shall be made to the
Recreation Committee on a first-come-first-served basis, with as much
prior notice as possible. The application shall include the following
information: the name and address of the applicant; the name and
address of the person or organization sponsoring the activity; the day
and time for which the group use or reservation is desired; the park or
portion of the park for which the group use or reservation is desired; an
estimate of the number of people to attend; and any other information
that the Recreation Committee may find reasonably necessary to
determine whether the group use or reservation should be permitted.
B. The reservation or group use of the park will not unreasonably interfere
with or detract from the general enjoyment of the park.
§ 201-2 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 201-4
195:687
§ 201-4.1. Fee schedule; certificates of insurance. [Added 5-28-1997
by Ord. No. 97-8; amended 1-26-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-28;
10-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-25; 5-9-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-11]
C. The reservation or group use will not unreasonably interfere with or
detract from the public health, welfare, safety or recreation.
D. The reservation or group use will not be reasonably anticipated to
include violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
E. The reservation or group use will not entail extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police operation by the township.
F. The reservation or group use is on a first-come-first-served basis.
Reservations will be taken no more than two months (60 days) in
advance of the date of the group use or reservation or in advance of the
first date of use in the case of a seasonal reservation.
G. Reservation and group use will be permitted for persons or groups who
are entirely or primarily Waterford Township residents or companies
with facilities in Waterford Township.
H. A group or organization using a park under the provisions of this
section will be bound by all park rules, regulations and applicable
ordinances. The person to whom the permit or reservation is issued
shall be liable for all loss, damage or injury sustained by any person
whatever by reason of negligence of the person to whom such permit
shall have been issued. The Township Clerk shall have the right to
require any permittee to submit evidence of liability insurance covering
injuries to members of the general public arising out of such permitted
activities in such amounts as may be from time to time determined by
the Recreation Committee prior to the commencement of any activity or
issuance of any permit.
I. The Recreation Committee shall have the authority to revoke a permit
upon a finding of violation of any rule, regulation or ordinance or upon
good cause shown.
A. 149Fee schedule. Persons, groups and/or athletic teams not part of the
Waterford Township Athletic Association or Atco Lions Football or the
Waterford Township Cheerleading Association shall be required to pay
fees in accordance with the schedule attached hereto and incorporated
by reference herein. Said fees shall be paid with the filing of the
application for use of any park, playground and/or recreation facility
owned by the Township of Waterford. These fees shall not be included in
Chapter 124 of the Township Code, captioned "Fees."
(1) Athletic facilities use fees.
(a) Practices.
149. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 124, Fees.
§ 201-4 WATERFORD CODE § 201-4.1
195:688
[1] Residents: $100 per team, one two-hour practice per week
for 12 weeks.
[2] Nonresidents: $200 per team, one two-hour practice per
week for 12 weeks.
NOTES: Additional practices per week follow the same
schedule.
Resident team rosters shall consist of 75% Waterford
Township residents. All other teams are to be considered
nonresident teams. The determination of whether a team
is a resident or nonresident team, when disputed, shall be
decided by the Township Committee and confirmed by way
of resolution.
(b) Games.
[1] Youth fee.
[a] Resident fee: $25 per game.
[b] Nonresident fee: $50 per game.
[2] Non youth fee.
[a] Resident fee: $35 per game.
[b] Nonresident fee: $70 per game.
NOTE: Youth fee applies to organizations where 100%
of the participants are under the age of 18 years old at
time of application.
(c) For-profit camps: $500 per camp.
(d) For-profit tennis lessons: $500 for the period May 1 through
September 30, with a maximum usage of 10 hours per week
with a two-hour-per-one-court maximum per day.
(e) For-profit clinics: $350 per clinic, five two-hour clinic sessions
for five weeks.
(f) Light fee: $75 flat fee.
B. Additional requirements; certificates of insurance. Persons, groups and/
or athletic teams not located within the Township of Waterford and/or
part of the Waterford Township Athletic or Recreation Associations
shall provide, as part of the application process, a certificate of
insurance naming the Township of Waterford as an additional insured in
amounts as are set forth on the application form, which application
form is incorporated by reference into this section. Such applicants
shall also be required to complete and sign the Hold Harmless and
Indemnification statement on the application form.
§ 201-4.1 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 201-5
195:689
§ 201-5. Protection of property, wildlife, vegetation and natural
resources.
No person in a public park, playground or recreation area shall:
§ 201-6. Dumping and littering.
No person in a public park, playground or recreation area shall:
A. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or
remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings,
pavings or paving materials, waterlines or other public utilities or parts
or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether
temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary
markers or other structures whatsoever, either real or personal.
B. Fail to cooperate in maintaining rest rooms and washrooms in a neat
and sanitary condition. No person over the age of six years shall use the
rest rooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex.
C. Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees, shrubs or plants or
other wood or materials or make any excavation by tool, equipment,
blasting or other means or agency.
D. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the
bark or pick the flowers or seed of any plant, dig in or otherwise disturb
grass areas or in any other way injure the natural beauty or usefulness
of any area.
E. Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, planters,
fountains, railings, fences or upon any other property not designated or
customarily used for park purposes.
F. Tie or hitch an animal to any tree or plants.
G. Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, pursue, chase, tease, shoot or
throw missiles at any animal, wildlife, reptile or bird; nor shall he/she
remove or have in his/her possession the young of any wild animal or
the eggs, nest or young of any reptile or bird. Exception to the
foregoing is made in that snakes known to be deadly poisonous or other
deadly reptiles may be killed on sight.
H. Light or cause to be lighted any fire outside of a grill, fireplace or other
area designated for such use by the Recreation Committee.
I. Remove, deface, vandalize, damage or destroy recreation equipment.
[Added 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-19]
J. Use a recreation area, recreational equipment or playing fields other
than for the type of activity intended (i.e., tennis courts for playing
tennis or tennis-type games only). [Added 8-14-1996 by Ord. No.
96-19]
§ 201-5 WATERFORD CODE § 201-6
195:690
§ 201-7. Motor vehicles.
§ 201-8. Dogs and other animals. [Amended 12-11-1996 by Ord. No.
96-24]
No person shall be responsible for the entry of a dog or other domestic
animal, except for a Seeing Eye dog, dogs used to assist handicapped
persons and commonly known as "service dogs" or dogs used to assist
A. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters
of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water in or adjacent
to any park or any tributary stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into
such water substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which shall or
may result in the pollution of such waters.
B. Have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken
glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or
other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in areas contiguous
to any park or left in any park or left anywhere on the grounds thereof,
but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided.
Where receptacles are not provided or are full, all such rubbish or
waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for
its presence and shall be properly disposed of elsewhere.
A. No person in a public park, playground or recreation area shall:
(1) Drive any motor vehicle on any area except the paved or stoned
park roads or parking areas or such areas as may upon occasion
specifically be designated as temporary areas by the Recreation
Committee.
(2) Park a motor vehicle in other than an established or designated
parking area, and such parking shall be in accordance with posted
directions and the instructions of any attendant who may be
present.
(3) Leave a motor vehicle standing or parked at night in established
parking areas or elsewhere in the park areas.
(4) Fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the state motor
vehicle traffic laws in regard to equipment and operation of
vehicles.
(5) Fail to obey the direction of a traffic officer.
(6) Fail to observe all traffic regulations and signs indicating speed,
direction, caution, stopping or parking and all others posted for
proper control and to safeguard life and property.
B. Motorcycles, dirt bikes and other similar mechanical vehicles shall be
subject to the above provisions. [Added 8-14-1996 by Ord. No.
96-19]
§ 201-6 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 201-8
195:691
deaf persons and commonly known as "hearing dogs," into areas of public
parks, playgrounds or recreation areas, unless such are clearly marked with
signs bearing the words "Domestic animals permitted in this area." Where
domestic animals are permitted, they shall be restrained by a leash not
greater than six feet in length.
§ 201-9. Nuisances.
No person shall, in a public park, playground or recreation area, take any
action or cause another person to take any action that would be a nuisance
to other users of the park, playground or recreation area. Such action would
include but not be limited to the following:
§ 201-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-11-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-24]
Any person or persons found to be in violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding
$1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof.
Chapter 208
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drug-free school zones — See Ch. 118.
Fees — See Ch. 124, Art. II.
Loitering — See Ch. 184.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 201.
Soliciting political contributions — See Ch.
212.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 239.
A. Playing a radio, amplifier or musical instrument too loudly.
B. Throwing stones, sticks and other missiles.
C. Soliciting, begging and posting notices.
D. Running lotteries and games of chance.
E. Shining bright lights on adjacent properties.
F. Attempting to gain entry to a special event without paying the required
admission fee.
G. Driving or hitting golf balls. [Added 12-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-24]
§ 201-8 WATERFORD CODE § 201-10
195:692
ARTICLE I
Peddlers, Hawkers, Vendors, Solicitors, Canvassers, Seasonal Sales
Vendors, Transient Merchants and Non-Profit-Making Vendors150
[Adopted 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-8]
§ 208-1. Title.
This article shall be entitled "Peddlers, Hawkers, Vendors, Solicitors,
Canvassers and Seasonal Sales Vendors."
§ 208-2. Purpose. [Amended 4-25-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-9]
The purpose and intent of this article is to establish regulations relative
to intermittent, temporary and part-time sales of goods and merchandise.
This article is also to establish regulations during specific "seasonal time
periods" defined as Christmas, Valentine's Day, Easter and Mother's Day,
and to prohibit seasonal sales in all residential-zoned classifications as set
forth in the Zoning Code of the Township of Waterford.151 This article also
prohibits stationary vendors from selling merchandise and goods outdoors
without receiving required Planning/Zoning approval or obtaining a permit
from the Township Clerk. This article shall set forth the application/approval
process for licensing for peddlers, hawkers, vendors, solicitors, canvassers,
transient merchants and seasonal sales. Furthermore, this article is to
preserve Township aesthetics and zoning, alleviate traffic congestion,
protect against pedestrian and motor vehicle accidents and generally
protect the health, safety and welfare of the public of the Township of
Waterford.
§ 208-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ITINERANT AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND PEDDLERS — Included
in the definition of hawker, peddler, vendor, solicitor and canvasser.
MERCHANDISE (PEDDLER, HAWKER, VENDOR, SOLICITOR or
CANVASSER) — This definition shall include all goods, wares, foods, fruits,
vegetables, farm products, books, magazines, periodicals, printed
materials, arts, crafts, orders or contracts for services, home improvements
or alterations and anything that may be sold or distributed by peddlers or
solicitors and all kinds of articles or personal property for personal and/or
domestic use.[Amended 4-26-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-14; 7-26-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-20]
150. Editor’s Note: This article was renamed from “Peddlers, Hawkers, Vendors, Solicitors,
Canvassers and Seasonal Sales Vendors” to “Peddlers, Hawkers, Vendors, Solicitors,
Canvassers, Seasonal Sales Vendors, Transient Merchants and Non-Profit-Making
Vendors” 4-25-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-9.
151. Editor's Note: See Ch. 176, Land Use, Development and Zoning.
§ 208-1 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 208-3
195:693
MERCHANDISE (SEASONAL SALES) — This definition shall only include
Christmas trees, Christmas wreaths, Christmas grave blankets, Christmas
arts and crafts, valentine flowers, Easter flowers, Easter baskets, Mother's
Day flowers, Mother's Day baskets and other articles of arts and crafts
related to the seasonal sales activity of these specific days.
NONPROFIT SEASONAL SALES VENDORS and NON-PROFIT-MAKING
VENDORS — Any nonprofit, religious, charitable, educational, civic or
veteran organization, society, association, service, club, volunteer first aid
organization or fire company which is located within the boundaries of
the Township of Waterford and sells goods and merchandise at a specific
location, either owned by the nonprofit organization or at a location not
owned by the nonprofit organization, having the written consent of the
owners of property to conduct seasonal sales activities within the Township
of Waterford.[Amended 4-25-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-9]
PEDDLER, HAWKER AND VENDOR — Any person, whether or not a
resident of the Township of Waterford, traveling about and through the
Township of Waterford, either on foot, by vehicle or by any manner, means
or method, who shall go from house to house, place to place or street
to street, conveying or transporting goods, products, wares, merchandise,
food or drink or any product thereof, offering or exposing the same for sale
or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who engages in
any of the foregoing activities from a stationary location on the street or
other public place.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, partner, corporation or
corporations or similar business entity.
SEASONAL SALES TIME PERIOD — This shall be defined as a specific time
period to sell goods and/or merchandise as follows:
SEASONAL SALES VENDOR — A person who sells goods and/or
merchandise for a specified, limited purpose and period of time, at a
location owned by and/or leased by the person.
SOLICITOR OR CANVASSER — Any person, whether or not a resident of
the Township of Waterford, who goes from house to house, from place to
place or from street to street, whether on foot or by conveyance of any kind,
nature or sort, soliciting, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of
services, goods, wares, merchandise, food or drink or any products thereof,
or property of any kind or nature whatsoever, for future performance or
CHRISTMAS — - A time period not to exceed 30 days, including
Christmas Day and 29 days preceding Christmas Day.
A.
VALENTINE'S DAY — - A time period not to exceed five days, including
Valentine's Day and the four days preceding Valentine's Day.
B.
EASTER — - A time period not to exceed five days, including Easter and
the four days preceding Easter.
C.
MOTHER'S DAY — - A time period not to exceed five days, including
Mother's Day and the four days preceding Mother's Day.
D.
§ 208-3 WATERFORD CODE § 208-3
195:694
delivery, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a
sample of the subject of such order, and whether or not he is collecting
advance payments on such sales or orders, or who engages in any of the
foregoing activities, from a stationary location on the street or other public
place.
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS — Includes the terms "itinerant merchant" and
"itinerant vendor" and shall mean any person who engages in a temporary
business of selling articles of value within the Township of Waterford and
who, in furtherance of such purposes, hires, leases, uses or occupies any
building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, public rooms
and hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops or any street, alley or other
public place within the Township for the exhibition and sales of such articles
of value, either privately or at public auction.[Added 4-25-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-9]
§ 208-4. Fixed location sale; prohibitions, except as permitted in
this Code. [Amended 4-25-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-9]
A. No peddler, hawker, canvasser, solicitor, transient merchant or vendor
shall sell or offer for sale to the general public any goods or
merchandise, beverages or food products from a fixed location utilizing
public or quasi-public streets and sidewalks within the Township of
Waterford. In addition, the sale of merchandise and goods from
stationary locations is prohibited, with the exception of seasonal sales
licensed under this article and transient merchants in compliance with
this chapter. A person shall be deemed to be selling from a fixed
location if such person remains at a fixed location for a period of 15
minutes or longer, unless extended as provided below.
B. Extension.
(1) The fifteen-minute time limitation is extended beyond 15 minutes,
but not to exceed 30 minutes in total, for such periods of time that
customers or prospective customers are being serviced by the
vendor wherein the customers or prospective customers are:
(a) Examining, viewing, handling, testing, pricing or returning the
merchandise;
(b) Seeking information from the person;
(c) Making purchases or sales; and/or
(d) Waiting to be attended by the person.
(2) The fifteen-minute time limitation is further extended for such time
following a sale or purchase that the person may need to replace or
replenish merchandise, to perform that which is necessary to clean,
straighten up the cart or its merchandise, to secure the proceeds of
the sale, to file copies of receipts and/or other acts that occur
following the sale of such merchandise. However, the total time
§ 208-3 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 208-4
195:695
§ 208-5. License required. [Amended 4-25-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-9]
It shall be unlawful for any hawker, peddler, vendor, solicitor, canvasser,
seasonal sales vendor and transient merchant, as defined herein, to engage
in such activity within the Township of Waterford without first obtaining a
license therefor, in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 208-6. Application for business registration certificate and
license. [Amended 4-26-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-14; 7-26-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-20]
Applicants for a license under this article shall file with the Township Clerk
an application, in duplicate, on forms to be provided by the Township Clerk,
that shall provide the following information, all of which shall be sworn to:
allotted for such acts following a sale under this subsection shall
not exceed 10 minutes.
(3) At the expiration of the 15 minutes plus the extended period as
provided above, the person must move from such location to a
location at least 25 feet away. Such person cannot return to within
25 feet of such location for a period of at least one hour. No person
has a right to any particular location on the public right-of-way and/
or sidewalks.
A. The name, address and telephone number of the organization and/or
business applying for a license under the provisions of this section.
B. The name, address, telephone number and description of those
individuals to be employed and engaged in peddling, hawking,
soliciting, canvassing or being a transient merchant. [Amended
4-25-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-9]
C. The place or places of residence of the organization and/or business
applying for a license, as well as those individuals engaged by the
organization and/or business in conducting peddling, hawking, vending,
soliciting, canvassing activities and being a transient merchant.
[Amended 4-25-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-9]
D. The social security numbers and driver license numbers of individuals
of the organization and/or business engaged in the activities of
peddling, hawking, vending, soliciting, canvassing or being a transient
merchant. [Amended 4-25-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-9]
E. The social security numbers and driver license numbers of those
individuals engaged in peddling, hawking, vending, soliciting,
canvassing and acting as a transient merchant for the organization and/
or business applying for a license to conduct said activities. [Amended
4-25-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-9]
F. A brief description of the nature of the business, the goods to be sold
and the name and addresses of the principal office of their
§ 208-4 WATERFORD CODE § 208-6
195:696
manufacturer as well as the name and address of the agent designated
to receive service of process in the State of New Jersey of said
organization and/or business applying for a license under this article.
G. The length of time for which the right to do business is desired by the
organization and/or business applying for the license.
H. A photograph of the individuals employed by the organization and/or
the business applying for a license, taken within 60 days immediately
prior to the filing of the application.
I. Three business references located in the County of Camden, State of
New Jersey, or in lieu thereof, such other available evidence of the
character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an
investigator to properly evaluate such character and responsibility.
J. A statement as to the individuals employed by the organization and/or
business applying for a license indicating whether or not those
individuals have been convicted of any crime, disorderly persons
offense or violation of any municipal ordinance, as well as describing
the nature of the events and the punishment or penalty assessed
therefor.
K. Whether or not orders are to be solicited or taken for future delivery of
goods or performance of services by the organization and/or business
applying for a license.
L. The fingerprints of the person applying for the business registration
certificate and of all employees employed by applicant who will be
performing the service within the Township.
M. The applicant being the organization and/or business applying for a
license shall list previous licenses issued by the Township of Waterford
as well as other municipalities wherein licenses have been applied for
and issued by those municipalities.
N. Proof of registration with the New Jersey Division of Taxation and copy
of a valid certificate of authority to collect sales taxes.
O. The time of soliciting, peddling, hawking, vendoring and canvassing
shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday.
(1) The aforesaid time limitation shall apply to all persons issued a
license identified on the application unless such a person or license
holder has been invited to a dwelling by an occupant of said
dwelling, or had previously made an appointment with the
applicant of the dwelling. When the sale or attempted sale of the
merchandise is not involved, and canvassing and soliciting is in
connection with a political campaign or charitable or religious
organization recognized as tax exempt under the United States
Internal Revenue Service, solicitation may take place from 9:00
§ 208-6 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 208-6
195:697
§ 208-7. Application for seasonal sales vendor.
Applicants for a license under this article shall file a sworn application with
the Township Clerk, in duplicate. Complete applications for seasonal sales
license must be submitted 20 days prior to the actual specified time period
for conducting a seasonal sales activity. An application determined to be
incomplete upon review shall be returned to the applicant. In addition, the
following information shall be required and sworn to:
a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Sunday, unless other prior
arrangements have been made with the occupant of the dwelling.
A. The name, address and telephone number of the organization and/or
business applying for a license under the provisions of this section.
B. The name, address, telephone number and description of those
individuals to be employed by and engaged in a seasonal sales activity.
C. The block and lot location of the property to be utilized in conducting a
seasonal sales activity.
D. The social security numbers and driver's license numbers of individuals
of the organization and/or business engaged in the seasonal sales.
E. The social security numbers and driver's license numbers of individuals
engaged in seasonal sales for the organization and/or business applying
for a license to conduct said activities.
F. The length of time for which the right to do business is desired by the
organization and/or business applying for the license as per § 208-3 of
this article, which defines seasonal sales period.
G. A photograph of the individuals employed by the organization and/or
the business applying for a license, taken within 60 days immediately
prior to the filing of the application.
H. The individuals employed by the organization and/or business applying
for a license shall be fingerprinted at the request of the Chief of Police.
I. A statement as to the individuals employed by the organization and/or
business applying for a license indicating whether or not those
individuals have been convicted of any crime, disorderly persons
offense or violation of any municipal ordinance, as well as describing
the nature of the events and the punishment or penalty assessed
therefor.
J. The applicant being the organization and/or business applying for a
license shall list previous licenses issued by the Township wherein
licenses have been applied for and issued by those municipalities.
K. The time of seasonal sales shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m.
§ 208-6 WATERFORD CODE § 208-7
195:698
L. A property survey of the lot(s) to be prepared by a New Jersey licensed
professional engineer or surveyor. A hand-drawn sketch plat may be
substituted in lieu of a survey plat as determined by the Township
Clerk. The purpose of the survey plat and/or sketch plat is to determine
if the proposed use of the property location is sufficient for the intended
purpose of conducting seasonal sales. The following information must
be set forth on the survey and/or sketch plat submitted:
(1) The location of and quantities of merchandise to be stored and
displayed on the lot(s).
(2) The location of on site parking, as well as off-site parking
associated with the site location.
M. The location of curb cut access to indicate proper ingress and egress to
the site to evaluate and prevent traffic hazards, congestion or excessive
interference with normal traffic movements on adjacent public streets.
N. The location of temporary signs in accordance with regulations set forth
in the Zoning Code of Township of Waterford.152
O. No temporary signs advertising the seasonal sales activity shall be
place on any tree, telegraph, electric light or public utility pole or upon
rocks or other natural features located within the public right-of-way.
All temporary signs shall be located on the site.
P. No more than four temporary signs shall be created. Temporary signs
shall not exceed six square feet in area nor exceed four feet in height.
Q. Temporary signs may not be erected prior to 48 hours of the designated
seasonal sales activity and must be removed within 48 hours after the
time period stated and licensed for conducting a seasonal sales activity.
R. No sign shall be erected that is of such character, form, shape or color
that it imitates or resembles any official traffic sign, signal or device, or
that has any characteristics which are likely to confuse or dangerously
distract the attention of the operator of a motor vehicle on a public
street.
S. Temporary signs shall be kept in a proper state of repair, in accordance
with the requirements of the Township's Building Code, Property
Maintenance Code, and other pertinent regulations.153 Signs which fall
into such a state of disrepair as to become unsightly or to pose a threat
to public safety may be removed by the Township at the owner's
expense upon proper notification by the Township.
T. No temporary sign shall be erected within or project over the right-ofway
of any public street or sidewalk. No temporary signs place on the
site shall be located in such a fashion which would affect the site
152. Editor's Note: See Ch. 176, Land Development and Zoning.
153. Editor's Note: See Ch. 103, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Ch. 220, Property
Maintenance.
§ 208-7 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 208-7
195:699
§ 208-8. Investigation and issuance. [Amended 4-26-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-14; 7-26-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-20]
visibility of the motoring public as determined by the Chief of Police or
his designee.
U. The applicant shall submit with his application a statement as to how
the site shall be maintained during the designated time period, as well
as a statement indicating how trash, refuse and other materials will be
disposed of other than through normal solid waste collection services
provided by the Township of Waterford. All debris, materials, trash, etc.,
must be removed from the site within 48 hours following the expiration
of the seasonal license issued by the Township of Waterford.
V. A certification from the Waterford Township Tax Collector that all taxes
have been paid and are current.
W. Proof of registration with the New Jersey Division of Taxation and copy
of a valid certificate of authority to collect sales taxes.
A. Upon receipt of a properly completed and signed application, the
original application shall be referred immediately by the Township
Clerk to the Township Chief of Police who shall cause to be made within
30 days such investigation of the applicant's business and such other
factors as the Chief of Police deems necessary for the protection of the
public good and welfare.
B. Upon completion of the investigation, the Chief of Police shall endorse
thereon his/her approval or disapproval and, if disapproval, his/her
reasons therefor, and immediately notify the applicant that the
application has been disapproved, or if any of the applicant's
employees/persons to perform the service have been disapproved. The
application, so endorsed, shall be promptly returned to the Township
Clerk.
C. Any determination by the Chief of Police that an application is
unsatisfactory or that any employees/persons listed on the application
to provide the service are unsatisfactory shall be based on one or more
of the following findings with respect to the applicant or any of the
employees of the applicant:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the
application.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the course of
carrying on the business of solicitor, vendor, peddler, or canvasser.
(3) Any violation of this chapter, past or present.
(4) Conviction of a crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
(5) Previous identified fraudulent acts or conduct.
§ 208-7 WATERFORD CODE § 208-8
195:700
§ 208-9. Grounds for Denial of Peddler, Hawker, Vendor, Solicitor,
Canvasser, Transient Merchant and Seasonal Sales Vendor License.
[Amended 4-25-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-9]
Grounds for denial of licenses shall be as follows:
§ 208-10. Fees.154 [Amended 12-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-24;
4-26-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-14; 7-26-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-20]
(6) A public record of breaches of other municipality peddling,
soliciting or canvassing ordinances.
(7) Conducting the business of soliciting, peddling or canvassing in an
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of
the peace or to constitute a menace to health, safety or general
welfare of the public.
D. An approved and endorsed business registration application shall be
returned to the Township Clerk by the Chief of Police and shall include a
Township-issued identification badge. The identification badge shall
include the name or names of all employees/persons to work for the
applicant and the expiration date of each license. Upon payment of the
prescribed registration fee, the prescribed license fee and identification
badge fee as hereinafter set forth, the Township Clerk shall execute and
deliver the licenses for each employee or person who is to work for the
applicant. The employees/persons performing the service for the
applicant shall be required to display the identification badge at all
times by wearing it on the outside of the licensee's clothing in a
conspicuous manner. The Township Clerk shall keep a record of all
licenses issued to all employees/persons working for the applicant who
has been issued the business registration certificate, the fees received
and any and all complaints made by Township residents concerning the
applicant and/or licensees.
A. Failure to comply with application, procedures and requirements as set
forth in §§ 208-6 and § 208-7 of this article shall constitute a basis for
denial of a license.
B. Revocation and/or denial of a license for good cause by any municipality
shall constitute a basis for denial of a license.
C. Violation of any grounds set forth in the § 208-13 of this article entitled
"Revocation."
D. Disapproval by the Chief of Police after his review as to matters relating
to the health, safety and welfare of the Township of Waterford.
E. Other good cause as set forth in the investigation by the Chief of Police.
154. Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
§ 208-8 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 208-10
195:701
§ 208-11. Duration of business registration certificates and
licenses: peddlers, hawkers, vendors, solicitors and canvassers.
[Amended 4-26-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-14; 7-26-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-20]
All business registration certificates issued as set forth in this chapter shall
expire at the end of six months from the date of issuance of the certificate.
All licenses issued to employees/persons working for the applicant, no
matter at what date issued, shall expire at the same time as the business
registration certificate. A business registration certificate shall not be
transferrable and must be surrendered after expiration before a renewal
business registration certificate can be issued. The renewal process for
business registration and licenses is through the same procedure as for the
issuance of the initial business registration certification and licenses.
§ 208-12. Duration of license: seasonal sales.
A seasonal sales license issued shall be for a period of time as set forth
in § 208-3, entitled "Definitions," of this article. A separate license shall
be applied for each seasonal sales activity, as well as employed by an
organization (profit or nonprofit) and/or business. Licenses shall not be
transferable and must be surrendered after expiration before a new license
and/or registration can be issued for each seasonal sales activity. Any
activities involving the sales of merchandise as defined under the definition
of "Merchandise (Seasonal Sales)" in § 208-3 of this article shall be required
to obtain a seasonal sales license notwithstanding the issuance of a vendor's
license prior to the adoption of this article.
A. Business registration fee. Any application for peddler, hawker, vendor,
solicitor, canvasser or seasonal sales vendor shall be required to pay a
fee of $250 to the Township Clerk to cover the cost of processing the
application and to investigate the facts stated therein in order for a
registration certificate to be issued to the applicant.
B. License fee. A license fee of $75 shall be assessed for each employee/
person working for the applicant in the Township. The $75 fee for each
license to be issued to each employee/person is to cover the cost of
completing the investigation and background on each employee/person.
Any applicant for a seasonal sales vendor registration certificate and
license shall be required to pay a fee of $300 to the Township for the
issuance of the certificate/license.
C. The Township-issued identification badges. The fee for the Township
identification badge for each person to be issued a license is $25 to
cover the costs of processing and creating the badge, unless exempted
by Subsection B. In the event the identification badge is destroyed or
lost, a replacement fee of $25 shall be assessed.
§ 208-10 WATERFORD CODE § 208-13
195:702
§ 208-13. Revocation.
Licenses issued under this article may be revoked by the Chief of Police or
his designee after reasonable notice and hearing for any of the following
causes:
§ 208-14. Enforcement. [Amended 8-22-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-22]
Notwithstanding the right of revocation, reserved to the Township
governing body, and in addition to same, it shall be the duty of any police
officer or enforcement official of the Township of Waterford to require any
person peddling, soliciting, canvassing or hawking and who is not known by
such officer to be duly licensed, to produce their peddler's license and/or to
otherwise enforce any of the provisions of this chapter against any person
found to be violating same.
§ 208-15. Existing licenses. [Amended 4-26-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-14; 7-26-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-20]
Any licenses already issued under Chapter 208 of the Code of the Township
of Waterford prior to the effective date of this amended chapter shall
expire on December 31, 2017. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit
or prohibit an existing applicant from reapplying for a business registration
certificate and licenses under this chapter prior to that date.
A. Misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for
the license and registration of individuals engaged by the organization
(profit or nonprofit) and/or business.
B. Misrepresentation or false statement made in the cause of carrying on
activities regulated herein.
C. Conviction of any crime or disorderly persons offense involving moral
turpitude.
D. Conducting the business of soliciting, canvassing vending, hawking or
seasonal sales activities in an unlawful manner and in violation of any
provision of this article or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of
the peace or to constitute a menace to health, safety or general welfare
of the public.
E. Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be cause for
immediate revocation of a license issued by the Township of Waterford,
and the revocation of a license shall be grounds for nonissuance of a
license for a period not to exceed two years. Notice of hearing for
revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth the
grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice
shall be served personally upon the licensee by means of a summons, or
by mail, postage prepaid, to the licensee at the address given by the
licensee in making application at least five days prior to the date set for
a hearing in accordance with the provisions of this article. Hearing will
be held within 30 days of issuance of the notice of revocation.
§ 208-13 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 208-16
195:703
§ 208-16. Appeal.
Any person, organization (profit or nonprofit) and/or person aggrieved by
the actions of the Chief of Police and/or the Township Clerk in the denial
of an application for a license as provided in this article, or in the decision
with reference to the revocation of a license as provided in this article, shall
have the right of appeal as set forth in this article.
§ 208-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-11-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-24]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not more than
$1,000 or be imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or be subject to a period
of community service for up to 90 days, or any combination thereof. Each
day that a violation shall exist shall be construed as a separate offense.
§ 208-18. Exceptions.
A. This article shall not be so construed as to apply to the selling of any
item or article at wholesale to dealers in such articles or items, or to the
delivery of milk, eggs, bread, butter, newspapers or to other articles or
items of food or merchandise of a type which are generally considered
as household necessities and that are commonly delivered on a houseto-
house basis at intervals of a week or less.
B. Any person honorably discharged from the United States military or
naval service as now defined in N.J.S.A. 45:24-9(a), or as may hereafter
be defined, shall be exempt from securing a license or paying the fee as
provided herein, but shall be required to comply with all other
applicable sections of this article, and shall be required to register with
the Township Clerk and obtain a special veteran's permit which will be
issued by the Township Clerk without charge upon identification and
exhibition of such state license.
C. Nonprofit groups.
(1) Any nonprofit religious, charitable, educational, political, civic or
veterans organization, society, association or club desiring to sell
any item or merchandise for a religious, charitable, patriotic,
educational, civil or philanthropic purpose shall be exempt from
the provisions of §§ 208-3, 208-4, 208-6, 208-7, 208-10, 208-11 and
208-12 of this article, provided that there is filed a sworn
application, in writing, with the Township Clerk, either by the
individual so doing if done on an individual basis, or by the one in
charge thereof if being done on a group basis by numerous
individuals as agents or employees, who shall give the following
information:
(a) The name of the individual or organization and purpose of the
cause for which the permit is sought.
§ 208-16 WATERFORD CODE § 208-18
195:704
§ 208-18.1. Establishment of Do Not Knock Registry. [Added
8-22-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-22]
(b) The names and addresses of the individual officers and
directors or trustees of the organization and the address of
such organization.
(c) The location or locations of the property to be utilized in
conducting sales activity, if applicable.
(d) The length of time anticipated to conduct the activity.
(e) Proof of permission to use the property or locations.
(f) A sketch plan of the site where the activity is to be conducted
in order for the Township to determine the safety of the
location.
(g) Compliance with § 208-7, Subsections N through T, on use of
temporary signs.
(h) A statement that the site will be maintained properly during
the activity and that any trash and/or refuse will be removed
and properly disposed within 48 hours following use of the site.
(2) Upon satisfying the application requirements and upon being
satisfied that such person is a bona fide representative of such an
organization or that such organization, as aforesaid, is bona fide,
and that the agents or representatives who shall conduct the
transactions are approved representatives, the Township Clerk
shall issue a permit without charge to such organization,
association or corporation to operate in the Township. Such
organization shall supply its agents, representatives or employees
with a badge or ribbon containing the name of such organization,
which shall be worn and conspicuously displayed on the front of the
clothing of such agent, representative or employee.
A. The Township hereby establishes a Do Not Knock Registry. The
Township Clerk shall prepare a list of addresses of those premises
where the owner and/or occupant of same has notified the Township
Clerk that peddling, soliciting, canvassing, hawking and door-to-door
sales as identified in this chapter are not permitted on the premises.
Any property owner or occupant that wants to be included on the Do
Not Knock Registry shall complete a form that will be available at the
Township Clerk's office during normal business hours.
B. Do Not Knock Registry display.
(1) Any owner and/or occupant who has requested to be identified on
the Do Not Knock Registry shall be provided a sticker from the
Township Clerk's office for prominent posting or display at their
§ 208-18 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 208-18.1
195:705
premises indicating it is part of the Do Not Knock Registry, and
peddling or soliciting of any type is not permitted at the premises.
(2) Owners and/or occupants who are identified on the Do Not Knock
Registry at their request shall remain on the registry until such
time as written notice is provided to the Township Clerk to remove
their name from the registry.
C. Distribution of Do Not Knock Registry. The Township Clerk shall
provide and distribute the current Do Not Knock Registry to any
licensee under this chapter at the time of issuing a license for peddling,
soliciting, canvassing, hawking or any other type door-to-door selling
permitted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The Do Not Knock
Registry provided to these licensees shall only identify the physical
address of the premises/properties on the Do Not Knock Registry. The
licensee shall not peddle, solicit, canvass, hawk or conduct door-to-door
sales at these premises identified on this registry.
§ 208-18.1 WATERFORD CODE § 208-18.1
195:706
ARTICLE II
Solicitations by Charitable Organizations in Rights-of-Way
[Adopted 3-22-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-3]
§ 208-19. Solicitation permitted.
Charitable organizations, as defined in N.J.S.A. 45:17A-20, shall be
permitted to solicit contributions for charitable purposes in the right-ofway
of a road or highway maintained or under the jurisdiction of the
New Jersey Department of Transportation or the Camden County Board of
Chosen Freeholders or the Township of Waterford subject to the charitable
organization obtaining prior written approval and/or permit from the
governmental entity having jurisdiction over the road or highway.
§ 208-20. Rules and regulations.
The following rules and regulations shall apply to charitable organizations
soliciting under the terms of this article regardless of whether it is a state,
county or Township roadway.
A. In the case of any state road or highway or intersection thereof, a
charitable solicitation permit shall be obtained from the Department of
Transportation in accordance with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 16:40-4.1
et seq., together with the applicant complying with the requirements of
this article.
B. In the case of any county road or highway or intersection thereof, an
approval in writing and/or permit shall be obtained from the Camden
County Board of Chosen Freeholders in accordance with rules and
regulations established by it, together with the applicant complying
with the requirements of this article.
C. In the case of any state, county or municipal road or highway or
intersection thereof, a Township resolution of consent and permit shall
be obtained in accordance with the rules and regulations established in
this article.
D. Solicitation shall be subject to any specific terms and conditions of the
permit granted by the state, county or Township. The state, county and/
or Township permit, as applicable, shall be in the possession of the
responsible individual on site during all times of solicitation and be
available for inspection by state, county and/or Township law
enforcement officers.
A. Charitable organizations shall solicit only for charitable purposes.
B. Solicitations shall be permitted only at signalized intersections or when
an existing traffic control device causes temporary interruption in the
flow of normal traffic, such as at the opening of a movable bridge.
C. Each person soliciting charitable contributions on behalf of a charitable
organization shall be at least 18 years old.
§ 208-19 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 208-20
195:707
D. Solicitation is encouraged to be off the traveled way.
E. Solicitors shall not stop traffic or impede the flow of traffic. Traffic shall
already be stopped before solicitation may occur and shall cease when
traffic is moving. The use of flagmen is prohibited.
F. Solicitation shall only be permitted during daylight hours.
G. State, county, local law enforcement officers or representatives of the
Department of Transportation may suspend solicitation operations at
any time if any condition of the permit is violated, or, if in the local law
enforcement officer's sole discretion or the state or county's sole
discretion, traffic is being impeded or delayed or the public safety is at
risk.
H. Solicitors shall not drink alcoholic beverages, use drugs, or be under
the influence of drugs or alcohol while soliciting.
I. Solicitors shall not harass the public.
J. All solicitors shall wear safety vests that are in accordance with
Department of Transportation standards.
K. Parking of vehicles used as part of the solicitation shall comply with
applicable traffic regulations and any directive issued by the local
Police Department.
L. Solicitors shall not install any traffic control devices.
M. Signs.
(1) Signs advertising the roadway solicitation are permitted, providing
the signs are of a temporary construction and breakaway to the
extent possible. Signs shall be a maximum of 16 square feet.
Signage shall be in accordance with the temporary signage
standards contained in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices, 1988, or superseding issue.
(2) At least two warning signs shall be required and placed as follows:
(a) CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS 500 FEET AHEAD.
(b) The second sign following shall identify the name of the
charitable organization.
(c) Signs shall not be permitted in the traveled way or in medians
less than eight feet in width. All signs warning, noticing or
advertising a solicitation shall be removed immediately
following the solicitation event.
N. The charitable organization shall be responsible for cleaning up any
debris from the right-of-way.
§ 208-20 WATERFORD CODE § 208-20
195:708
§ 208-21. Intersections of state and county roads.
If the charitable solicitation is proposed at the intersection of a State and
County highway, the charitable organization must obtain written approval
from both the New Jersey Department of Transportation and the Camden
County Board of Chosen Freeholders.
§ 208-22. Bordering municipalities.
If the charitable solicitation is proposed at the border of Waterford
Township and any other municipality, the charitable organization must also
obtain approval for the solicitation from the adjoining municipality.
§ 208-23. Documents to be filed with Township.
A copy of the application form or letter of request filed with the New Jersey
Department of Transportation or the Camden County Board of Chosen
Freeholders shall be filed with the Township Clerk. A copy of any permit,
consent resolution or letter of consent issued by the state or county shall be
filed with the Township Clerk prior to the solicitation event.
§ 208-24. Application to Township required.
O. Any other requirement as may be determined necessary by the
Township Police Department.
A. For all charitable solicitations in the Township, regardless of whether it
is on a state, county or municipal roadway, an application shall be filed
with the Township Clerk at least 45 days prior to the proposed
solicitation event(s). The application shall include the following
information:
(1) Name and address of charitable organization.
(2) Proposed location to conduct solicitation.
(3) Date or dates of proposed solicitation.
(4) Duration and/or times of the proposed solicitation.
(5) Name of responsible individual(s) to be on site during the proposed
solicitation.
(6) Acknowledgment of compliance with rules and regulations to be
imposed for the proposed solicitation.
B. If more than one solicitation event is to be held in any calendar year, a
Township permit for all such events can be applied for and issued in one
application.
§ 208-20 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 208-25
195:709
§ 208-25. Resolution of consent; permit.
Upon the timely filing of a complete application and its review and
comments by the Township Police Department, the Township shall place
on its next regularly scheduled meeting, consideration for the adoption
of a resolution of consent and the issuance of a permit to the charitable
organization. The Township permit is subject to any further approvals when
it is a state or county roadway where the solicitation event is to occur.
§ 208-26. Disclaimer of liability.
The municipality shall not be liable in any civil action for damages for
property damage or personal injury resulting from a motor vehicle accident
arising out of or in the course of a charitable organization soliciting
charitable donations. The charitable organization shall be required to sign
a hold harmless and indemnification agreement with the Township prior to
the solicitation event(s). The charitable organization shall also be required
to provide a certificate of insurance naming the Township as an additional
insured prior to commencing any coin drop activity.
§ 208-27. When effective; filing requirements.
This article shall become effective immediately upon its final passage and
publication as required by law. A certified copy of this article shall be filed
with the New Jersey Department of Transportation and the Camden County
Board of Chosen Freeholders.
§ 208-25 WATERFORD CODE § 208-27
195:710
ARTICLE III
Outdoor Sales and Displays
[Adopted 4-25-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-9]
§ 208-28. Issuance of permit.
On application to the Township Administrator, or his or her designee, the
Township Administrator, or his or her designee, may permit, at their
discretion, an outdoor display and/or sale on sidewalks adjacent to an
applicant's commercial premises, subject to the conditions contained
herein.
§ 208-29. Conditions for issuance of permits.
A permit for an outdoor display and sale shall only be given if the applicant
satisfies all of the following criteria:
§ 208-30. Duration of permit.
Any permit issued hereunder shall be issued for a period of 30 consecutive
days, with dates and time of display and sale subject to the approval of the
Township Administrator.
A. No food or foodstuffs shall be displayed or offered for sale except by a
merchant whose normal business includes the sale of such items; said
merchant shall also provide a trash receptacle of at least 25 gallons'
capacity within five feet of his/her display area.
B. The outdoor display and sale shall be restricted to areas zoned for
commercial business and shall otherwise be in accord with all zoning
regulations pertaining thereto.
C. The outdoor display sale shall not block pedestrian or motor vehicle
traffic. Specifically, it shall not impede the flow of pedestrian traffic,
including the handicapped, and said display shall in no way threaten the
safety of the public. This includes, but is not limited to, ensuring that
motorists are not visually or physically obstructed in an unsafe manner.
D. All participating displayers or sellers shall own or lease permanent
premises within 25 feet of the place where the outdoor display or sale
is/will be conducted.
E. The applicant shall demonstrate that the outdoor display and sale
serves the public purpose of furthering the commercial and mercantile
growth and stability and/or aesthetics of the Township at large.
F. The permit shall not adversely affect the public welfare.
G. The goods to be sold shall be related to the principal use of the
commercial property.
§ 208-28 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 208-31
195:711
§ 208-31. Permit fee.
The applicant shall pay a fee of $100 for the initial thirty-day permit and
$25 for each additional permit thereafter within a twelve-month period.
§ 208-32. Application information.
The applicant shall include with its application its name, location to be used
for sale and display and a list of the goods to be displayed and offered for
sale.
§ 208-33. Waiver.
Permits for outdoor displays and sales are waived for:
§ 208-34. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Construction Code Official or his
designee.
A. Township-endorsed festivals.
B. Carnivals, festivals, circuses and similar events conducted or endorsed
as a fundraiser for a nonprofit entity, school or religious entity.
C. Businesses that inherently display their goods and merchandise
outdoors for which planning and zoning approvals for said outdoor
display have been specifically obtained.
D. Farms and farm stands accessory to a farm.
E. Displays not exceeding an aggregate of 16 square feet of the business
operation's leasehold sidewalk area, provided the conditions listed in
§ 208-29 above are met.
§ 208-31 WATERFORD CODE § 208-34
195:712
Chapter 212
PUBLIC CONTRACTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Professional service contracts — See Ch. 10.
Personnel rules of conduct — See Ch. 44, Art.
II.
Purchasing procedures — See Ch. 59, Art. I
§ 208-34 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 208-34
195:713

ARTICLE I
Political Contributions by Professional Business Entities; Transfer
of Contributions
§ 212-1. Statement of public policy.
The Township of Waterford reaffirms the policy of the Township to set
maximum dollar amounts that professional business entities may contribute
politically, beyond which they become ineligible to receive a public
professional service contract from the Township of Waterford, as well as
the Township's policy to prohibit professional business entities which are
performing or being paid under existing contracts with the Township from
making political contributions in amounts that exceed the Township's limits
on political contributions by professionals. The Township also hereby
establishes a policy prohibiting the transfer or "wheeling" of political
contributions by professionals to candidates of municipal political
committees who are not affiliated with the Township of Waterford.
§ 212-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the terms used herein shall be given the
broadest possible meaning in order to effectuate the policy objectives stated
and adopted. Certain specific terms used shall have the following meanings:
CONTRIBUTING — The act of giving money or providing in-kind
contributions to aid a municipal political candidate or any of the political
party committees or PACs otherwise referenced in this article.
CONTRIBUTING POLITICALLY — Shall have the same meaning as
"contributing."
CONTRIBUTIONS — Shall be given the same meaning and use generally
utilized by the Election Law Enforcement Commission of the State of New
Jersey under the statutes and regulations governing that agency. The term
shall include but not be limited to payments or donations of money and inkind
contributions.
PAC or PACS — The terms "PAC" or PACS" are abbreviations for "political
action committee" or "political action committees," respectively. The terms
refer to organizations that regularly engage in, or whose primary purpose
is, the support of municipal elections and/or municipal parties in excess
of the thresholds specified in this article. The foregoing shall be limited
to organizations and entities which support or oppose Waterford Township
candidates for Mayor or Township Committee, or which engage in political
activities in support of or opposition to candidates for Waterford Township
Mayor or Waterford Township Committee.
POLITICAL CONTRIBUTIONS — Has the same definition as "contributions"
hereinabove.
PROFESSIONAL BUSINESS ENTITIES — A "professional business entity"
seeking a public contract means individuals and firms engaged in the
rendering of legal services, engineering services, survey work, architectural
§ 212-1 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 212-2
195:715
services, planning services, design services, financial consulting and other
consulting work, auditing, accounting, appraisal services, insurance
services and banking. If a professional business entity is an individual, the
definition includes the individual and individual's spouse, if any, and any
child living at home. "Professional business entities" also include firms,
corporations, professional corporations, partnerships, business
organizations, and/or business associates who provide professional
services, where those professional services are exempt from public bidding
for public contracts pursuant to the Local Public Contracts Law.
§ 212-3. Prohibition on awarding public contracts to certain
contributors.
A. Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, Waterford
Township or any of its purchasing agents or agencies or those of its
independent authorities, the Planning Board and Zoning Board, as the
case may be, shall not enter into an agreement or otherwise contract to
procure professional, banking, insurance coverage services or any
other consulting services, including those awarded pursuant to a "fair
and open" process, from any professional business entity, if that entity
has solicited or made any contribution of money, or pledge of a
contribution, including in-kind contributions, to any Waterford
Township municipal candidate or holder of the public office having
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract, or campaign
committee supporting each candidate or officeholder, or to any
Waterford Township political party committee or PAC that regularly
engages in, or whose primary purpose is the support of, municipal
elections and/or municipal parties in excess of the thresholds specified
in Subsection D within one calendar year immediately preceding the
date of the contract or agreement.
B. No professional business which enters into negotiations for, or agrees
to, any contract or agreement with the municipality or any department
or agency thereof or of its independent authorities for the rendering of
professional, banking or insurance coverage services or any other
consulting services, including those awarded pursuant to a "fair and
open" process, shall solicit or make any contribution of money, or
pledge of contribution, including in-kind contributions, to any
Waterford Township municipal candidate or holder of the public office
having ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract, or
campaign committee supporting such candidate or officeholder, or to
any Waterford Township political party committee or PAC that regularly
engages in, or whose primary purpose is the support of, municipal
elections and/or municipal parties between the time of first
communications between that business entity and Waterford Township
regarding a specific professional services agreement and the
termination of negotiations or the completion of the contract or
agreement, whichever is later.
§ 212-2 WATERFORD CODE § 212-3
195:716
§ 212-4. Contributions made prior to effective date.
No contribution of money or any other thing of value, including in-kind
contributions, made by a professional business entity to any municipal
candidate for Mayor or Township Committee, or Waterford Township
political party committee or PAC referenced in this article shall be deemed
a violation of this article, nor shall an agreement for property, goods, or
services, of any kind whatsoever, be disqualified thereby, if that contribution
was made by the professional business entity prior to the effective date of
this article.
§ 212-5. Contribution statement by professional business entity.
C. For purposes of this article, a "professional business entity" seeking a
public contract means an individual, including the individual's spouse,
if any, and any child living at home; person; firm; corporation;
professional corporation; partnership; organization; or association. The
definition of a business entity includes all principals who own 10% or
more of the equity in the corporation or business trust, partners, and
officers in the aggregate employed by the entity as well as any
subsidiaries directly controlled by the business entity.
D. Any professional business entity under this section may annually
contribute a maximum of $2,600 each for any purpose to any candidate
for Mayor or Township Committee, or $7,200 to a Waterford Township
political party committee or PAC without violating Subsection A of this
section.
E. For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall be:
(1) The Waterford Township Committee and the Mayor of Waterford
Township, if the contract requires approval or appropriation from
the Committee.
(2) The Mayor of Waterford Township, if the contract requires approval
of the Mayor, or if a public officer who is responsible for the award
of a contract is appointed by the Mayor.
(3) The Waterford Township Land Use Planning Board.
F. Contributions given to members of, or candidates for, another
municipal governing body that is engaged in a shared services or joint
purchasing agreement with Waterford Township shall not be deemed in
violation of this article nor does the article preclude the participation of
a shared services or joint purchasing agreement on account of such
contributions.
A. Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure services,
including banking or insurance coverage services, with any
professional business entity, the Township or any of its purchasing
agents or agencies and the Planning Board, as the case may be, shall
§ 212-3 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 212-5
195:717
§ 212-6. Return of excess contributions.
A professional business entity or Township candidate or officeholder or
Waterford Township political party committee or PAC referenced in this
article may cure a violation of § 212-4 of this article, if, within 60 days after
the date on which the applicable ELEC report is published, the professional
business entity notifies the Township Committee in writing and seeks and
receives reimbursement of a contribution from the Waterford Township
candidate or municipal or committee or PAC referenced in this article.
§ 212-7. "Wheeling" prohibited.
A candidate for Mayor or Township Committee shall not make a contribution
to any other candidate committee or municipal party committee not
affiliated with the Township of Waterford; nor shall any such candidate
accept a contribution from any other candidate committee or municipal
party committee not affiliated with the Township of Waterford.
§ 212-8. Violations and penalties.
receive a sworn statement from the professional business entity made
under penalty of perjury that the bidder or offeror has not made a
contribution in violation of § 212-4 of this article.
B. The professional business entity shall have a continuing duty to report
any violations of this article that may occur during the negotiation or
duration of a contract. The certification required under this subsection
shall be made prior to entry into the contract or agreement with the
Township and shall be in addition to any other certifications that may be
required by any other provision of law.
A. It shall be a breach of the terms of the Waterford Township professional
services agreement for a business entity to:
(1) Make or solicit a contribution in violation of this article;
(2) Knowingly conceal or misrepresent a contribution given or
received;
(3) Make or solicit a contribution through intermediaries for the
purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the
contribution;
(4) Make or solicit any contribution on the condition or with the
agreement that it will be contributed to a campaign committee of
any candidate or holder of the public office of Waterford Township;
(5) Engage or employ a lobbyist or consultant with the intent or
understanding that such lobbyist or consultant would make or
solicit any contribution which, if made or solicited by the business
entity itself, would subject that entity to the restrictions of this
article;
§ 212-5 WATERFORD CODE § 212-8
195:718
(6) Fund contributions made by third parties, including consultants,
attorneys, family members, and employees;
(7) Engage in any exchange of contributions to circumvent the intent
of this article; or
(8) Directly or indirectly, through or by any other person or means, do
any act which would subject that entity to the restrictions of this
article.
B. Any professional business entity who violates Subsection A above shall
be disqualified from eligibility for future Waterford Township contracts
for a period of four calendar years from the date of the violation.
§ 212-8 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 212-8
195:719

ARTICLE II
Award of Professional Services Contracts
§ 212-9. Statement of public policy.
It is the purpose of this article that, notwithstanding that professional
services contracts and certain other contracts for goods and services are
exempt from the competitive bidding requirements of the Local Public
Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq., the Township Committee deems
it appropriate, and consistent with the provisions of the New Jersey
legislation, now codified at N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20.1 et seq., to award such
contracts through a competitive, quality-based, fair and open process.
§ 212-10. Process for award of professional services contracts.
The Township of Waterford, or any agency or instrumentality thereof, shall
not enter into a contract, including a professional services contract, or such
other contract, which is exempt from public bidding requirements, having
an anticipated value in excess of $10,000 as determined by the municipality,
agency or instrumentality, with a business entity, except a contract that is
awarded pursuant to a fair and open process, if, during the preceding oneyear
period, that business entity has made a contribution that is reportable
by the recipient under N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq., to any municipal committee
of a political party in that municipality if a member of that political party is
serving in an elected public office of that municipality when the contract is
awarded or to any candidate committee of any person serving in an elected
public office of that municipality when the contract is awarded. The fair and
open process shall be quality-based and shall be as follows:
A. Professional services may be awarded by virtue of a publicly advertised
request for qualification ("RFQ") and/or request for proposal ("RFP"),
which will be issued as one document for those appointments which are
made on an annual basis.
B. For said positions, no contract shall be awarded unless and until the
positions are:
(1) Publicly advertised in newspapers in sufficient time to give notice
in advance of the solicitation for contracts;
(2) Awarded under a process that provides for public solicitation of
proposals and qualifications:
(3) Awarded and disclosed under criteria established in writing by the
Township of Waterford prior to the solicitation of proposals or
qualifications; and
(4) Publicly announced when awarded; and as to those RFQs and RFPs
which prove to be unsuccessful, the Township Clerk shall retain a
copy of same on file for a period of not less than 60 days.
§ 212-9 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 212-10
195:721
§ 212-11. Emergency exceptions.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Township Committee recognizes that
the New Jersey Legislature has provided for the occurrence of certain
emergencies, and further recognizes that, therefore, the procedure outlined
above might not be capable of being achieved in the event of an emergency
or similar time constraints. Thus, should a situation arise, and time does
not permit resort to this procedure, and the immediate performance of
services is necessary, then an award for same may be made in accordance
with the provisions of the Local Public Contracts Law relating to emergency
contracts, and such rules and regulations as may be promulgated, from
time to time, by the Township Committee with regard to same. No such
emergency contracts, however, may be awarded without submission to the
Township Clerk of a certification establishing a basis for the deviation from
the procedures outlined herein.
C. For contracts which arise on an occasional basis, such as appraisers
needed for acquisition of farmland and/or open space, as well as title
searches, surveying, and similar work associated with same, and
comparable assignments, such as planning services needed for Master
Plan updates, appraisals, special counsel, special project engineer
contracts, etc., professional services contracts may be awarded without
following the foregoing provisions, so long as:
(1) The anticipated value does not exceed the threshold of $10,000 set
forth above; and
(2) The Township Administrator makes every effort to solicit at least
two proposals for said work.
§ 212-10 WATERFORD CODE § 212-11
195:722
Chapter 214
POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult establishments — See Ch. 77.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 82.
Fees — See Ch. 124, Art. II.
Loitering — See Ch. 184.
§ 214-1. License required.
No person shall keep or maintain for gain or profit within the Township
of Waterford any pool or billiard parlor without first obtaining a license
therefor.
§ 214-2. Application for license.
No license shall be granted except upon application in writing therefor to
the Clerk of the township, setting forth the place and premises where the
pool or billiard tables are to be set up and the number of the same, with an
affidavit that the facts set forth therein are true.
§ 214-3. Approval by Township Committee.
The Clerk shall issue said license only after approval by the Township
Committee.
§ 214-4. License fee; required information.
§ 214-5. Exhibition of license.
The licensee of any such pool or billiard parlor shall at all times exhibit his
license certificate in a conspicuous place in the room where said business is
carried on, and failure thereof shall be presumptive evidence of having no
license.
§ 214-6. Clerk to keep certain records.
The Clerk shall keep a proper record of all licenses issued and all moneys
received therefrom.
A. The license fee shall be as set by the Township Fee Schedule
Ordinance155 for each table.156
B. The license shall contain the location of the premises and the number of
tables therein licensed and the date of expiration of said license.
155. Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
156. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 212-11 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 214-7
214:723
§ 214-7. Compliance with certain rules and regulations.
Every licensee shall comply at all times with the rules and regulations of the
Department of Public Safety.
§ 214-8. Violations and penalties.157
Any person who is guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be sentenced to imprisonment in the county jail for any term not
exceeding 90 days or shall be fined a sum not to exceed $1,000 or a period
of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof,
within the discretion of the court before whom any such person is convicted.
Chapter 220
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animal waste — See Ch. 94.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 100.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 103.
Fences — See Ch. 131.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 137.
Land development and zoning — See Ch. 176.
Littering — See Ch. 180.
Solid waste — See Ch. 235.
Maintenance of streets and sidewalks — See
Ch. 239, Art. II.
Unlicensed vehicles — See Ch. 270.
Public health nuisances (Board of
Health) — See Ch. 306.
157. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 214-7 WATERFORD CODE § 214-8
214:724
ARTICLE I
Standards and Administration
[Adopted 2-26-1997 by Ord. No. 97-1158]
§ 220-1. Purpose. [Amended 11-9-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-15;
8-8-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-19]
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the residents of Waterford Township through the enforcement
of minimum standards of maintenance for residential and nonresidential
buildings and grounds. The provisions of this article shall apply to all
structures which are now, or may become in the future, substandard with
respect to structure, protection against fire hazard, equipment or
maintenance, inadequate provisions for light and air, lack of property
heating, unsanitary conditions and overcrowding or shall otherwise be
deemed to constitute a danger to safety, health and welfare. The existence
of such conditions, factors or characteristics adversely affects public safety,
health and welfare and leads to the continuation, extension and aggravation
of urban blight. Adequate protection of the public, therefore, requires the
establishment and enforcement of these minimum property standards.
Further, this chapter is adopted to exercise the police powers granted
by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq., and the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1 and
N.J.A.C. 5:28-1, the New Jersey State Housing Code. Three copies of the
New Jersey State Housing Code shall be placed on file in the office of the
Township Clerk and are available to all persons desiring to use and examine
the same.
§ 220-2. Administration.
A. The Construction Official and/or Zoning and Code Enforcement Official
of Waterford Township are hereby designated and appointed as the
principal public officers authorized to exercise the powers prescribed in
this article (hereinafter referred to as "officials").
B. Application of the Building Code. Any alterations to buildings, or
changes of use therein, which may be caused directly or indirectly by
the enforcement of this article shall be done in accordance with the
applicable section of the code, as amended from time to time.
C. Existing buildings. This article establishes minimum requirements for
the continued occupancy of all buildings used for human habitation or
use and does not replace or modify requirements otherwise established
for the construction, repair, alteration or use of buildings, equipment or
facilities, except as provided in this section.
158. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 220, Property Maintenance, as
follows: Art. I, Unguarded Wells and Excavations, adopted 12-11-1974 as Ch. 118 of the
1974 Code; Art. II, General Provisions, adopted 7-27-1988 by Ord. No. 88-13.
§ 220-1 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 220-3
214:725
§ 220-3. Word usage; definitions.
Unless otherwise stated, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this
article, have the meanings indicated in this section:
A. Word usage. Words used in the present tense include the future; words
in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; and the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular.
B. Terms defined in International Property Maintenance Code. Where
terms are not defined in this section and are defined in the International
Property Maintenance Code, they shall have the meanings ascribed to
them as in the International Property Maintenance Code. [Amended
11-9-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-15]
C. Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined under the provisions of
this article or under the provisions of the International Property
Maintenance Code, they shall have ascribed to them their ordinarily
accepted meanings or such as the context herein may imply. [Amended
11-9-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-15]
D. Terms defined. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure, the use of which is incidental
to that attached to or located on the same premises as the principal
structure.
BLIGHT — The general condition of buildings, structures and vacant
land areas that are unsafe, insanitary, dilapidated or deleterious to
the health, safety and welfare of neighboring properties and the
community.
BUILDING — Any building or structure, or part thereof, used for human
habitation, use or occupancy, including any accessory buildings and
appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and any
nonresidential building or structure used for commercial or industrial
use, including accessory buildings and appurtenances belonging
thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.[Amended 4-11-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-4]
CODE — BOCA, NEC, National Plumbing, NFPA and the New Jersey
State Housing Code.[Amended 11-9-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-15;
8-8-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-19]
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — The official who is charged with the
issuance of construction permits and inspections, and designated
herein or otherwise charged with the responsibilities of administering
this article, or his authorized representative.
ZONING AND CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — The official who is
charged with the application of the Land Use Ordinance and Municipal
Codes, designated herein or otherwise charged with the responsibilities
of administering this article, or his authorized representative.
§ 220-3 WATERFORD CODE § 220-3
214:726
DWELLING — Any building, including a motel-type of operation, which
has facilities as described in the following definition of "dwelling unit,"
which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or
sleeping by human occupants, provided that temporary housing, as
hereafter defined, shall not be regarded as a dwelling.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building containing two or more units.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms arranged for the use of one
or more individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, with
cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS — The open space on the property under
the control of owners or operators of such premises.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents
or other pests by eliminating their harborage places, by removing
or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food, by
poison spraying, fumigating or trapping or by any other approved pest
elimination methods.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space arranged for
living, eating and sleeping purposes, not including bathrooms, water
closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, hallways and other
accessory floor space.
INFESTATION — The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other
pests.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES — Any vehicle powered by a portable
or installed gas engine which does not have a current registration and,
when applicable, an insurance certificate. This definition does not apply
to vehicles used on an agricultural parcel.
JUNK — Scrap iron, metal, pipe, glass, paper, plastics, used lumber,
electrical appliances and equipment, machinery and parts, rags, motor
vehicle parts, vehicles unfit for reconditioning or any material
commonly known as and referred to as "junk" in the ordinary and
accepted meaning of the word.
JUNK YARD — A parcel of land on which junk is placed, collected or
stored.
NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING — Any building or structure used for a
commercial or industrial use.[Added 4-11-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-4]
OCCUPANT — Any person over one year of age, including the owner
or occupant, living and sleeping in a dwelling unit or having actual
possession of said dwelling or rooming unit.
OPENABLE AREA — That part of a window or door which is available
for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
§ 220-3 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 220-3
214:727
§ 220-4. Enforcement; authority of officials; inspections.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a
multifamily dwelling, rooming house or motel in which dwelling units
or rooming units are let or offered for occupancy.
OWNER — Any person who, alone, jointly or severally with others:
PARTY IN INTEREST — Any person who, alone, jointly or severally
with others, holds an interest in any building as a secured creditor or
lienholder.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage, including but not limited to the residue from the burning of
wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rugs, cartons,
boxes, wood (exclusive of wood properly stacked for use in a fireplace
or wood stove), excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard
trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery and dust
and other similar materials.
SUPPLIED — Installed, furnished or provided by the owner or operator.
TEMPORARY HOUSING — Any tent, trailer or other structure used for
human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not
attached to the ground, to another structure or to any utility system on
the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days.
WORKMANLIKE STATE OF MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR — That such
maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonably skillful manner.
Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit or
nonresidential building with or without accompanying actual
possession thereof; or [Amended 4-11-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-4]
(1)
Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling
unit as owner or agent of the owner or as executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of
the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner
shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article, and the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto to the same extent
as if he were the owner.
(2)
A. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Construction and/or Zoning
and Code Enforcement Officials or their authorized representatives to
enforce the provisions of this article. Nothing herein shall prohibit the
officers of the Township Police Department from issuing summonses for
violations of this article.
B. The Officials shall have the power to grant relief from any of the
provisions of this article where there are practical difficulties in the way
of carrying out the strict letter of this article, provided that the intent of
§ 220-3 WATERFORD CODE § 220-4
214:728
§ 220-5. Issuance of notice of violation; summonses, complaints
and orders.
this article shall be observed and public safety secured. The particulars
of such relief when granted or allowed and the decision of the Official
shall be recorded and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant
and the Municipal Clerk for the governing body.
C. Inspection of premises and the issuing of orders in connection
therewith under the provisions of this article shall be the joint
responsibility of the Construction Official and Zoning and Code
Enforcement Official. Whenever, in the opinion of an Official, it is
necessary or desirable to have inspections of any condition by any other
department or professional (such as an architect or structural
engineer), arrangements will be made for this to be done in such a
manner that the owners or occupants of buildings shall not be subjected
to visits by numerous inspectors nor to multiple or conflicting orders.
No order for correction of any violation under this article shall be
issued without the approval of the Official, and it shall be the
responsibility of the official, before issuing any order, to determine that
it has the concurrence of any other officer of the Township government
concerned with any matter involved on the case in question.
D. Except as may otherwise be provided by statute or local law or
ordinance, no officer, agent or employee of the Township charged with
the enforcement of this article shall become personally liable for any
damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act
required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties under this
article. No person who institutes or assists in the prosecution of a
criminal proceeding under this article shall be liable to damages
hereunder unless he acted with actual malice and without reasonable
grounds for believing that the person accused or prosecuted was guilty
of an unlawful act or omission. Any suit brought against any officer,
agent or employee of the Township as a result of any act required or
permitted in this discharge of his duties under this article shall be
defended by the legal representatives of the Township, at Township
cost, until the final determination of the proceedings therein.
E. The Official shall make or cause to be made inspections to determine
the condition of any land, building or structure in order to safeguard the
safety, health and welfare of the public under the provisions of this
article. The Official is authorized to enter any building or structure only
by the expressed consent of the owner or his agent or by an inspection
warrant issued by the Municipal Judge.
F. All nonresidential buildings shall be subject to life hazard and non-lifehazard
inspections for fire safety. [Added 4-11-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-4]
A. Any building or property which now exists or which hereafter may exist
that is unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use due to dilapidation,
§ 220-4 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 220-5
214:729
defects, increase in the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities,
lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities, or due to other conditions
rendering such buildings unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous or
detrimental to the health or safety or otherwise inimical to the welfare
of the residents of the Township or that otherwise are in violation of this
article, shall be repaired, closed or demolished in accordance with the
provisions herein provided.
B. If the Official's investigation discloses a basis for a notice of violation,
he shall issue and cause such notice to be served upon the owners and
parties in interest in such property. The notice shall state the violation
and contain a requirement that the property owner shall notify the
Official, in writing, of his intentions with respect to correcting the
condition. In the event that there is no response from the property
owner within the time period set forth on said notice, or should the
response be unsatisfactory to the Official, the Official shall file a
complaint with the Waterford Township Municipal Court and a hearing
shall be held before the Municipal Judge, at which time a penalty may
be assessed for the violation as hereinafter set forth.
C. Whenever a petition is filed with the Construction Official by a public
authority or by at least five residents of the Township charging that any
building or property is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use
or whenever it appears to the Construction Official that any building is
unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use, he shall, if his preliminary
investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be
served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such building a
complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice
that a hearing will be held before the Construction Official at a place
therein fixed not less than seven days nor more than 30 days after the
serving of said complaint; that the owner and parties in interest shall be
given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in
person or otherwise, and that the rules of evidence prevailing in the
courts shall not be controlling in hearings before him.
D. Findings of Official; order; inspection costs.
(1) After such hearing, if the Construction Official determines that the
building under consideration is unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use, he shall state, in writing, his findings of fact in
support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be
served upon the owners and persons in interest an order: requiring
the repair, alteration or improvement of said building to be made by
the owner within a reasonable time, which time shall be set forth in
the order, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate or have said
building vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order. If
the building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner
fails to repair, alter or improve said building within the time
specified in the order, then the owner shall be required to remove
§ 220-5 WATERFORD CODE § 220-5
214:730
or demolish said building within a reasonable time as specified in
said order of removal.
(2) All costs incurred for professional inspections by an architect or
structural engineer in connection with an investigation and hearing
shall be assessed to the property owner in accordance with
§ 220-5G below.
E. If the owner fails or persons in interest fail to comply with an order to
repair, alter or improve or, at the option of the owner, to vacate and
close said building, the Construction Official may cause such building to
be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed; and the
Construction Official shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of
any building so closed a placard with the following words: "This
building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use; the use or
occupancy of this building is prohibited and unlawful."
F. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the Construction Official may cause said building to be
removed or demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition
thereof after advertisement for and receipt of bids to complete the
specified work.
G. The amount of the costs of the filing of legal papers, professional
inspection fees, expert witness fees, search fees and advertisement
charges incurred in the course of any proceeding taken under this
article determined in favor of the municipality, and such costs of such
repairs, alterations or improvements or vacating and closing or removal
or demolition, if any, or the amount of the balance thereof remaining
after deduction of the sum, if any, realized from the sale of materials
derived from such building, or from any contract for removal or
demolition thereof, shall be a municipal lien against the real property
upon which the cost was incurred. If the building is removed or
demolished by the Construction Official, the materials of such building
shall be sold. There shall be credited against the cost of the removal or
demolition thereof, including the clearance and, if necessary, leveling of
the site, the proceeds of any sale of such materials or any sum derived
from any contract for the removal or demolition of the building. If there
are no such credits or if the sum total of such costs exceeds the total of
such credits, a detailed statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount
so due shall be filed with the Municipal Tax Assessor or other custodian
of the records of tax liens and a copy thereof shall be forthwith
forwarded to the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested. If
the total of the credits exceeds such cost, the balance remaining shall
be deposited in the Superior Court by the Township, shall be secured in
such manner as may be directed by such court and shall be disbursed
according to the order or judgment of the court to the persons found to
be in title thereto by final order or judgment of such court. Any owner
or party in interest may, within 30 days from the date of filing of the lien
certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the Superior Court to
§ 220-5 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 220-5
214:731
§ 220-6. Environmental requirements.
contest the reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the costs
set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
H. Summonses, complaints and orders issued pursuant to this article by
the Official shall be served personally or by certified mail upon the
owner and persons in interest who reside in the Township or to anyone
residing in the household of said owner or owners and persons in
interest who are over the age of 14 years. If said owners or owner and/
or persons in interest reside outside the Township, then said
complaints, orders and notices shall be either served upon them
personally or by certified mail. If the whereabouts of such persons is
unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the Official in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, the Official shall make an affidavit to
that effect and file it and a copy of the complaint with the Municipal
Clerk. In that event, the serving of such complaint, order or notice upon
such persons may be made by publishing the same once each week for
two consecutive weeks in the official newspaper of the Township. The
last notice shall be published not less than 30 days before the proposed
removal or destruction. A copy of said complaint, order or notice shall
be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected. A copy of
such complaint, order or notice shall be duly recorded with the Clerk of
Camden County, all pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 and 40:48-2.7. Proof of
service of all complaints, orders and notices shall be filed within 10
days thereafter with the Municipal Clerk and the Municipal Tax
Collector.
I. When any such removal or destruction shall have been undertaken and
completed by the Construction Official, an accurate account of the costs
and expenses shall be kept and a true statement, under oath or
affirmation, shall be filed by the person in charge of the removal or
destruction with the Municipal Clerk, who shall record it in a file to be
kept for that purpose.
J. If an actual and immediate danger to life is posed by the threatened
collapse of any fire-damaged or other structurally unsafe building, the
Construction Official may, after taking such measures as may be
necessary to make the building temporarily safe, seek a judgment in
summary proceedings before the Superior Court for the demolition of
the building.
A. Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum
conditions of property and structures. Every building or structure,
residential or commercial, and the premises on which it stands, shall
comply with conditions herein prescribed as they apply thereto. These
requirements shall also apply to nonresidential buildings, as defined
herein, as deemed necessary. [Amended 4-11-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-4]
§ 220-5 WATERFORD CODE § 220-6
214:732
§ 220-7. Exterior structure. [Amended 4-11-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-4]
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any building or structure, or portion thereof, which does not comply with
the code and the following requirements. These requirements shall also
apply to nonresidential buildings, as defined herein, as deemed necessary.
B. Exterior property areas. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or
let to another for occupancy any dwelling, structure or premises which
does not comply with the following requirements:
(1) Sanitation. All exterior property areas shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish,
inoperable motor vehicles, junk and garbage.
(2) Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained
so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water.
(3) All cisterns, cesspools or septic tanks shall be covered by a cover
sufficient to withstand one thousand 1,000 pounds pressure per
each 10 square feet of the cover area.
(4) Insect and rodent harborage. The property shall be maintained in
such a fashion to ensure that it is not a source for insects, rodents,
vermin or other pests which become a nuisance and adversely
impact upon neighboring properties.
(5) Lawn areas shall be kept trimmed at a reasonable height.
C. Construction prior to 1978 shall be tested for lead-based paint.
A. Foundations. Every foundation, wall and all other exterior surfaces
shall be maintained in a workmanlike state of maintenance and repair
and shall be kept in such condition as to exclude rodents and other
intrusions. The foundation elements shall adequately support the
building at all points.
B. Exterior walls. Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose
or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions which might
admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the
occupied spaces of the building.
C. Exterior maintenance of structures. The exterior of every structure or
accessory structure or other improvement on the premises shall be kept
in good repair, and all exposed surfaces thereof subject to deterioration
shall be covered by a protective coating appropriate for the particular
material involved.
D. Roofs. The roof shall be structurally sound, tight and have no defects
which might admit rain, and roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent
rainwater from causing dampness in the walls or interior of the
building.
§ 220-6 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 220-7
214:733
§ 220-8. Interior structure. [Amended 4-11-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-4]
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
or use any building, dwelling, rooming unit or portion thereof which does
not comply with the code and the following requirements. These
requirements shall also apply to nonresidential buildings, as defined herein,
as deemed necessary.
E. Drainage. Leaders and drainpipes shall be securely fastened to the
buildings and shall direct stormwater from foundation walls of the
structure.
F. Stairs, porches and railings. Stairs and other exit facilities shall be
adequate for safe ingress and egress. They shall be constructed and
maintained in conformance with the International Property
Maintenance Code and the provisions of this article. [Amended
11-9-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-15]
G. Structural safety. Every outside stair, porch and appurtenance attached
thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe for use and capable of
supporting the loads to which it is subjected, as required by the
International Property Maintenance Code, and shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair. [Amended 11-9-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-15]
H. Windows, doors and hatchways. Every window, exterior door and
basement hatchway shall be substantially tight and shall be kept in
sound condition and repair.
I. Exit doors. Every door available as an exit shall be capable of being
opened easily from the inside by occupants.
J. Guards for basement windows. Every basement or cellar window shall
be protected against the entry of rodents and insects.
K. House numbers. Every dwelling unit will have the proper address
prominently displayed. The numbers shall be least three inches in
height, affixed to the structure and clearly visible from the road. In the
case of properties with dwelling units not visible from the road, the
numbers shall be placed at the driveway entrance as well.
A. Structural members. The supporting structural members of every
structure used for human occupancy shall be maintained structurally
sound, showing no evidence of deterioration which would render them
incapable of carrying the imposed loads.
B. Interior stairs and railings. The interior stairs of every structure used
for human occupancy shall have a railing and be maintained in sound
condition and good repair by replacing treads and risers that evidence
excessive wear or are broken, warped or loose. Every inside stair shall
§ 220-7 WATERFORD CODE § 220-8
214:734
§ 220-9. Sanitary and heating requirements.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy,
any dwelling unit for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating
therein which does not comply with the code and the following
requirements:
be constructed and maintained as to be safe for use and capable of
supporting required loads.
C. Bathroom and kitchen floors. Every powder room, bathroom and
kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be
substantially impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be
easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
D. Sanitation. The interior of every structure used for human occupancy
shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free from any
accumulation of rubbish or garbage. Rubbish, garbage and other refuse
shall be kept inside temporary storage facilities.
E. Insect and rodent harborage. Structures used for human occupancy
shall be kept free from excessive insect and rodent infestation. Where
excessive infestation is found, it shall be promptly exterminated by
acceptable processes which will not be injurious to human health. After
extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent
reinfestation.
F. Maintenance of interior. Interior walls, ceilings and other exposed
surfaces on the interior of structures used for human occupancy shall
be kept smooth, clean and free of excessive flaking, loose or peeling
paint, plaster or paper and shall be capable of being maintained free of
visible foreign matter and vermin and in a sanitary condition. Where
necessary to accomplish the foregoing or any part thereof, by reason of
the nature of the surface material, such interior walls shall be painted,
papered, plastered or otherwise provided with a protective coating.
G. Smoke detectors. Smoke detectors shall be installed outside of each
separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms and on
each additional story of dwellings, including basements and cellars but
not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. All detectors shall
be connected to a sounding device or other detectors to provide, when
actuated, an alarm which will be audible in all sleeping areas. All
detectors shall be approved and listed and shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. In new construction
of residential or commercial buildings, required smoke detectors shall
receive their primary power from the building wiring when such wiring
is served from a commercial source. Wiring shall be permanent without
a disconnecting switch other than those required for over-current
protection. Smoke detectors may be battery operated when installed in
existing buildings or in buildings without commercial power.
§ 220-8 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 220-9
214:735
A. Sanitary facilities. The following minimum sanitary facilities shall be
supplied and maintained in a sanitary and safe working condition:
(1) Water closet. Every dwelling unit shall contain a bathroom within
its walls, separate from the habitable rooms, which affords privacy
and which is equipped with a water closet.
(2) Lavatory. Every dwelling unit shall contain a lavatory which, when
a water closet is required, shall be in the same room with said
water closet.
(3) Bathtub or shower. Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which
affords privacy to a person in said room and which is equipped with
a bathtub or shower.
(4) Kitchen sink. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink apart
from the lavatory required under § 220-9A(2).
(5) Water and sewer system. Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin,
bathtub or shower and water closet required under the provisions
of this section shall be properly connected to either a public water
and sewer system or to an approved private water and septic
system. All sinks, lavatories, bathtubs and showers shall be
supplied with hot and cold running water.
B. Water heater facilities. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with water
heating facilities which are installed in an approved manner, properly
maintained and properly connected with hot water lines to the fixtures
required to be supplied with hot water under § 220-9A(5). Water
heating facilities shall be capable of heating water to such a
temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at
any kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, shower and laundry facility or
other similar units.
C. Heating facilities.
(1) Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly
installed, maintained in safe and good working condition and are
capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and water closet compartments to a temperature of at
least 65° Fahrenheit at a distance of three feet above floor level
under ordinary weather conditions.
(2) Operation of heating facilities. Every heating or water heating
facility shall be installed and shall operate in accordance with the
requirements of the International Property Maintenance Code and
Fire Prevention Code. [Amended 11-9-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-15]
§ 220-9 WATERFORD CODE § 220-10
214:736
§ 220-10. Occupancy requirements.
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling unit or
room for the purpose of living therein which does not comply with the code
and the following requirements:
§ 220-11. Lighting and ventilation requirements.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling unit or rooming unit for the purpose of living therein which
does not comply with the code and the following requirements:
A. Minimum ceiling heights. At least 1/2 of the floor area of every
habitable room shall have a ceiling height of at least seven feet and the
floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than
five feet shall not be considered as a part of the floor area in computing
the total floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the
maximum permissible occupancy thereof.
B. Required space in dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain a
minimum gross floor area of not less than 150 square feet for the first
occupant and 100 square feet for each additional occupant. The floor
area shall be calculated on the basis of the total area of all habitable
rooms.
C. Occupancy of rooming units. Occupancy of dwelling units and rooming
units having only one habitable room shall be limited to two persons.
A. Natural light in habitable rooms. Every habitable room shall have at
least one window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a
court. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for
every habitable room shall be 10% of the floor area of such room,
except in kitchens when artificial light may be provided in accordance
with the provisions of the Building Code. Whenever walls or other
portions of a structure face a window or any room and such
obstructions are located less than three feet from the window and
extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window
shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and
shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total
window area for the room.
B. Electrical outlets required. Every electrical outlet and fixture shall be
maintained in good and safe working condition and shall be connected
to the source of electric power in an approved manner.
C. Adequate ventilation. Every habitable room shall have a least one
window which can be easily opened or such other device as will
adequately ventilate the room. The total openable window area in every
habitable room shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum window
area size required in Subsection A above, except where mechanical
ventilation is provided in accordance with the provisions of the
§ 220-10 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 220-11
214:737
§ 220-12. Maintenance Code certificate.
Responsibilities of owners of property, their agents and prospective
occupants shall be as follows:
International Property Maintenance Code and Fire Prevention Code.
[Amended 11-9-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-15]
D. Ventilation and light in bathroom and water closet. Every bathroom and
water closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation
requirements for habitable rooms as required by Subsections A and C,
except that no window shall be required in bathrooms or water closet
compartments equipped with an approved ventilation system.
A. Certificate required.
(1) No owner or his agent shall sell, rent, transfer, grant, lease, let,
mortgage with right of occupancy or otherwise dispose of the
ownership or occupancy, whether or not for consideration and
whether such disposal of ownership or occupancy is temporary or
permanent, of any dwelling unit, hotel, motel, rooming house,
rooming unit, boardinghouse or premises on which a building is
located and is used for human occupancy unless a maintenance
code certificate, certifying that the building and premises are in
compliance with all ordinances of Waterford Township, shall first
be obtained from the Official. Such maintenance code certificate
shall be granted or denied after the property is inspected in the
presence of the owner or his agent.
(2) No owner, owner's agent or lessee shall sell, transfer, lease, change
the use or expand an existing use of a nonresidential building
unless a maintenance code certificate, certifying that the building
and premises are in compliance with all Township ordinances and
any other requirement imposed by governmental regulations, shall
first be obtained from the Official. Such maintenance code
certificate shall be granted or denied after the property is
inspected in the presence of the owner or owner's agent. [Added
4-11-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-4]
B. The Official shall cause to be prepared appropriate application forms
for such certificates, which forms shall be available at the office of the
Municipal Clerk.
C. The Official shall also cause to be prepared appropriate forms of such
certificates.
D. A charge as set forth in Chapter 124, Fees, to cover the cost of
inspection in connection with such application shall be paid to the
Municipal Clerk at the time the application is filed and shall not be
refundable. In the event that more than two visits are required to one
site, an additional fee shall be charged.
§ 220-11 WATERFORD CODE § 220-12
214:738
§ 220-13. Enforcement; violations and penalties.159
This article may be enforced by the filing of a complaint against any person,
firm, corporation, party of interest or occupant who shall violate any of its
provisions. Said party shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000,
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or community service of not more
than 30 days, or any combination thereof. Every day in which said person,
firm, corporation, party of interest or occupant remains in violation of the
provisions of this article shall be deemed a separate offense. A continuance
of a violation or noncompliance with the provisions of this article shall be
deemed a nuisance, and the governing body shall have the right to apply
to the courts of the state for injunctive or other relief in addition to the
penalties prescribed herein.
§ 220-14. Restraint order by action of injunctive relief.
Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Official under this article
may, within 30 days after the posting and service of such order, bring an
action for injunctive relief to restrain the Official from carrying out the
provisions of the order and for any other appropriate relief.
§ 220-15. Severability.
If for any reason any section or provision of this article shall be questioned
in any court and shall be held to be unconstitutional or invalid, the same
shall not be held to affect any other section or provision of this article.
§ 220-16. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this
article shall be and the same are hereby repealed. Chapter 162, Housing
Standards, of the Code of the Township of Waterford is hereby repealed in
its entirety.
E. A property owner shall be entitled to the issuance of a conditional
maintenance code certificate, provided that the purchaser of the
property acknowledges the violations noted by the Official and agrees
that such violations shall be remedied within 90 days of the sale of the
property. Extensions may be granted for an additional 90 days, provided
that work is in progress.
F. The issuance of a maintenance code certificate is not a warranty with
respect to the fitness of the subject property for any particular purpose.
No one other than the owner of the property who has applied for the
maintenance code certificate may rely upon it, and the certificate is
merely verification that the subject property complies with the
minimum requirements of Waterford Township's Property Maintenance
Code.
159. Editor’s Note: See also Ch. 1, Art. II, General Penalty.
§ 220-12 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 220-17
214:739
§ 220-17. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon final passage and publication
according to law.
§ 220-18. Cost of abatement as lien. [Added 11-12-1998 by Ord. No.
98-17]
A. Where abatement of a nuisance, other than as described in § 220-5
herein, requires expending Township funds, the enforcing official shall
present a report of work required to accomplish such abatement,
together with a cost estimate to the Township Committee. The
enforcing official shall also submit a summary of all proceedings
undertaken to secure compliance from the effected property owner
prior to seeking the use of municipal funding. The Township Committee
may order that the Township Administrator proceed to have the
necessary work completed to abate the nuisance and bring the property
into compliance with this article. The work to be completed shall not
exceed the amount of funds available and authorized to abate the
nuisance. Upon completion of the work authorized, the Administrator
shall submit a report of all expenses and costs, including administrative
costs, to the Township Committee. The Township Committee shall adopt
a resolution authorizing that said expenses and costs shall become a
lien against the effected property, collectible as provided by law. A copy
of the resolution authorizing said lien shall be certified by the Township
Clerk and filed with the Township Tax Collector, who shall be
responsible for the collection thereof. A copy of the resolution shall also
be sent by certified and regular mail to the last known address of the
property owner.
B. Where the abatement of a nuisance requires immediate expenditure of
Township funds to rectify an imminent danger, hazard or lifethreatening
situation, or for the necessary protection of the health,
safety and welfare of the public, the enforcing official shall submit to
the Township Committee a report identifying the reason or reasons
such action was required and the amount of all Township funds
expended. The Township Committee shall adopt a confirming resolution
approving the action and the expenditure of municipal funds for this
purpose, whereupon same shall become a lien against the effected
property collectible as provided by law. A copy of the resolution
approving the expenses and costs shall be certified by the Township
Clerk and filed with the Township Tax Collector, who shall be
responsible for the collection thereof. A copy of the resolution shall also
be sent by certified and regular mail to the last known address of the
affected property owner.
§ 220-17 WATERFORD CODE § 220-18
214:740
ARTICLE II
Vacant and Abandoned Properties
[Adopted 10-28-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-18160]
§ 220-19. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPAL OFFICER — The Township Code Enforcement Officer or such
official that may be designated to act for the Code Enforcement Officer.
OWNER — Includes the title holder, any agent of the title holder having
authority to act with respect to a vacant property, any foreclosing entity
that has filed a notice with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to the provisions
N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 (P.L. 2008, c. 127, Sec. 17, as amended by P.L. 2009, c.
296), or any other entity determined by the Township to have authority to
act with respect to the property.
VACANT PROPERTY — Any building used or to be used as a residence
or a commercial use not legally occupied or at which substantially all
lawful construction operations or residential or commercial occupancy has
ceased, and which is in such condition that it cannot legally be occupied
without repair or rehabilitation, including but not limited to any property
meeting the definition of abandoned property in N.J.S.A. 55:19-80; provided,
however, that any property where all building systems are in working order,
where the building and grounds are maintained in good order, or where the
building is in a habitable condition and where the building is being actively
marketed by its owner for sale or rental, shall not be deemed a vacant
property for purposes of this chapter.[Amended 3-8-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-10]
§ 220-20. Registration requirements.
Effective December 15, 2015, the owner of any vacant property as defined
herein shall, within 30 calendar days after the building becomes vacant
property or within 30 calendar days after assuming ownership of the vacant
property, whichever is later; or within 10 calendar days of receipt of notice
from the municipality, file a registration statement for such vacant property
with the Township Clerk on forms provided by the Township for such
purposes. Any failure to provide notice by the municipality shall not
constitute grounds for failing to register the property.
A. Each property having a separate block and lot number as designated in
official records of the municipality shall be registered separately.
B. The registration statement shall include the name, street address,
telephone number, and email address (if applicable) of a person 21
160. Editor’s Note: This ordinance was amended 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-24 to add
provisions requiring registration of defaulted mortgage property, which provisions were
superseded 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-10. See now Art. III of this chapter.
§ 220-19 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 220-20
214:741
years or older, designated by the owner or owners as the authorized
agent for receiving notices of code violations and for receiving process
in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding on
behalf of such owner or owners in connection with the enforcement of
any applicable code.
C. The registration statement shall include the name, street address,
telephone number, and email address (if applicable) of the firm and the
actual name(s) of the firm's individual principal(s) responsible for
maintaining the property. The individual or representative of the firm
responsible for maintaining the property shall be available by telephone
or in person on a twenty-four-hour per day, seven-day per week basis.
The two entities may be the same or different persons. Both entities
shown on the statement must maintain offices in the State of New
Jersey or reside within the State of New Jersey.
D. The registration shall remain valid for a six-month time period from the
date of registration. The owner shall be required to renew the
registration semi-annually every six months as long as the building
remains a vacant property and shall pay a registration or renewal fee in
the amount prescribed in § 220-23 of this chapter for each vacant
property registered. [Amended 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-10]
E. The semi-annual renewal shall be completed every six months.
[Amended 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-10]
F. The owner shall notify the Township Clerk within 30 calendar days of
any change in the registration information by filing an amended
registration statement on a form provided by the Township Clerk for
such purpose.
G. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the Township against the
owner or owners of the building.
H. Any owner of vacant property who plans to restore the property to
productive use and occupancy during the twelve-month period
following the date of the initial registration of the property shall file a
detailed statement and shall be exempt from payment of the
registration fee, but shall comply with all other provisions of this
article. In the event that the property has not been restored to
productive use and occupancy at the end of the twelve-month period,
the owner shall be liable for any fee waived. The municipal officer may
extend the waiver of the registration fee for not more than one
additional year in response to a written request by the property owner
where the municipal officer finds that compelling conditions outside the
owner's control made it impossible for the owner to restore the
property within the initial twelve-month period.
§ 220-20 WATERFORD CODE § 220-20
214:742
§ 220-21. Access to properties.
The owner of any vacant property registered under this article shall provide
access to the Township to conduct exterior and interior inspections of the
building to determine compliance with municipal codes upon reasonable
notice to the property owner or the designated agent. Such inspections shall
be carried out on weekdays during the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00
p.m. or at such other time as may be mutually agreed upon between the
owner and the Township.
§ 220-22. Responsible owner or agent.
I. Where the owner is an entity experienced in rehabilitation or
redevelopment of vacant properties, and where the property subject to
this article is being held for a project of rehabilitation or redevelopment
consistent with municipal plans and ordinances, and where by virtue of
financing, market or other conditions that project may require more
than one year for realization, the municipal officer may extend the
waiver of the registration fee on an annual basis without limitation upon
written request by the owner as long as the municipal officer finds that
the owner is making reasonable progress toward completion of the
project. The owner shall provide the municipal officer with such
documentation, which may include plans, financing applications,
applications for land use approval or other evidence of progress.
A. An owner who meets the requirements of this article with respect to the
location of his or her residence or workplace in the State of New Jersey
may designate him or herself as agent or as the individual responsible
for maintaining the property.
B. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this section,
the owner consents to receive any and all notices of code violations
concerning the registered vacant property and all process in any court
proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding brought to
enforce code provisions concerning the registered building by service
of the notice or process on the authorized agent. Any owner who has
designated an authorized agent under the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to consent to the continuation of the agent's
designation for the purposes of this section until the owner notifies the
Township in writing of a change of authorized agent or until the owner
files a new annual registration statement.
C. Any owner who fails to register vacant property under the provisions of
this article shall be deemed to consent to receive, by posting on the
building in plain view, and by service of notice at the last known address
of the owner of the property on record within the Township by regular
and certified mail, any and all notices of code violations and all process
in an administrative proceeding brought to enforce code provisions
concerning the building.
§ 220-20 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 220-23
214:743
§ 220-23. Fee schedule.
§ 220-24. Requirements for owners.
The owner of any building that has become vacant property and any person
maintaining or operating or collecting rent for any such building that has
become vacant shall, within 30 days of the inception of any vacancy:
A. The registration fee for each building will be for the initial registration
and for each subsequent renewal.161 [Amended 3-8-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-10; 6-14-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-17]
B. At least 80% of the fee income shall be used to carry out the purpose of
this article with respect to vacant properties, including, but not limited
to, code enforcement, abatement of nuisance conditions and other
activities related to rehabilitation and enforcement.
A. Enclose and secure the building against unauthorized entry as provided
in the applicable provisions of the Township Code, or as set forth in the
rules and regulations supplementing those codes; and
B. Post a sign affixed to the building indicating the name, address and
telephone number of the owner, the owner's authorized agent for the
purpose of service of process (if designated pursuant to § 220-20B of
this article), and the person responsible for the day-to-day supervision
and management of the building, if such person is different from the
owner holding title or authorized agent. The sign shall be of a size and
placed in such a location so as to be legible from the nearest public
street or sidewalk, whichever is nearer, but shall be no smaller than
eight inches by 10 inches; and
C. Secure the building from unauthorized entry and maintain the sign until
the building is again legally occupied or demolished or until repair or
rehabilitation of the building is complete; and
D. Ensure that the exterior grounds of the structure, including yards,
fences, sidewalks, walkways, rights-of-way, alleys, retaining walls,
attached or unattached accessory structures and driveways, are wellmaintained
and free from trash, debris, loose litter, and grass and weed
growth; and
E. Continue to maintain the structure in a secure and closed condition,
keep the grounds in a clean and well-maintained condition, and ensure
that the sign is visible and intact until the building is again occupied or
demolished, or until repair and/or rehabilitation of the building is
complete.
F. The owner of any vacant property shall acquire or otherwise maintain
liability insurance in an amount of not less than $100,000 for buildings
designed primarily for one- to four-unit residential use and not less than
161. Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
§ 220-23 WATERFORD CODE § 220-24
214:744
§ 220-25. Violations and penalties.
$500,000 for any other buildings, including, but not limited to,
buildings designed for multifamily, manufacturing, storage or
commercial uses, covering any damage to any person or any property
caused by any physical condition of or in the building. Any insurance
policy acquired or renewed after the building has become vacant shall
provide for written notice to the municipal officer within 30 days of
any lapse, cancellation or change in coverage. The owner shall attach
evidence of the insurance to the owner's registration statement. Any
registration statement submitted that does not include such evidence
shall not be deemed to be valid.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article or of the rules and
regulations issued hereunder shall be fined not less than $500 and not
more than $1,000 for each offense. Every day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Fines assessed under
this article shall be recoverable from the owner and shall constitute a
lien on the property.
B. For purposes of this section, failure to file a registration statement
within 30 calendar days after a building becomes vacant property or
within 30 calendar days after assuming ownership of a vacant property,
whichever is later, or within 10 calendar days of receipt of notice by the
municipality, and failure to provide correct information on the
registration statement, or failure to comply with the provisions of such
provisions contained herein shall be deemed to be violations of this
article.
§ 220-24 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 220-25
214:745

ARTICLE III
Defaulted Mortgage Properties
[Adopted 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-10]
§ 220-26. Public nuisance declared.
All registrable property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, the
abatement of which pursuant to the police power is hereby declared to be
necessary for the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the Township
of Waterford.
§ 220-27. Applicability.
The requirements of this article shall be considered cumulative to and not
superseding or subordinate to any other law or provision regarding the
registration of vacant, deteriorated and/or abandoned property, it being the
express intent of the Township that the requirements of this article shall
be a further remedy available to the Township in addition to any other
applicable laws relating to same.
§ 220-28. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, notwithstanding any meaning to the contrary elsewhere in this
chapter:
ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY and/or ACCESSIBLE STRUCTURE — A property
that is accessible through a compromised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc.,
or a structure that is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow
access to the interior space by unauthorized persons.
APPLICABLE LAWS — The Code of the Township of Waterford, as it may be
amended from time to time, and any and all ordinances and/or resolutions
adopted by the Township which govern property maintenance and are not
codified therein, together with all other laws, rules and regulations of the
County of Camden and/or State of New Jersey applicable to construction,
maintenance and/or use of real property, including but not limited to state
and/or county construction, building and fire codes.
ARM'S-LENGTH TRANSACTION — The sale of real property to an
independent third-party purchaser, who is unrelated to the transferor, for
fair market value as determined by an independent appraiser not hired or
retained by the transferor.
DEFAULT — The event, action and/or inaction, and the continuing situation
arising therefrom, where a mortgagor, owner and/or borrower has not
complied with any one or more terms of the mortgage encumbering the
mortgagor's property as said property is identified in the mortgage, has not
paid current all real property taxes and/or applicable municipal charges,
or has otherwise failed to comply with the provisions of a loan or other
agreement wherein the borrower has used the borrower's real property as
collateral therefor. For the purpose of this definition, the term "mortgage"
§ 220-26 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 220-28
214:747
shall also mean and/or refer to the promissory note executed with the
mortgage and/or such other valid written evidence of the debt as recognized
by law.
DETERIORATED PROPERTY — Property located within the Township of
Waterford upon which is found any one or more of the following conditions:
ENFORCING OFFICER — Any police officer, Construction Code Official,
Zoning Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, Fire Inspector or Building
Inspector or other person authorized by the Township and/or the State of
New Jersey to enforce the applicable laws.
EVIDENCE OF VACANCY — Any condition that on its own, or combined
with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe
that a property is vacant, including but not limited to overgrown and/
or dead vegetation; past-due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities;
accumulation of trash, junk or debris; abandoned vehicles, auto parts or
automotive materials; the absence of furnishings and/or personal items
consistent with habitation or occupancy; the presence of an unsanitary,
stagnant swimming pool; the accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers
and/or mail; statements by neighbors, passers-by, delivery agents or
government agents as to suspected vacancy; or the presence of boards over
doors, windows or other openings in violation of applicable laws.
FORECLOSURE — The legal process by which a mortgagee or other
creditor terminates a property owner's ownership of and/or equitable right
of redemption in real property in order to obtain legal and equitable title to
the real property which was pledged as security for a debt. This definition
shall include, but is not limited to, public notice of default, recording of a
lis pendens, filing of a foreclosure complaint in the Superior Court of New
Jersey, delivery and recording of a deed in lieu of foreclosure, sale of the
real property to the foreclosing mortgagee or creditor, entry of a judgment
of foreclosure and/or all other processes, activities and actions, by whatever
name, associated with the foreclosure process. For purposes of this article,
the foreclosure process shall not be deemed concluded until the property
that is obtained by the mortgagee, creditor and/or its designee by deed or
Properties that have broken or severely damaged windows, doors, walls
or roofs which create hazardous conditions and/or encourage
trespassing; or
A.
Properties whose maintenance is not in conformance with the
maintenance of other neighboring properties; or
B.
Properties cited under the property maintenance provisions of the
Waterford Township Code and/or as a public nuisance pursuant to
applicable laws; or
C.
Properties that endanger the public's health, safety, or welfare because
the properties or improvements thereon are so dilapidated,
deteriorated and/or so violative of basic property maintenance
requirements that they violate minimum health and safety standards.
D.
§ 220-28 WATERFORD CODE § 220-28
214:748
judgment of foreclosure or any other means is sold to a non-related bona
fide third-party purchaser in an arm's-length transaction.
LOCAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY — A property management
company located within 20 driving miles of any municipal border of the
Township or a non-local property manager approved by the Township
Administrator upon the Administrator's review and consideration of
reasonably reliable credentials.
MORTGAGEE — The creditor identified in the mortgage documents as
the lender and/or financing institution which lent money to a property
owner thereunder and encumbered the property owner's real property as
collateral therefor, including but not limited to any trustees, mortgage
service companies, and/or any agent, servant, or employee thereof, and/or
any successor in interest or assignee of said mortgagee's rights, interests
or obligations under the mortgage agreement, which assignment and/or
transfer was made, in part, for the purpose of substituting one mortgagee
for another.
OWNER — Any person, firm, corporation or their legal entity who or which,
individually or jointly with one or more others, holds the legal or beneficial
title to any real property located within the Township.
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY — A property manager, property
maintenance company or similar entity responsible for the maintenance and
security of registrable property and who has the authority to make decisions
concerning maintenance of said property and/or the abatement of nuisance
conditions at the property, including without limitation the authority to
make expenditures in connection therewith.
REAL PROPERTY — Any improved residential or commercial land located
within the Township limits, together with the buildings, fixtures, equipment
and leasehold improvements thereon and/or affixed thereto, or any part
or portion thereof, which is identified by a property parcel and/or tax
identification numbering system. For purposes of this chapter, all developed
lots are considered improved land.
REGISTRABLE PROPERTY —
Any and all real property located within the Township, whether vacant
or occupied, that satisfies any one or more of the following criteria:
(1) Is encumbered by a mortgage in default;
Is subject to an ongoing foreclosure action by a mortgagee or other
creditor;
(2)
Is subject to an application for a judgment of foreclosure by a
mortgagee or other creditor;
(3)
Is pending and/or scheduled for tax sale for unpaid property taxes
and/or other municipal charges;
(4)
A.
§ 220-28 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 220-28
214:749
RENTAL PROPERTY — A property that contains a single-family rental
dwelling unit or multifamily rental dwelling units for use by residential
tenants, including but not limited to mobile homes, mobile home spaces,
townhomes, condominium unit(s) and/or apartments. A rental dwelling unit
includes property that is provided to an individual or entity for residential
purposes upon payment of rent or any other consideration in lieu of rent,
regardless of the nature of the relationship between lessor and lessee.
SEMI-ANNUAL REGISTRATION — The six-month period of registration
commencing from the date of the first action that required registration,
as determined by the Township and/or its designee, and including every
subsequent six-month registration period thereafter. The date of the initial
registration may be different than the date of the first action that required
registration.
TRANSFEREE — The person, mortgagee, trustee and/or entity to which
legal title of real property is transferred as a result of a judgment of
foreclosure, sheriff's sale after foreclosure, deed in lieu of foreclosure,
non-arm's-length sale or transfer and/or any other type of nonarm's-length
transaction.
UNAUTHORIZED PERSON — Any person who does not have the permission
of the property owner and/or property management company, as the case
may be, to use, reside in, live in or otherwise occupy, on a temporary or
permanent basis, any real property.
VACANT — Any parcel of land situated within the Township that contains
any building or structure that is not lawfully occupied or inhabited by
human beings, as evidenced by the conditions set forth in the definition
of "evidence of vacancy" above, and/or which is occupied without a valid,
unexpired certificate of occupancy or other written authorization for
occupancy as may be required by applicable laws.
§ 220-29. Establishment of registry; registration requirements and
procedures; fees.
Has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was
transferred to the beneficiary of a mortgagee or other creditor
involved in the foreclosure; and/or
(5)
Was transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure to the
mortgagee or other foreclosing creditor.
(6)
The designation of a defaulted mortgage/foreclosure property as
"registrable" shall remain in place until such time as the property
is sold to an unrelated bona fide third-party purchaser in an arm'slength
transaction or the foreclosure action has been dismissed and any
default on the mortgage and/or delinquencies in unpaid property taxes
or other municipal charges has been cured.
B.
A. Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within
the Township shall perform an inspection of the property to determine
vacancy or occupancy immediately upon default by the mortgagor. The
§ 220-28 WATERFORD CODE § 220-29
214:750
mortgagee shall, within 10 days of the inspection, register the property
with the registrar on designated forms or in such other manner as
directed, and shall indicate thereon whether the property is vacant or
occupied. A separate registration is required for each property, whether
it is found to be vacant or occupied.
B. Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name, direct
mailing address, a direct contact name, including the direct-dial
telephone number and direct e-mail address thereof, and a valid
telephone number and e-mail address for the mortgagee and the
mortgagee's servicer, if any, as well as the name and twenty-four-hour
contact telephone/cellular phone number of the local property
management company responsible for the property.
C. Mortgagees who have existing registrable property on the effective
date of this article have 30 calendar days from the effective date hereof
to register the property as required herein and to indicate whether the
property is vacant or occupied. A separate registration is required for
each property, whether it is vacant or occupied.
D. If the mortgage on the registrable property is sold or transferred, other
than via an arm's-length transaction, the new mortgagee and/or
transferee shall be subject to all of the requirements of this article and,
within five business days of such sale or transfer, the new mortgagee
shall register the property as required herein.
E. If a mortgagee who obtains title to a registrable property as a result of a
foreclosure process subsequently sells or transfers the property, other
than via an arm's-length transaction, the transferee shall be subject to
all the requirements of this article and, within five business days of the
transfer, the transferee shall register the property as required herein.
F. As long as the property constitutes a registrable property as defined
herein it shall be the responsibility of the registered mortgagee,
independently or by and through a local property management
company, to inspect the property monthly. If an inspection shows a
change in the property's occupancy status, the mortgagee shall, within
10 days of that inspection, update the occupancy status of the property
with the registrar.
G. Every property registration required by this article shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable semi-annual registration fee.162
Notwithstanding anything else herein to the contrary, every semiannual
registration shall terminate upon the sale or other transfer of a
registrable property such that the purchaser and/or transferee thereof,
other than an unrelated third-party purchaser in an arm's-length
transaction, shall pay a new semi-annual registration fee at the time of
the new purchaser's/transferee's registration of the registrable
property as otherwise required in this article. Any previous unpaid
162. Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
§ 220-29 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 220-29
214:751
§ 220-30. Maintenance requirements.
Each and every property registered pursuant to the requirements of this
article shall be maintained by the mortgagee to the following standards and/
or conditions:
semi-annual registration fees are the responsibility of the new
mortgagee or transferee and are due and payable with the initial
registration filed by same.
H. All registration fees must be paid directly by and/or from the
mortgagee, transferee or other non-arm's-length purchaser of a
registrable property and cannot be paid by a third party on behalf
thereof without the express written consent of the Township.
I. Properties subject to this article shall remain subject hereto, including
without limitation the semi-annual registration requirement,
inspection, security and maintenance standards of this article, for as
long as the property meets the definition of a registrable property.
J. Until the mortgage or lien on a property registered under this article is
satisfied or legally discharged, the mortgagee's intent to no longer
pursue foreclosure as evidenced by any action in further thereof,
including without limitation the filing of a dismissal of lis pendens, entry
of a court order vacating a final judgment of foreclosure and/or the
dismissal or withdrawal of pending foreclosure proceedings, whether
voluntary or otherwise, shall not exempt any mortgagee from the
obligation to comply with all of the requirements of this article for any
period of time during which a property meets the definition of a
registrable property.
K. Any person or legal entity that has registered a property under this
section must report any change of information contained in the
registration within 10 days of the date such change occurs.
L. Failure of the mortgagee to properly register a registrable property, or
to fail to modify the registration as required herein to reflect a change
of circumstances, shall be deemed a violation of this article and the
mortgagee shall be subject to enforcement hereunder, including any
monetary penalties set forth in of this chapter.
M. Pursuant to any administrative or judicial finding and/or determination
that any property is in violation of this article, the Township may take
any and all necessary action to ensure compliance with the applicable
laws and may place a lien on the property for the cost of any work
performed to bring the property into compliance with all applicable
laws.
A. The property shall be kept free of weeds, overgrown brush, dead
vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of
newspaper circulars, flyers, notices (except those required by federal,
state or local laws and/or court orders), discarded personal items,
§ 220-29 WATERFORD CODE § 220-30
214:752
§ 220-31. Security requirements.
All registrable properties shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not
to be accessible to unauthorized persons, in accordance with the following
minimum standards:
including but not limited to furniture, clothing and large or small
appliances, printed material or any other items that give the
appearance that the property is vacant.
B. The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings,
which shall be removed or painted over with an exterior-grade paint
that matches the color of the exterior of the structure.
C. The front, side, and rear yards of the property, including landscaping,
shall be maintained in accordance with all applicable laws.
D. The mortgagee shall perform yard maintenance, including but not
limited to property and appropriate maintenance of grass, ground
coverings, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings so as to prevent
overgrowth thereof, including removal of all such trimmings, together
with maintenance of decorative rock or bark, artificial turf/sod and/or
such other items of hardscape designed specifically for residential
installation. Any overgrowth of weeds, grass, ground coverings, bushes,
shrubs, hedges and/or similar plantings and/or any accumulation of
gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar material shall not be
considered proper yard maintenance as required hereunder.
E. The mortgagee shall perform standard and/or routine year-round
maintenance, including, but not limited to, maintaining, repairing and
winterizing existing irrigation systems, pools and spas. Pools and spas
shall be maintained so the water remains free and clear of pollutants
and debris and complies with all applicable Department of Health
regulations and any other applicable laws.
F. The mortgagee shall further comply with any property maintenance
requirements set forth in all other applicable laws.
A. A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and
locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that
may allow any unauthorized person to access the interior of the
property or structure. Broken windows, doors, gates and other
openings of such size that may allow any unauthorized person to access
the interior of the property or structure must be repaired. Broken
windows shall be secured by re-glazing of the window.
B. If a property is registrable, and the property has become vacant or
deteriorated, a local property manager shall be designated by the
mortgagee or owner to perform the work necessary to bring the
property into compliance with all applicable laws, and the property
manager must perform regular inspections to verify continued
§ 220-30 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 220-31
214:753
§ 220-32. Inspections for violations.
Compliance with the registration, maintenance and security requirements
of this article does not relieve any person, legal entity or agent thereof from
any other obligations set forth in any applicable laws which may apply to
the property and/or govern the use thereof.
§ 220-33. Enforcement.
§ 220-34. Opposing or obstructing enforcing officer.
Whoever opposes, obstructs or resists any enforcing officer in the discharge
of his/her duties as provided in this article shall be punishable as provided
by the applicable laws, which action shall be cognizable in the Municipal
compliance with the requirements of this article and any other
applicable codes.
A. Regardless of whether a registrable property has been properly
registered as required in this article, if the enforcing officer has reason
to believe that a registrable property is posing a serious threat to the
public health, safety and welfare, the enforcing officer may temporarily
secure the property at the expense of the mortgagee or owner, and/or
may issue such notices of violation and/or summonses as may be
necessary to ensure the conditions of the property are addressed as
soon as possible.
B. In addition to any other powers, the enforcing officer may implement
additional maintenance and/or security measures, including but not
limited to securing any and all doors, windows or other openings,
employment of an on-site security guard and/or other similar measures
as may be reasonably required to help prevent further decline of the
property.
C. If the enforcing officer finds that the condition of a registrable property
is posing a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare, then
the Township, upon notice to the mortgagee and/or owner, may abate
the violations and charge the costs of such abatement to the mortgagee
and/or owner.
D. If the mortgagee or owner does not reimburse the Township for the cost
of temporarily securing the property and/or the costs associated with
any abatement undertaken by the Township as permitted herein, within
30 days of the date the Township sent the mortgagee or owner the
invoice therefor, then the Township may assess a lien against the
property in the manner provided by applicable laws for such costs,
along with the Township's administrative costs associated with same. In
addition to filing a lien, the Township can pursue reimbursement from
the mortgagee or owner and/or seek and enforce such other penalties
as may be contemplated herein.
§ 220-31 WATERFORD CODE § 220-34
214:754
Court of the Township or such other court of competent jurisdiction as may
be applicable.
§ 220-35. Immunity of enforcing officer.
Every enforcing officer and such other persons authorized by the Township
to implement and/or enforce the provisions of this article shall be immune
from prosecution, whether civil or criminal, for his/her reasonable, good
faith entry upon real property while in the discharge of the duties imposed
by this article.
§ 220-36. Violations and penalties.
A. Violations. It shall be a violation of this article and shall be unlawful for
any mortgagee and/or owner to:
(1) Fail to register a registrable property;
(2) Fail to properly maintain and/or secure any registrable property in
accordance with the requirements of this article; or
(3) Maintain any registrable property in a manner which results in a
violation of any other applicable laws.
B. Enforcement. The requirements of this article may be enforced as
follows:
(1) By an action for injunctive relief, civil penalties, or both, through a
court of competent jurisdiction;
(2) By revocation or temporary suspension of necessary permits and/or
certificates of occupancy and/or licenses related to occupancy and/
or use of real property;
(3) By the nuisance abatement process and/or property maintenance
enforcement process established in the Code of the Township of
Waterford;
(4) By issuance of a citation or notice of violation in accordance with
any applicable laws; and
(5) By any other process as may be permitted by law or in equity.
C. All such remedies cognizable in and/or subject to the jurisdiction of the
Waterford Township Municipal Court shall be subject to a fine of up to
$1,000 for each offense.
D. Separate offenses. Each violation of this article shall constitute a
separate offense for each day that such violation continues or reoccurs.
Each condition which exists in violation of this article is a separate
violation.
E. Use of one enforcement process or theory shall not preclude the
Township from seeking the same, different, or additional relief through
§ 220-34 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 220-36
214:755
other enforcement methods provided for herein at any time in the
present or future.
F. Persons responsible for violations. The owner, mortgagee, trustee or
servicer, as those terms are defined in this article, and their duly
authorized officers, employees or agents employed in connection
therewith who have assisted in the commission of a violation or failed to
perform such actions as are required herein, shall be liable for and/or
subject to being found guilty of such violation.
§ 220-36 WATERFORD CODE § 220-36
214:756
Chapter 223
RENTAL PROPERTIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 100.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 103.
Fees — See Ch. 124.
Land use, development and zoning — See Ch.
176.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 220.
§ 220-36 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 220-36
214:757

ARTICLE I
Registration and Licensing
[Adopted 2-25-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-3; amended in its entirety
2-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-3]
§ 223-1. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following
words or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the following
meanings:
AGENT — The individual or individuals designated by the owner as the
person(s) authorized by the owner to perform any duty imposed upon the
owner by this article. The term does not necessarily mean a licensed real
estate broker or salesman of the State of New Jersey, as those terms are
defined by N.J.S.A. 45:15-3; however, such term may include a licensed
real estate broker or salesman of the State of New Jersey if such person
designated by the owner as his agent is so licensed.
APARTMENT or DWELLING — Any apartment, cottage, bungalow, any room
or rooms in a rooming/boarding house or other dwelling unit consisting of
one or more rooms occupying all or part of a floor or floors in a building,
whether designed with or without housekeeping facilities, for dwelling
purposes and notwithstanding whether the apartment is designed for
residence, for office or for the operation of any industry or business or for
any other type of independent use. Each dwelling unit shall contain no more
than one kitchen or cooking facility.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or rooms or suite or apartment, including
any room or rooms in a rooming/boarding house, whether furnished or
unfurnished, which is occupied or intended, arranged or designed to be
occupied for sleeping or dwelling purposes by one or more persons,
including but not limited to the owner thereof or any of his servants,
agents or employees, and shall include all privileges, services, furnishings,
furniture, equipment, facilities and improvement connected with use or
occupancy thereof. Each dwelling unit shall contain no more than one
kitchen or cooking facility.
LIFE SAFETY INSPECTIONS — Shall constitute the following: smoke
detectors, lint, mold, heater mechanical malfunctions, roach and/or insect
infestation, carbon monoxide detectors, chain locks, tripping hazards, hot
water pressure valves, automatic door closures, Romex connectors,
electrical receptacles, electrical hazards, railing, exhaust flue pipes, dryer
exhaust pipes, and stoves, if applicable and/or required under applicable
building/construction codes. Exterior life safety inspection items shall
include trip hazards on steps, sidewalks, and/or sink holes on the property,
railings, building identification numbers and/or letters, electrical hazards,
environmental hazards and/or spills, broken windows, dead or dying trees,
and roofs.
LOCAL HOUSING INSPECTOR — Township Official authorized to conduct
inspections pursuant to this article.
§ 223-1 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 223-1
214:759
OWNER — Any person or group of persons, firm, corporation or officer
thereof, partnership, association or trust who owns, operates, exercises
control over, or is in charge of a rental facility. This includes a condominium
association where any rental facility exists.
OWNER-OCCUPIED — A portion of a rental facility, dwelling, commercial
unit or dwelling unit shall be considered owner-occupied if the owner
makes his primary residence therein. A person may have only one primary
residence in the Township.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust
or other legal entity, or any combination thereof.
REGISTRATION — The certificate issued to the owner/agent by the
Township Clerk or his/her designee attesting that the rental unit has been
properly registered in accordance with this article.
RENTAL FACILITY — Every building, group of buildings or condominiums
or a portion thereof consisting of more than two dwelling units, kept,
used, maintained, advertised or held out to be a place where living
accommodations are supplied, whether furnished or unfurnished, for pay or
other consideration for one or more individuals.
RENTAL UNIT — A dwelling unit which is used, occupied or offered for
occupancy by lease, rent or otherwise, to persons other than the owner.
Rental unit shall not include that portion of a rental facility, dwelling,
commercial unit or dwelling unit that is owner-occupied. For purposes of
this article, any dwelling unit where the dwelling unit is occupied by a
person or persons other than the owner, even if rent or other consideration
is not being charged or collected, shall be considered a rental unit.
RENT or RENTED — Occupied by any person or persons other than the
owner, regardless of whether there is a written or oral agreement and
regardless of whether the owner receives consideration for the occupancy.
TENANCY — Occupancy of the unit by one or more tenants.
TENANT — Occupant in a unit other than the owner.
§ 223-2. Registration required; exception.
A. All rental units and rental facilities shall hereafter be registered with
the Township Clerk or designee of the Township of Waterford, or such
other person as designated by the Township Committee, in writing, on
forms which shall be provided for that purpose and which shall be
obtained from the Township Clerk or designee. Such registration shall
occur on an annual basis, as provided herein. No rental unit shall
hereafter be rented unless the rental unit is registered in accordance
with this article.
B. Owners of two-family residential property in which one unit is owneroccupied,
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:8-28.5, shall not be
required to register if:
(1) The property has been certified to be free of lead-based paint;
§ 223-1 WATERFORD CODE § 223-2
214:760
§ 223-3. Registration deadlines.
Each rental unit shall be registered annually. The registration shall occur
on or before January 1 of each year. For new rental units that come into
existence after January 1 of each year, the initial registration shall occur
before the creation of the first tenancy in any new rental unit or newly
constructed or reconstructed building. Each rental unit shall be reregistered
with each change in occupancy.
§ 223-4. Registration forms; filing; contents.
Without in any way intending to infringe upon the requirements of N.J.S.A.
46:8-28, all rental units and rental facilities shall be registered as provided
herein. Every owner shall file with the Township Clerk or such other person
as designated by the Township Committee a registration form for each unit
contained within a building or structure and for each rental facility that
shall include the following information:
(2) The property was constructed during or after 1978; and
(3) The property is a seasonal rental unit which is rented for less than
six months' duration each year.
A. The name and address of the record owner or owners of the premises
and the record owner or owners of the rental unit, if not the same
persons. In the case of a partnership, the name and addresses of all
general partners shall be provided, together with the telephone
numbers for each of such individuals, where such individual may be
reached both during the day and evening hours.
B. If the address of any record owner is not located in Waterford or in
Camden County, the name and address of a person who resides in
Camden County and who is authorized to accept notices from the
Township or a tenant and to issue receipts therefor and to accept
service of process on behalf of the record owner shall be provided.
C. The name, phone number and address of the agent of the premises, if
any.
D. The name and address, including the dwelling unit number, of the
superintendent, janitor, custodian or other individual employed by the
owner or agent to provide regular maintenance service, if any.
E. The name, address and telephone number of an individual
representative of the owner or agent or the owner, if domiciled in
Camden County, who may be reached or contacted at any time in the
event of an emergency affecting the premises or any unit of dwelling
space therein, including such emergencies as the future of any essential
service or system and who has the authority to make emergency
decisions concerning the building and any repair thereto or expenditure
in connection therewith.
§ 223-2 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 223-4
214:761
§ 223-5. Indexing and filing of registration forms; posting of
certificate of inspection.
§ 223-6. Filing of amendments.
Every person required to file a registration form pursuant to this article
shall file an amended registration form within 20 days after any change in
the information required to be included thereon. No fee shall be required
for the filing of an amendment, except where the ownership of the premises
is changed.
§ 223-7. Periodic inspections.
F. The name and address of every holder of a recorded mortgage on the
premises.
G. If fuel oil is used to heat the building and the landlord furnishes the heat
in the building, the name and address of the fuel oil dealer servicing the
building and the grade of fuel oil used.
H. The address of the rental unit. If the rental unit is located in a building
with more than one dwelling unit, the address of the building, the
number of dwelling units within the building, and the portion of the
building to be used as a rental unit shall also be provided.
I. As to each rental unit, a specification of the exact number and
dimensions of sleeping rooms contained in the rental unit. In order to
satisfy the requirement of this provision, an owner shall submit a floor
plan, drawn appropriately to scale, indicating the use and dimensions of
each room covered by the registration, which shall become part of the
application and which shall be attached to the registration form when
filed with the Township Clerk or designee.
J. Proof of a satisfactory inspection in accordance with § 223-7 below.
K. Such other information as may be prescribed by the Township of
Waterford.
L. The proposed number of occupants for the rental unit.
A. Upon receipt of a completed registration form complying with the
requirements of § 223-4 above, the Township Clerk or designee shall
index and file the registration forms. In doing so, the Township Clerk or
designee shall follow the mandates of N.J.S.A. 46:8-28.1, as amended
and supplemented, so that the filing of the registration form will
simultaneously satisfy the registration requirements of N.J.S.A. 46:8-28
to the extent that it applies to the property being registered, and will
also satisfy the registration requirements of this article.
B. The owner shall post the certificate of inspection in a conspicuous place
on the premises of the rental unit.
§ 223-4 WATERFORD CODE § 223-7
214:762
A. Each rental unit and rental facility shall be inspected at least once every
year. Each rental unit shall be inspected before every initial occupancy,
change in occupancy and/or change in the number of occupants, and
the owner shall be required to obtain a certificate of inspection in
accordance with this section before any occupancy shall be permitted.
B. Such inspections shall be performed by such person, persons or agency
duly authorized and appointed by the Township of Waterford, and
inspections made by persons or an agency other than the duly
authorized and appointed person, persons or agency of the Township of
Waterford shall not be used as a valid substitute.
C. Such inspection shall be for the purpose of determining Zoning
Ordinance163 compliance, and to the extent applicable, compliance with
this article, the Township's Property Maintenance Code, the Uniform
Construction Code,164 Housing Code and/or Building Code and/or
Uniform Fire Safety Act. Inspections will be done on all interior,
exterior, grounds, roads and driveways of all rental properties to ensure
public health, safety and welfare of all occupants and the general
public. Inspections will be for enforcement of the Township's Property
Maintenance Code, the Uniform Construction Code, the Fire Safety Act,
Department of Health Regulations, the National Electric Code and
National Standard Plumbing Code.
(1) In addition to the above, the owner of a rental unit shall comply
with the following:
(a) All carpeting, where provided or installed by the owner, shall
be kept in good repair, properly attached to the floor surface
which it is covering, and shall be steam cleaned or cleaned by
other means acceptable to the Local Housing Inspector, prior
to occupancy by tenants or a change in tenants. Carpeting
which is worn, damaged or becomes a trip hazard shall be
properly repaired or replaced.
(b) All appliances which are provided or installed by the owner,
including but not limited to stoves, ovens, refrigerators,
washers, dryers, freezers, and light fixtures, shall be
maintained in proper working order at all times, and promptly
repaired or replaced whenever necessary.
(2) Where the inspection of the rental unit results in a satisfactory
inspection, the inspector shall issue a certificate of inspection for
the rental unit. The certificate of inspection shall state the
maximum number of occupants for the rental unit, as determined
by the inspection.
163. Editor's Note: See Ch. 176, Land Use, Development and Zoning.
164. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Property Maintenance, and Ch. 103, Construction Codes,
Uniform.
§ 223-7 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 223-7
214:763
§ 223-8. Access for inspections and repairs.
D. Unsatisfactory inspection. In the event that the inspection(s) of a rental
unit does not result in a satisfactory inspection, a certificate of
inspection shall not issue and the owner of the property or his agent
shall not lease or rent such property, nor shall any tenant occupy the
property, until the necessary corrections have been made to bring the
property and rental unit into compliance with the applicable code, and
the property is thereafter subsequently inspected and registered. In the
event that the property is occupied when such conditions are
discovered, all such corrections shall be made within 30 days, unless
the nature of the deficiency and the applicable law upon which the
inspection is made mandates a shorter time for repairs, in which event
the shorter time shall govern. In the event that the conditions are not
corrected within the thirty-day time period, or sooner where required,
the owner shall be deemed in violation of this article, and every day that
the violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation
subject to the penalty provisions of this article. The owner, however,
shall be permitted to apply for an extension of time to make repairs or
corrections so as to comply with this article, for good cause shown,
Where the applicable law upon which the inspection is made mandates
that the property be vacated, the owner or its agent shall cause the
rental unit to be vacated, and any such failure to do so shall be a
violation of this article. Where applicable, the Relocation Assistance
Act165 shall apply to any removal of a tenant due to a violation of this
article. However, any such costs incurred by the Township shall be
reimbursed by the owner within 30 days of receipt of a documented
invoice indicating the amount paid by the Township.
E. Multiple inspections: It is the intent of this article that each rental unit
be inspected at least once a year but not necessarily more than once a
year. In those instances where a unit is inspected for a reason other
than the annual inspection under this article, that inspection shall count
as the annual inspection under this article, provided that the same is
permitted by the Administrative Code of the State of New Jersey. The
owner shall be responsible for providing proof to the Township Housing
Inspector that said inspection(s) was made and for obtaining written
confirmation from the Township that said inspection(s) satisfies the
requirements of this article.
A. The inspection officers are hereby authorized to make inspections to
determine the condition of rental facilities, rental units and rooming/
boarding houses in order that they may promote the purposes of this
article to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of
rental facilities, rental units and rooming/boarding houses and of the
general public. For the purposes of making such inspections, the
inspecting officers are hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey
rental facilities, rental units and rooming/boarding houses at all
165. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 20:4-1 et seq.
§ 223-7 WATERFORD CODE § 223-8
214:764
§ 223-9. Prohibitions on occupancy.
§ 223-10. Registration form required for each unit.
A registration form shall be required for each rental unit, even if more than
one rental unit is contained in the property. In the event that a registered
property is sold, assigned or transferred during the year, an amended
registration form is required to be filed in accordance with § 223-6.
reasonable times. The owner or occupant of every rental facility, rental
unit and rooming/boarding house shall give the inspecting officer free
access to the rental facility, rental unit and rooming/boarding house at
all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspections, examinations
and surveys.
B. Every occupant shall give the owner of the rental facility, rental unit
and rooming/boarding house access to any part of such rental facility,
rental unit and rooming/boarding house at all reasonable times for the
purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this article or any lawful order issued
pursuant thereto.
C. Complaints. Within 10 days of receipt of a complaint alleging a reported
violation of this article, an inspecting officer shall conduct an inspection
as hereinbefore provided.
D. In the event that the owner and/or occupant of a unit subject to
inspection under this article refuses access to an inspection officer, that
officer shall make application to the Waterford Township Municipal
Court, with notice to the objector, for an administrative search warrant
which the Court will issue if the Court concludes that the reason for the
proposed inspection is the enforcement of the article.
A. No person shall hereafter occupy any rental unit nor shall the owner
permit occupancy of any rental unit within the Township of Waterford
which is not registered in accordance with this article.
B. No owner, agent, broker or person shall purchase, sell, rent, lease or
use in such a manner as to result, permit or allow any person(s) to
occupy or live in, as occupant, tenant or otherwise, any dwelling unit or
rental unit or other structure, unless a certificate of occupancy shall
first have been obtained.
C. A landlord/owner who places a tenant in a rental unit which is not
registered and who does so in good faith and without knowledge of the
requirement that such rental unit must be registered and who is
supplied a written warning advising of the requirements of this article
shall have a period of three business days to cause the rental unit to be
registered in accordance with this article or, failing to do so, shall
vacate said premises or otherwise be subject to the penalty provisions
herein.
§ 223-8 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 223-11
214:765
§ 223-11. Fees.
At the time of the filing of the registration form, the owner or agent of the
owner must pay a fee in accordance with the following:
§ 223-12. Registration form to be provided to occupants and
tenants.
Every owner shall provide each occupant or tenant occupying a rental unit
with a copy of the registration form required by this article. This particular
provision shall not apply to any hotel, motel or guesthouse registered with
the State of New Jersey, pursuant to the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Act, as
defined in N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3. This provision may be complied with by posting
a copy of the registration certificate in a conspicuous place within the rental
unit(s).
§ 223-13. Maximum number of occupants; standards of conduct.
A. An annual registration fee, which includes the annual inspection fee, as
follows:166
B. An amended registration fee as follows:167
C. A reinspection fee as follows:168
D. Late charges. For any fee paid more than 30 days after its due date
there shall be a late fee.169
E. If the owner of the property is a senior citizen who resides in a unit of
the property and rents out the remaining unit(s) and who would
otherwise qualify for the state property tax deduction pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.41, then the fees shall be 1/2 of the stated amounts.
F. The fees assessed are for the cost of administering, inspecting and
enforcing the requirements of this article.
A. The maximum number of occupants shall be posted in each rental unit.
It shall be unlawful for any person, including the owner, agent, tenant
or registered tenant, to allow a greater number of persons than the
posted maximum number of occupants to sleep in or occupy overnight
the rental unit for a period exceeding 29 days. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this article. For
purposes of this subsection the term "person" is intended to mean
owner, tenant or guest of the rental unit.
B. Nuisance prohibited. No rental unit or rental facility shall be used,
operated or maintained in a manner which shall result in any
166. Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
167. Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
168. Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
169. Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
§ 223-11 WATERFORD CODE § 223-13
214:766
§ 223-14. Responsibilities of landlords and owners.
§ 223-15. Revocation of registration; procedure.
unreasonable disturbance or disruption to the surrounding properties
and property owners or of the public in general, such that it shall
constitute a nuisance, as defined in the ordinances of the Township of
Waterford.
C. Compliance with other laws. The maintenance of all rental units and
rental facilities and the conduct engaged in upon the premises by
occupants and their guests shall at all times be in full compliance with
all applicable ordinances and regulations of the Township of Waterford
and with all applicable state and federal laws.
A. Any landlord and/or owner of leased property located within the
Township of Waterford shall be responsible for any activities, actions,
events and conduct of any person and/or animal which occur in, on or
about said premises or property.
B. The landlord/owner of any such property located within the Township of
Waterford shall be responsible and liable for the conduct and actions of
any tenant, invitee, guest or any other person who is in, on or about the
premises and/or property with the permission, either express or
implied, of the landlord, owner, tenant, guest or invitee.
A. In addition to any other penalty prescribed herein, any owner may be
subject to the revocation or suspension of the registration issued
hereunder upon the happening of one or more of the following:
(1) Conviction of a violation of this article in the Municipal Court or
any other court of competent jurisdiction.
(2) Determination of a violation of this article at a hearing held
pursuant to Subsection B herein.
(3) Continuing, after notice, to rent the unit or units to a tenant or
tenants who are convicted of a violation of the Noise and/or
Nuisance Ordinances of the Township on more than one occasion.
(4) Continuing, after notice, to permit the rental unit to be occupied by
more than the maximum number of occupants as defined in this
article.
(5) Maintaining the rental unit or units or the property in which the
rental unit(s) is a part in an uninhabitable and/or dangerous
condition likely to result in injury to person or property.
(6) Failing to pursue eviction of a lessee or tenant for good cause as
defined by N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1g, which includes a tenant or lessee
who:
§ 223-13 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 223-15
214:767
(a) Has continued to be, after written notice to cease, so
disorderly as to destroy the peace and quiet of the occupants
or other tenants residing in said house or neighborhood; or
(b) Has willfully or by reason of gross negligence caused or
allowed destruction, damage or injury to the premises; or
(c) Has continued, after written notice to cease, to substantially
violate or breach any of the landlord's rules and regulations
governing said premises which have been accepted by the
tenant or made a part of the lease at the beginning of a lease
term; or
(d) Has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense, or if a
juvenile, has been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of an act
which if committed by an adult would constitute an offense
under the Comprehensive Drug Reform Act of 1987 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-1 et seq.) involving the use, possession, manufacture,
dispensing or distribution of a controlled dangerous substance,
controlled dangerous substance analog or drug paraphernalia
within the meaning of that Act within or upon the leased
premises or the building or complex of buildings and land
appurtenant thereto and has not in connection with his
sentence for that offense either successfully completed or been
admitted to and continued upon probation while completing a
drug rehabilitation program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:35-14; or,
being the tenant or lessee of such leased premises, knowingly
harbors or harbored therein a person who has been so
convicted or has so pleaded, or otherwise permits or permitted
such a person to occupy those premises for residential
purposes, whether continuously or intermittently; or
(e) Has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to, or if a juvenile, has
been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of an act which if
committed by an adult would constitute an offense under
N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 or N.J.S.A. 2C:12-3 involving assault, or
terroristic threats against the landlord, a member of the
landlord's family or an employee of the landlord; or, being the
tenant or lessee of such leased premises, knowingly harbors or
harbored therein a person who has been so convicted or has so
pleaded, or otherwise permits or permitted such a person to
occupy those premises for residential purposes, whether
continuously or intermittently; or
(f) Has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to, or if a juvenile, has
been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of an act which if
committed by an adult would constitute an offense under
N.J.S.A. 2C:20-1 involving theft of property from the landlord,
the leased premises or other tenants residing in the same
building or complex; or, being the tenant or lessee of such
leased premises, knowingly harbors or harbored therein a
§ 223-15 WATERFORD CODE § 223-15
214:768
person who has been so convicted or has so pleaded, or
otherwise permits or permitted such a person to occupy those
premises for residential purposes, whether continuously or
intermittently.
(7) False or misleading information given or provided in connection
with the registration application or renewal; or
(8) Failure to correct violations in the time period prescribed; or
(9) Failure to permit lawful inspections; or
(10) Failure to pay any fee herein provided for; or
(11) Violation of the provisions of this article or any other ordinance or
law pertaining to the use of the property.
B. Procedure; written compliant; notice; hearing.
(1) A complaint seeking the revocation or suspension of the
registration may be filed by any one or more of the following:
Director of Public Safety, Chief of Police, Construction Code
Official, Local Housing Inspector, Zoning Enforcement Officer or
any other person or office authorized to file such complaint. Such
complaint shall be in writing and filed with the Township Clerk or
designee. The complaint shall be specific and shall be sufficient to
apprise the registrant of the charges, so as to permit the registrant
to present a defense. The individual(s) filing the complaint may do
so on the basis of information and belief, and need not rely on
personal information.
(2) Upon the filing of such written complaint, the Township Clerk or
designee shall immediately inform the Township Committee, and a
date for a hearing shall be scheduled, which shall not be sooner
than 10 nor more than 30 days thereafter. The Township Clerk or
designee shall forward a copy of the complaint and a notice, as to
the date of the hearing, to the licensee and the agent, if any, at the
address indicated on the registration form. Service upon the agent
shall be sufficient.
(3) The hearing required by this section shall be held before the
Township Governing Body, unless, in its discretion, the Township
determines that the matter should be heard by a hearing officer,
who shall be appointed by the Township Governing Body. If the
matter is referred to a hearing officer, such officer shall transmit
his findings of fact and conclusions of law to the Township
Governing Body within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing.
The Township Governing Body shall then review the matter and
may accept, reject or modify the recommendations of the hearing
officer based on the record before such hearing officer. In the event
that the matter is not referred to a hearing officer and is heard by
the Township Governing Body, then it shall render a decision within
§ 223-15 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 223-15
214:769
§ 223-16. Notice of violation; subsequent violations.
§ 223-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
in the Municipal Court of the Township of Waterford, or such other court
having jurisdiction, be liable to a fine not exceeding $300 for the a first
offense, a fine of not less than $400 nor more than a $1,000 for a second
or subsequent offense, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days,
30 days of the conclusion of the hearing. Following the hearing, a
decision shall be rendered dismissing the complaint, revoking or
suspending the registration, or determining that the registration
shall not be renewed or reissued for one or more subsequent
license years.
(4) A stenographic transcript may be made of the hearing. All
witnesses shall be sworn prior to testifying. The strict rules of
evidence shall not apply, and the evidential rules and burden of
proof shall be that which generally controls administrative
hearings.
(5) The Township Solicitor or his designee shall appear and prosecute
on behalf of the complainant in all hearings conducted pursuant to
this section.
C. Defenses. It shall be a defense to any proceeding for the revocation,
suspension or other disciplinary action involving a rental registration
that the owner has taken appropriate action and has made a good faith
effort to abate the conditions or circumstances giving rise to the
revocation proceeding, including but not limited to the institution of
legal action against the tenant(s), occupant(s) or guests for recovery of
the premises, or eviction of the tenant(s) or other enforcement action.
The burden of proving such defense shall be on the owner.
A. Upon the occurrence of any violation of this article, the landlord or
owner of the property shall be put on notice by receiving written
notification of said violation from the person so designated by the
Township Committee to forward said notice. Said notice shall generally
inform the landlord and/or owner of the nature of the violation and the
date upon which said violation occurred. Said notice shall also state
that any subsequent violation of this article may result in said landlord
and/or owner being cited and otherwise charged with a violation of said
article, which may result in a hearing on said violation pursuant to
§ 223-15B of this article.
B. If any violation of this article occurs subsequent to written notification
being sent to said landlord and/or owner in accordance with the above
provisions, then said landlord and/or owner shall be cited for violation
of this article and notice for a hearing pursuant to § 223-15 of this
article.
§ 223-15 WATERFORD CODE § 223-17
214:770
or both. Each day that a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate and
distinct violation, subject to the penalty provisions of this article. Each
separate rental unit that fails to conform to this article shall be deemed a
separate and distinct violation for each day that the violation occurs within
the particular rental unit.
§ 223-17 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 223-17
214:771
Chapter 226
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Utilities Authority — See Ch. 66.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 220.
Water — See Ch. 278.
§ 223-17 WATERFORD CODE § 223-17
226:772
ARTICLE I
Connections to Public Sewer
[Adopted 12-8-1976 as Ord. No. 76-6; amended in its entirety
6-27-1979 by Ord. No. 79-12 (Ch. 98, Art. I, of the 1974 Code)]
§ 226-1. Connections required to available sewers.
The owner of every existing house, building or structure and the owner of
every house, building or structure hereafter to be constructed or acquired
which may be occupied or used by human beings, located on a street
along the line of a sewer now or hereafter constructed or acquired in the
Township of Waterford where the property line of the lot contains such
house, building or structure within 150 feet of said sewer line, shall, within
90 days after the date on which the service of such sewer is made available
to such house, building or structure, install a toilet in such house, building
or structure, unless a toilet is now installed therein or shall have been
installed therein prior to such date, and connect said toilet and any other
sewerage facilities emanating from said house, building or structure to the
sewer system under and pursuant to rules and regulations, which rules and
regulations shall be filed in the offices of the Waterford Township Municipal
Utilities Authority.170
§ 226-2. Connections for industrial wastes.
If any such house, building or structure referred to in § 226-1 hereof shall
be used for industrial or commercial purposes, the owner thereof shall,
within 90 days after the date on which the services of said sewer are
made available to said house or structure or prior to occupancy or use
of said house, building or structure, whichever date shall be later, install
such facilities as are necessary to accept and dispose of industrial wastes
emanating therefrom and connect such facilities with said sewer system
under and pursuant to rules and regulations, which rules and regulations
shall be filed in the offices of the Waterford Township Municipal Utilities
Authority.
§ 226-3. Failure to make connections.
If the owner of any house, building or structure referred to in §§ 226-1 and
226-2 hereof shall fail to make any installation or connection required by
this Article within the time herein required, the township may proceed to
make such installation or connection or cause the same to be made and
assess the cost thereof as a lien against such house, building or structure
pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:63-52
through 40:63-64.171
170. Editor's Note: See Ch. 66, Municipal Utilities Authority.
171. Editor's Note: These provisions were repealed by P.L. 1991, c. 53, § 1, effective January 1,
1992. See now N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-11 et seq.
§ 226-1 SEWERS § 226-3
226:773
Chapter 228
SEX OFFENDERS
§ 226-3 WATERFORD CODE § 226-3
228:774
ARTICLE I
Residency Prohibition
[Adopted 2-22-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-1]
§ 228-1. Residency prohibition; applicability; violations and
penalties.
A. No person over the age of 18 who has been convicted of a violation of
any crime against a minor as listed in N.J.S.A. 2C:7-2, and who as a
result of said conviction is required to register with the proper
authorities pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:7-1 et seq., Registration and
Notification of Release of Certain Offenders, shall be permitted to
reside or live within 1,000 feet of any school, park, playground or daycare
center in the Township.
B. A person who resides or lives within 1,000 feet of any school, park,
playground or day-care center in the Township shall have 60 days from
receipt of written notice of the prohibition set forth herein to move.
Failure to move to a location which is in compliance with this section
within that time period shall constitute a violation of this section.
C. This section shall not apply to a person who has established a residence
prior to January 25, 2006.
D. Any person who violates any section of this article shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $250 nor more than $2,000, imprisonment for not
more than 90 days and/or a period of community service not to exceed
90 days. Each day on which a violation occurs shall be considered a
separate offense.
§ 228-1 SEX OFFENDERS § 228-1
228:775
Chapter 230
SMOKING
§ 228-1 WATERFORD CODE § 228-1
228:776
ARTICLE I
Smoking in Public Buildings and on Public Property
[Adopted 10-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-14]
§ 230-1. Purpose.
The Township of Waterford finds and declares that the resolution of the
conflict between the right of the smoker to smoke and the right of the
nonsmoker to breathe clean air involves a determination of when and
where, rather than whether, a smoker may legally smoke. It is not the
public policy of the Township of Waterford to deny anyone the right to
smoke. However, the Township of Waterford finds that, in government
buildings owned or leased by the Township of Waterford and on all public
property owned or leased by the Township of Waterford, the right of the
nonsmoker to breathe clean air supersedes the right of the smoker to
smoke. In addition to the deleterious effects upon smokers, tobacco smoke
is at least an annoyance and a nuisance to a substantial percentage of the
nonsmoking public and a substantial health hazard to a smaller segment of
the nonsmoking public. Furthermore, smoking creates a substantial health
hazard to the youth of the Township who may be participating in activities
in buildings or properties owned or leased by the Township. Therefore, the
purpose of this chapter is to protect the interest of nonsmokers in public
buildings and on public property owned or leased by the Township and to
allow smokers the right to smoke only in designated areas established by
the Township.
§ 230-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC BUILDING — Any building or portion of a building owned or leased
by the Township of Waterford.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any real property, or portion thereof, owned or
leased by the Township of Waterford, to include parking lots, parks,
playgrounds and other recreation facilities.
SMOKING — The burning of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other
matter or substance which contains tobacco or a similar substance.
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Cigarette, cigar, smokeless tobacco to include
snuff, chewing tobacco or any substance that contains tobacco.[Added
2-28-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-3]
§ 230-3. Smoking prohibition.
Smoking is prohibited in all public buildings owned or leased by the
Township of Waterford and on all public property owned or leased by the
Township of Waterford. In public buildings or public property owned or
leased by the Township of Waterford, a designated smoking area may be
§ 230-1 SEX OFFENDERS § 230-3
228:777
established, which shall be clearly identified, and is the only area within a
public building or on any public property where smoking is permitted.
§ 230-4. Notice.
Notice of this chapter shall be provided to all Township employees and to
any employee organization's duly elected representative.
§ 230-5. Signs; posting.
All places affected by this chapter shall be identified by signs posted by
the Township with letters, at least one inch in height, stating "Smoking
Prohibited" or "Smoking Permitted," or the signs shall be designated by
the appropriate "Smoking Prohibited" or "Smoking Permitted" international
symbol. The letters or symbols shall contrast in color with the sign. The sign
shall also indicate that any person violating this chapter shall be subject to
a fine and that a person who smokes in a nonsmoking area may be denied
continued access to that area or to the services offered by the Township
until compliance with this chapter. Every sign required by this chapter shall
be located so as to be clearly visible to both the public and the Township
employees.
§ 230-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-28-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-3]
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a penalty of $100 for a first offense and a penalty of $200 for
each subsequent offense.
§ 230-3 WATERFORD CODE § 230-6
228:778
Chapter 232
SOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 143.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 220.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 239.
§ 232-1. Permission required.
No person shall excavate or otherwise remove soil for sale or for use
other than on the premises from which the soil shall be taken, except
in connection with the construction or alteration of a building on such
premises and excavation172 or grading incidental thereto, without first
having procured permission therefor from the Township Committee.
§ 232-2. Applications.
No application for the removal of soil from the premises for sale or
otherwise shall be considered unless and until the owner of the premises
shall first file with the Township Clerk an application requesting such
permission, together with a map of the premises showing the contour lines
and proposed contour grades resulting from such intended removal of soil
in relation to the topography of the premises, and the proposed contour
lines and proposed grades shall be subject to the inspection and approval
of the Township Committee. No such permission for soil removal shall
be issued until such map has been filed and until the proposed contour
lines and grades have been approved by the Township Committee of the
Township of Waterford.
§ 232-3. Hearing to review application; factors considered.
A. Upon written request for a hearing made by the applicant to the
Township Committee, an opportunity to be heard shall be granted
within 30 days thereafter, and the Township Committee, in considering
and reviewing the application and in arriving at its decision, shall be
guided by and take into consideration the public health, safety and
general welfare. Particular consideration shall be given to the following
factors:
(1) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(2) Drainage.
(3) Soil fertility.
172. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Property Maintenance.
§ 230-6 SOIL REMOVAL § 232-3
232:779
§ 232-4. Removal requirements.
If permission to remove the soil shall be granted, the owner or person
in charge shall conduct the operations so that there shall be no sharp
declivities, pits or depressions and in such a manner that the area shall be
properly leveled off, cleared of debris and graded to conform to the contour
lines and grades as approved by the Township Committee of the Township
of Waterford.
§ 232-5. Removal of arable layer prohibited.
The owner of the premises or person in charge of the removal of soil, when
permission has been duly granted, shall not take away the top layer of
arable soil for a depth of six inches, but such top layer of arable soil to a
depth of six inches shall be set aside for retention on the premises and shall
be respread over the premises when the rest of the soil has been removed,
pursuant to levels and contour lines approved by the Township Committee
of the Township of Waterford.
§ 232-6. Filing of bond.
Before any permit or permission for soil removal shall be granted or issued,
the owner or applicant shall file with the Township Committee a bond, in
form and with surety acceptable to the Township of Waterford, in such
amount as, in the opinion of the Township Committee of the Township
of Waterford, upon recommendation of the Township Engineer, shall be
sufficient to ensure the faithful performance of the work to be undertaken
pursuant to the permission granted by the Township Committee of the
Township of Waterford and pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 232-7. Permit required.
No excavation shall be made and no soil shall be removed under the
provisions of this chapter unless a permit therefor shall have been first
(4) Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and lands.
(5) Land values and uses.
(6) Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious physical development of the township.
B. If, after examining the application and the map provided for in § 232-2
of this chapter and after the hearing in the event that a hearing is
requested by the applicant, the Township Committee shall be of the
opinion that the proposed soil removal will not create conditions
inimical to the public health, welfare and safety and will not result in
the creation of any sharp declivities, pits or depressions, soil erosion or
fertility problems or depressed land values nor create any drainage or
sewerage problems or other conditions of danger, permission to remove
the soil shall be granted.
§ 232-3 WATERFORD CODE § 232-7
232:780
obtained as provided herein, and no excavation shall be made and no soil
shall be removed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 232-8. Violations and penalties.173
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $500, imprisonment in the
county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, a period of community service
not to exceed 90 days, or any combination thereof, in the discretion of the
Municipal Court Judge before whom such conviction shall be had. Each and
every violation of and nonconformance with this chapter or each day that
any provision of this chapter shall have been violated shall be construed as
a separate and distinct violation thereof.
Chapter 233
RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unlicensed vehicles — See Ch. 270.
§ 233-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the safety, health and general
welfare of the residents of the Township of Waterford on private and public
property within the Township. The purpose of this chapter is to prevent
residents from sustaining personal injury or property damage as a result of
the use and operation of recreational motor vehicles.
§ 233-2. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MOTORBIKE — Any motorized vehicle not registered with the State of New
Jersey pursuant to the provisions of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes
containing two wheels, commonly known as "motorbikes" or "ATVs," trail
bikes or motorcycles, bicycles with motor attached and all motor-operated
vehicles of the bicycle- or trail bike-type containing two wheels and having
a saddle or seat with driver sitting astride or upon it or a platform on which
the driver stands.
173. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 232-7 SOIL REMOVAL § 233-2
232:781
OPERATION — The riding of a recreational motor vehicle while the engine
is running. Operation is not intended to include the mere running of an
engine or nominal movement of the recreational motor vehicle which may
customarily happen during maintenance, storage and the like.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — All land in the Township of Waterford, in the County
of Camden, other than public property and other than public streets, roads
and highways.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Lands and interests in all real property owned by or
leased to the Township of Waterford, in the County of Camden, or owned by
or leased to any other municipal corporation or political subdivision of the
State of New Jersey, specifically included, but not limited in said definition
to, all public streets, roads and highways in the Township, public parks,
School Board lands and easement or rights-of-way open to the public.
RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE — Including, but not expressly limited
to, minibikes, motor scooters, go-carts, golf carts, motorbikes, dune buggies
and swamp buggies and any other similar motor vehicles of the type that
are normally used on land for recreation, entertainment or pleasure. The
use of lawn mowers, powered garden vehicles and other similar utilitarian
domestic vehicles is specifically excepted herefrom.
§ 233-3. Prohibited operation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit and suffer to
be operated a recreational motor vehicle, as defined herein within the
Township of Waterford under any of the following circumstances:
A. On private property of another without the express prior written
consent of the owner and the occupant of said property. Such consent
may be revoked at any time by the grantor thereof. Where such express
prior written consent has been obtained, the operator or person at the
site responsible for such operation shall keep said consent on his
person and available for immediate display at all times during the
period of such operation. Excepted from the operation of this
subsection are any private clubs or other organizations that permit the
operation of recreational motor vehicles on their property in connection
with the principal use of said property by the members of any such club
or organization.
B. On any public grounds or property, including township-owned land,
which shall include, but not be limited to, parks, ball parks, recreation
areas, lake area, township-owned streets, easements and sidewalks or
areas dedicated or commonly used for vehicular or pedestrian traffic,
township storage facilities, garage areas and Board of Education lands,
unless specifically designated, set aside and reserved therefor by
resolution of the Township Committee.
C. In such manner as to create loud or unnecessary noise so as to
unreasonably disturb or interfere with persons in the peaceful and quiet
enjoyment of their property. To this end, no person shall operate a
§ 233-2 WATERFORD CODE § 233-3
232:782
§ 233-4. General regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to the operation of a recreational
motor vehicle operated on public or private property as follows:
recreational motor vehicle before the hour of 9:00 a.m. and after the
hour of 7:00 p.m., prevailing time, or sunset, whichever shall first occur.
D. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the safety
or property of any person.
E. Other than while seated on the permanent, regular seat.
F. Under the age of 12 without being accompanied by their parent or adult
guardian.
G. At a speed too fast for existing conditions or potential hazards.
H. While intoxicated or impaired by alcohol or drugs.
I. On the tracks or right-of-way of a railroad.
J. On a highway.
K. In a tree nursery or planting in a manner which damages or destroys
growing stock or creates a substantial risk damage or destruction.
L. While pulling a person on skis, a toboggan, sleigh, sled or trailer, unless
the device is attached to the ATV by a tow-bar or other rigid connection.
M. On the ice of public water.
A. No person operating a recreational motor vehicle shall carry any other
person, except in a place designated therefore and equipped therefor as
part of the original manufacture for said purpose and in no event shall a
rider be carried on the handlebar thereof.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to make modifications to the exhaust
system of a recreational motor vehicle and/or to operate any
recreational motor vehicle equipped with a muffler cutout, muffler
bypass or similar device.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a recreational motor
vehicle after dark without a white headlight and red taillight. The
headlight and taillight must be lighted when riding a half-hour after
sunset to a half-hour before sunrise. Vehicles without lights shall not be
operated a half-hour after sunset up to sunrise. For greater safety, lights
should be on at all times.
D. No person shall operate or ride upon a recreational motor vehicle
excepting a golf cart, unless he wears goggles or a face shield and a
securely fitted protective helmet of a size proper for that person
approved by the Director of the Motor Vehicle Commission pursuant to
§ 233-3 SOIL REMOVAL § 233-4
232:783
§ 233-4.1. Registration. [Added 8-8-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-15]
All recreational motor vehicles subject to the provisions of this chapter
shall be registered with Waterford Township to ensure compliance with
the provisions of this chapter. Each recreational motor vehicle registered
shall receive an identification tag that must be prominently and visibly
displayed on the recreational motor vehicle at all times. Each recreational
motor vehicle shall pay a registration fee as set forth in the Township Fee
Schedule.174 Registration forms shall be provided by Waterford Township.
§ 233-5. Crossing roadways.
Operators of recreational motor vehicles shall avoid crossing a roadway
unless absolutely necessary. When crossing, the operator will:
§ 233-6. Impoundment.
N.J.S.A. 39:3-76.7 and 39:3-76.8. The helmet must be equipped with
either a neck or chin strap and be reflectorized on both sides thereof.
E. All recreational motor vehicles must have the following equipment:
(1) Brakes in good condition.
(2) A muffler which is in good operating condition and meets federal
standards. Such equipment is to be maintained in an effective and
suitable condition at all times. No modifications may be made to
increase the noise level.
(3) A spark arrester approved by the United States Forest Service. The
vehicle must not be operated at any time without the spark
arrester.
(4) Tires with at least 2/23nds of an inch tread without visible breaks,
cuts, exposed cords, bumps or bulges.
A. Cross at an angle of approximately 90°, at a place where there are no
obstructions to prevent a quick, safe crossing.
B. Come to a complete stop and yield the right-of-way to traffic on the
highway before crossing.
C. Cross a divided highway only where it intersects with another street or
highway.
D. Not cross a controlled access highway at any time.
A. Any police officer shall have the power and authority to confiscate and
impound any recreational motor vehicle as defined herein when said
recreational motor vehicle is operated in violation of this chapter or in
the event of the following:
174. Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
§ 233-4 WATERFORD CODE § 233-6
232:784
§ 233-7. Rebuttable presumptions.
(1) Operated by a person who is under the influence of alcohol or
drugs.
(2) When observed in reckless operation.
(3) Attempting to elude a law enforcement officer.
(4) Operating without a spark arrester.
(5) Operating with a modified exhaust system.
(6) Permitting unaccompanied operation by a person under the age of
12.
B. The Chief of Police or such Township police officer as shall be
designated by him shall keep and maintain a record of all recreational
motor vehicles impounded as aforesaid, which records shall so far as
possible show the name and address of the owner and the make, model,
year, serial number, color and other items tending to identify the
recreational motor vehicles impounded in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and shall also show the circumstances under
which it was impounded, such as the name of the police officer
impounding the same, the location at which the violation and
impounding occurred, the number of the registration tag and the place
where the impounded recreational motor vehicle is stored. Said record
shall, if reclaimed by the owner, show the date reclaimed, the time and
place of delivery to the owner and such other circumstances as the
Chief of Police or officer designated by him may think advisable, such as
the condition of the recreational motor vehicle at the time of
reclaiming, and a receipt for return of the recreational motor vehicle
shall be signed by the owner.
C. The owner of any impounded recreational motor vehicle shall have the
right to reclaim said recreational motor vehicle upon exhibiting
satisfactory proof to the Chief of Police that the following occurred:
(1) The owner of the recreational motor vehicle has paid all towing and
storage charges incurred pursuant to the Waterford Township
Code.
(2) The claimant shows sufficient proof that he is the lawful owner of
said recreational motor vehicle.
A. A rebuttable presumption shall exist that the operator of the
recreational motor vehicle is driving without consent of the owner or
person in custody and control of the recreational motor vehicle if he
cannot produce upon request of the police officer the written consent to
operate the recreational motor vehicle. A rebuttable presumption shall
also exist that the person is not authorized and given permission to
operate the recreational motor vehicle on private property from the
§ 233-6 SOIL REMOVAL § 233-7
232:785
§ 233-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any section of this chapter of the Code of the
Township of Waterford shall be subject to a fine of not more than $2,000,
imprisonment for not more than 90 days and/or a period of community
service not to exceed 90 days. Each day on which a violation occurs shall be
considered a separate offense.
Chapter 235
SOLID WASTE
owner or person in custody and control of such property or within 100
feet of a residence if, upon request, the operator cannot produce to the
officer the written consent required by this chapter from such owner or
person in custody and control for the date in question.
B. The rebuttable presumption shall terminate if the defendant produces
at the time of trial a written consent in writing or verbally from the
recreational motor vehicle or property owner giving permission for said
operation.
§ 233-7 WATERFORD CODE § 233-8
232:786
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 235-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their definitions shall have the meaning stated herein. Words used in the
present tense include the future tense, plural includes the singular, and any
one gender includes all others, except where the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
ALUMINUM CONTAINERS — Containers and packaging, such as beverage
cans or food and other nonfood cans, which can be processed into new
aluminum products.
APPROVED COMMERCIAL OCCUPANT — Any one commercial occupant of
an approved commercial property that has been approved by the Township
for automated collection by the Township of only recyclable materials.
APPROVED COMMERCIAL PROPERTY — A commercial property, or any
part thereof, which has been approved by the Township for automated
collection by the Township of only recyclable materials. An approved
commercial property may have one or more approved commercial
occupants.
ASHES — The residue from the combustion of any type of solid fuel, such as
wood, coal, charcoal, paper and/or similar substances.
AUTOMATED WASTE COLLECTION — The method of collecting solid
waste, recyclable materials and yard waste, using the specified carts for
each, through the use of mechanical collection equipment and special
containers, known as "carts," to accommodate the collection.
BULKY WASTE — Those items which are large enough to warrant special
collection or dropoff to a dropoff facility instead of regular residential,
automated curbside collection, such as appliances, furniture, mattresses,
carpet and padding, untreated heavy wood items, untreated fencing
materials, iron steel, large vehicle parts, tires, broken concrete or bricks.
CART — The specially designed waste container, with wheels and a specially
colored lid to represent the contents of the receptacle, which is to be
utilized for automated collection of solid waste and recyclable materials,
to be issued by the Township in either 30/31 gallon, 64/65 gallon or 95/96
gallon capacities, which shall be the only carts which are accepted for the
automated collection of the designated materials.
CONTAINER or RECEPTACLE — A waste container, also known as a
"receptacle," which is to be used for placement or containerization of such
materials that are to be collected by the Township, but are not permitted to
be disposed of in the Township-issued carts.
CURBSIDE — The area of a property which is between the curb and the
sidewalk of the street. In the absence of curb or sidewalk, "curbside" shall
§ 235-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 235-1
232:787
mean the area which is closest to the edge of the pavement of the street
without endangering traffic safety or obstructing pedestrian traffic.
DEMOLITION AND CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS — Any materials or waste
materials, such as lumber, brick, masonry, drywall, plaster, plumbing
fixtures, piping and tubing, gutters, roofing shingles, fencing of any kind,
yard debris and/or such other substances, materials and/or items
accumulated and/or produced as a result of a construction project
undertaken for the purpose of remodeling, rehabilitating, repairing and/or
constructing an addition to existing buildings, construction of new buildings
or demolition of existing structures and improvements by a property owner
or a contractor for the property owner.
DROPOFF FACILITY — Any one or more facility or facilities designated by
the Township which is available to Township residents for the drop off of
designated items for disposal or for further processing by the Township in
accordance with and/or as may be permitted by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection.
ELECTRONICS WASTE — Also known as "e-waste," consists of desktop
and personal computers, computer monitors, portable computers and
televisions.
GARBAGE — Any waste material in the process of or subject to
decomposition or decay incident to an ordinary domestic or business use
or purpose, including but not limited to kitchen refuse, animal or vegetable
matter, offal and decaying and decomposing substances.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE — Hazardous household products that
are used and disposed of by residential consumers, including some paints,
stains, varnishes, solvents and pesticides and other materials and products
which contain volatile chemicals that catch fire, react, explode under
certain circumstances or that are corrosive or toxic.
OCCUPANT — The property owner of a residential or approved commercial
property and/or any agent, tenant, lessee, caretaker, resident, occupant
and/or daily user thereof, including but not limited to all such person or
persons who is/are in charge of such residential or approved commercial
property affected by this chapter, whichever classification may be
appropriate and effective for the enforcement hereof.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Any formed or molded and hermetically sealed,
or made airtight with metal or plastic cap, rigid containers.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those designated materials which are being
accepted by the designated recycling facility for the Township and would
otherwise become solid waste and which may be collected, separated or
processed and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw
materials or products, including corrugated cardboard, mixed office paper,
newspaper, other paper, magazines, junk mail, glass containers, aluminum
containers, steel containers and/or other glass, together with plastic
containers containing the recycling logo and the recycling code numbers 1,
2, 4, 5 and 7.
§ 235-1 WATERFORD CODE § 235-1
232:788
RECYCLABLES CART — A 30/31, 64/65 or 95/96 gallon Township-issued
cart with wheels and issued to the occupant of a residential property or an
approved commercial property as provided for herein, which is designed
and intended to accommodate automated and semiautomated collection
operations of those types of recyclable materials which have been
designated herein for collection using such carts.
REFUSE — The waste items and/or materials designated herein as solid
waste, recyclable materials, yard waste, bulky waste, electronics waste and
household hazardous waste.
SINGLE STREAM RECYCLING — A system in which all paper fibers,
plastics, metals and other designated recyclable materials are mixed
together in a recycling collection vehicle instead of being sorted by the
resident or approved commercial property/occupant into separate
commodities. Also known as "fully commingled" or "single-sort" recycling.
SOLID WASTE — All ash, garbage, trash, rubbish and general waste
materials which are normally collected by the Township or its authorized
agents.
SOLID WASTE CART — A 30/31, 64/65 gallon or 95/96 gallon cart with
wheels and a lid issued to the occupant of a residential property which
is designed and intended to accommodate automated and semiautomated
collection operations of those types of solid waste materials which have
been designated herein for collection using such carts.
SUITABLE RECEPTACLE — A receptacle with a closely fitted cover or lid
constructed so as to prevent spillage or leakage of the contents, containing
adequate handles to support lifting without breaking when the receptacle is
full, and which is kept or maintained in clean condition.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Waterford.
TRASH AND RUBBISH — Solid waste generally incidental to the use and
occupancy of a residence and which is permitted to be disposed of and/
or collected in the solid waste container as set forth herein. "Trash and
rubbish" does not include other types of waste separately defined herein,
including recyclable materials, yard waste, electronics waste and/or
household hazardous waste.
YARD WASTE — Small branches of trees, hedge, bush and vine trimmings,
garden waste, stalks of vegetables and plants, grasses, leaves, weeds and
similar substances and/or materials found in residential yards which are
free of dirt, rocks and other bulky and noncombustible materials. "Yard
waste" does not include bulk leaves, tree roots, tree stumps, tree trunks or
portions thereof and/or tree branches over four inches in diameter or over
40 inches in length.
§ 235-2. Compliance required.
Every occupant of any residential property and/or approved commercial
property situated within the Township of Waterford shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter regarding the collection of refuse, including,
§ 235-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 235-2
232:789
without limitation, the use of required carts and the automated waste
collection procedures, compliance with established refuse collection
schedules and compliance with any and all regulations for the disposal
of refuse as set forth herein. All persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of any violation of this chapter shall be subject to punishment
pursuant to the provisions hereof.
§ 235-3. Occupant responsible for refuse.
Every occupant shall own and be responsible for all refuse placed curbside
for collection until such refuse is collected by the Township, and shall own
and be responsible for any items required to be taken to a dropoff facility
until acceptance by the Township of same at a Township-designated dropoff
facility.
§ 235-4. Prohibited materials and/or conduct.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Place or store any refuse in any paper bag, wooden keg or barrel,
basket, drum or any type of container whatsoever other than the
Township-issued carts and/or such permitted receptacles as
specified herein.
(2) Use any Township-issued cart for storage and/or placement for
collection of any type of refuse other than the type designated for
that cart.
(3) Alter any Township-issued cart and/or switch or change the colored
lids of any Township-issued carts for any reason.
(4) Collect, pick up, rake up or in any way disturb or remove any items
which have been identified in this chapter as refuse and placed by
any other person along any curb, street or public place for
collection by the Township.
(5) Directly or indirectly solicit contributions or gratuities, at any time,
for the collection of any refuse.
(6) Violate any term, condition or requirement of this chapter.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to place the
following materials for collection by the Township:
(1) Demolition and construction debris;
(2) Bulk leaves (except as otherwise provided in this chapter), tree
roots, tree stumps, and/or tree parts or tree branches over four
inches in diameter or over 40 inches in length;
(3) Hot ashes, dirt, earth, stone, bulk asphalt pavement, broken
concrete and concrete blocks;
§ 235-2 WATERFORD CODE § 235-4
232:790
§ 235-5. Hold harmless and indemnification.
Any and all property owners and occupants of any property which place
any material for collection not in accordance with this chapter shall hold
harmless and indemnify the Township of Waterford for any and all damages,
costs and/or losses incurred by the Township, its employees and/or agents,
whether directly or indirectly attributable to said action, as determined in
the sole discretion of the Township, for materials which were placed for
collection in violation of the terms of this chapter.
(4) Motor vehicles, recreational vehicles of any kind and/or bulk parts
thereof, including but not limited to engines, transmissions, rear
ends, mufflers, rims, wheels and any other bulky items which are
normally produced, in quantity, by vehicle repair operations;
(5) Dead animals and farm animal waste;
(6) Medical waste, excluding properly contained syringes and needles
which are medically necessary for the proper medical treatment of
the occupant of a residential property; or
(7) Hazardous waste as classified pursuant to New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection regulations, provided that residential
occupants may drop off household hazardous waste as defined
herein to any dropoff facility designated by the Township for
collection of same in accordance with scheduled dates and times
therefor which shall be posted by the Township.
C. It shall be unlawful for any municipal employee to collect, pick up, rake
up or in any way remove any refuse placed by any person along any
curb, street or public place for collection by the Township for any
unauthorized reason, including personal use and/or personal gain.
D. All solid waste shall be placed entirely within the solid waste cart, and
no solid waste shall be placed in the street. If any solid waste is placed
within the street and is not placed inside the solid waste cart, the
responsible party shall remove the solid waste from the street or be
deemed in violation of this chapter.
E. All recyclable materials shall be placed entirely within the recyclables
cart, and no recyclable materials shall be placed in the street. If any
recyclable material is placed within the street and is not placed inside
the recyclables cart, the responsible party shall remove the recyclable
materials from the street or be deemed in violation of this chapter.
F. All permitted bulky waste shall be placed curbside, and no bulky waste
shall be placed in the street. If any bulky waste is placed within the
street and is not placed curbside, the responsible party shall remove
the bulky waste from the street or be deemed in violation of this
chapter.
§ 235-4 SOIL REMOVAL § 235-6
232:791
§ 235-6. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced in the municipal court of the Township of
Waterford upon a complaint being filed by the Code Enforcement Officer,
Public Works Director or Deputy Director, Health Officer, and/or Police
Chief or his or her designee. Once a complaint has been signed and issued,
the responsibility for the disposal of the items shall lie with the violator.
Fines and/or fees not paid within 30 days of assessment by the Township
shall constitute a lien against the property, which shall be collected in the
manner provided by law, and refuse collection services shall cease until full
restitution has occurred.
§ 235-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine up to $100
for the first offense, up to $250 for the second offense and up to $500 for
each subsequent offense and by imprisonment in the county jail for a term
not to exceed 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the court. All persons
allowing or permitting the continuation of any violation of this chapter also
shall be subject to punishment for each separate offense as provided for
herein. The continuation of any violation of this chapter for more than one
day shall constitute a separate offense on each successive day.
§ 235-6 WATERFORD CODE § 235-7
232:792
ARTICLE II
Regulations Regarding Supply and Use of Carts
§ 235-8. Supply and labeling of carts; additional carts for purchase;
other receptacles.
A. Township to supply carts. The Township of Waterford shall provide each
residential dwelling with one cart for solid waste, one cart for
recyclable materials in which each occupant shall place and keep the
substances and/or materials which are designated for containment in
the respective carts. The Township shall provide each approved
commercial occupant with one cart for recyclable materials. All
Township-issued carts shall remain the property of the Township of
Waterford and/or approved hauler.
B. Carts labeled. Each cart shall contain a serial number which shall be
correlated with the assigned residential property or approved
commercial property and recorded by the Township. In the event that
an occupant moves from the property, each cart shall remain with the
property.
C. Additional carts available for purchase.
(1) An occupant of a residential property may purchase additional
carts over and above the initial carts provided by the Township for
the specific designated materials, which shall be approved only
upon a clear demonstration of need established to the satisfaction
of the Director and/or Deputy Director of the Public Works
Department by the occupant. Any such request for additional
cart(s) shall be made to the Director or Deputy Director of the
Public Works Department. The delivery of the cart to the occupant
will be made only after payment of the fee specified herein has
been delivered to and accepted by the Township. The serial
number, respective purchaser and the assigned property shall be
recorded by the Township for each additional purchased cart.
(2) An approved commercial occupant may purchase up to an
additional four recyclables carts, for a maximum of five total carts,
provided the occupant first demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
Director and/or Deputy Director of the Public Works Department
the need for the requested number of additional recyclables carts.
Any such request for additional cart(s) shall be made to the
Director or Deputy Director of the Public Works Department. The
delivery of the cart to the occupant will be made only after payment
of the fee specified herein has been delivered to and accepted by
the Township. The serial number, respective purchaser and the
assigned property shall be recorded by the Township for each
additional purchased cart.
(3) Occupants shall be charged a fee of $55 for a 64/65 gallon cart and
$65 for a 95/96 gallon cart.
§ 235-8 SOIL REMOVAL § 235-8
232:793
§ 235-9. Use of carts and receptacles.
(4) Additional carts approved and issued in accordance with this
section may be purchased only from the Township. All additional
purchased carts shall remain the property of the Township of
Waterford. In the event any occupant moves from any property, all
additional purchased cart(s) shall remain with the property.
(5) In the event the cart becomes damaged, the property owner/
occupant shall be required to immediately notify the Township
Public Works Department at 856-767-2359 and report the damage.
A new cart will be provided upon return of the damaged cart to the
Department of Public Works and payment of the fee indicated in
Subsection C(3) above to purchase new cart. If the cart was
damaged by the solid waste hauler, a new cart will be provided at
no cost by the hauler.
D. Other receptacles. The occupant of each property within the Township
shall provide such additional suitable receptacles for storage and
collection of all materials which are not permitted to be placed within
the Township-issued carts but are to be collected by the Township in
accordance with this chapter.
A. Use of carts required. Every property owner and/or occupant of any
residential property or approved commercial property situated within
the Township of Waterford shall utilize the Township-supplied cart(s)
for the regular and/or routine placement, storage and disposal of the
type of refuse specified thereon.
B. Placement of carts for collection.
(1) All carts, receptacles and/or items to be removed by the Township
shall be placed, by the occupant, in the required locations, no
earlier than 5:00 p.m. on the day preceding the collection day and
no later than 5:00 a.m. on the day of collection.
(2) The Director and Deputy Director of Public Works have the right to
designate collection points which may be located along the
property or across the street from the property, especially along
dead-end, alleyways and one-way streets, so as to provide for the
most efficient and safe route to accommodate automated and
semiautomated collection of refuse.
(3) The front of each cart shall be placed directly behind the curb face
or the edge of pavement with the arrows on the lid pointing
towards the street. The carts shall be placed curbside and spaced
no less than four feet apart. Carts also shall be placed at least three
feet from any obstruction which may be present in the roadway
(such as vehicles, snow, etc.) or along the sides of the cart (such as
poles, mailboxes, trees, etc.) in order to permit proper handling
and collection by automated collection vehicles. All carts
§ 235-8 WATERFORD CODE § 235-9
232:794
§ 235-10. General collection regulations.
containing the same type of refuse shall be placed together at
one collection point at curbside or such other location as may be
designated by the Township pursuant to § 235-9B(2) above.
(4) When plowed snow exists along the frontage of the property, the
occupant shall create an opening curbside to provide for the
placement of the carts in accordance with the requirements of this
section for safe and proper access by the automated collection
vehicle.
(5) A maximum of five total carts may be placed at any one property for
collection during any designated collection event.
C. Removal and storage of carts. Immediately after the carts and/or
receptacles are emptied by the Township, or within the same day of the
respective collection, all carts and receptacles should be returned to a
storage location, which shall be on the property behind, along the side
of or within the primary structure or an accessory building. The storage
area should be located so that the carts and receptacles are not visible
from the street and do not create any nuisance or affect to the health,
safety and welfare of neighbors or the general public.
A. Use of carts.
(1) The occupant shall place only the permitted items within each
designated cart. The occupant shall not intermix trash, recyclables
and yard waste or other waste.
(2) No items set curbside for collection by the Township shall be placed
in bags, boxes or corrugated receptacles.
(3) All items which previously contained liquids and are to be placed
within carts and/or receptacles for collection shall be thoroughly
and completely drained by the occupant prior to placing same in a
cart or receptacle.
(4) The contents placed in a cart shall not exceed the weight of 200
pounds for a 64/65 gallon container and 290 pounds for a 95/96
gallon container.
(5) The occupant of the premises shall be responsible to maintain all
carts and receptacles in a clean, sanitary and proper condition for
safe handling and collection. It is the sole responsibility of the
occupant to notify the Township of any damage to any cart which
may or actually does prohibit the ability to effectively use the cart
for containment, disposal and automated collection.
B. Use of receptacles.
(1) All receptacles, other than the carts, shall be sufficiently strong for
the intended use and purpose. Each receptacle shall have a close-
§ 235-9 SOIL REMOVAL § 235-10
232:795
§ 235-11. Uses subject to private waste removal.
fitting cover and durable handles which are manufactured as part
of the receptacle and shall have a capacity of not less than 2.5
gallons and not more than 40 gallons. Receptacles shall not include
paper bags or be made of other types of flimsy material.
(2) The maximum weight of the container, lid and contents of any
receptacle placed for collection shall not exceed 50 pounds.
(3) The occupant is responsible for owning and providing the
necessary receptacles for materials that are not to be placed into a
cart but are to be collected by the Township. Receptacles shall be
placed curbside within the limits of the street frontage of the
property in an area which is clear of any obstructions but shall not
be placed closer than three feet to any cart.
(4) When placed in a receptacle, materials shall not exceed the height
of the receptacle.
(5) The occupant is responsible for maintaining all receptacles in a
clean, sanitary and proper condition for the safe handling and
collection of the items placed therein.
(6) Receptacles that are broken or otherwise fail to meet the
requirements of this chapter may be treated as trash and/or
rubbish and shall be collected and disposed of by the Township as
such.
C. Items which cannot be placed in carts or receptacles. Any items which
are designated for curbside collection and are not permitted to be
placed within a cart or receptacle shall be placed in a neat and orderly
manner.
D. Convenience center. The Public Works Department may designate one
or more dropoff facility or facilities for the collection of designated
items and substances. Said facility(ies) may accept used motor oil,
corrugated cardboard, bulky waste, yard waste (excluding grass
clippings), and electronics waste when and as permitted by the rules
and regulations of the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection. The Township Public Works Department complex shall serve
as one such dropoff facility only for such items as may be designated by
the Township, from time to time, for dropoff at that location.
A. The occupant of any commercial or industrial premises and/or any such
use on any property shall be responsible for the storage and
containment of all solid waste and hazardous waste generated
therefrom and shall arrange for the private removal of all such waste
from such premises on every business day unless sufficient and suitable
facilities are provided, in accordance with the Township codes and
other regulations, for the storage thereof until same can be safely
removed from the premises or unless other arrangements for disposal
§ 235-10 WATERFORD CODE § 235-11
232:796
are made with the consent and the approval of the Mayor and Township
Committee, Board of Health, Waterford Township Planning Board and/
or any other governmental agency or department with authority to
regulate and/or enforce refuse collection requirements regarding same,
as the case may be.
B. This section shall not apply to those commercial uses located in a
residential zoning district, or to residences with a business attached
thereto and which generate no more than 95 gallons of noncompacted
solid waste on a weekly basis and no more than 95 gallons of recyclable
materials on a weekly basis or to approved commercial properties and/
or approved commercial occupants.
C. Apartment complexes of one to four units will be provided one ninetyfive-
gallon cart for trash and one ninety-five-gallon cart for recycling
per unit. Apartment complexes of five or more units may elect to have
solid waste and recyclables collected by the Township utilizing a threecubic-
yard container for solid waste and a three-cubic-yard container
for recycling.
D. Townhomes and duplex developments will be provided one ninety-fivegallon
cart for trash and one ninety-five-gallon cart for recycling per
unit where storage of the carts can comply with § 235-9C. In the event
storage of carts is unable to comply with § 235-9C, at least a threecubic-
yard container or dumpster shall be located on the property and
properly screened from street and adjoining property view. The latter
requirement shall be prospective only following adoption of this
chapter.
§ 235-11 SOIL REMOVAL § 235-11
232:797

ARTICLE III
Refuse Collection Schedules
§ 235-12. Collection of solid waste.
Collection of solid waste, which shall be contained within the designated
cart, shall be made once per week for each residential occupant based upon
the schedule established and posted by the Public Works Department. In the
event the designated collection day falls on a holiday, the collection day will
be moved to a different day which shall be designated and posted by the
Township as needed.
§ 235-13. Collection of recyclables.
Collection of recyclable materials from residential and participating
commercial occupants, which shall be contained within the designated cart,
shall be once per week based upon the schedule established and posted by
the Public Works Department. In the event the designated collection day
falls on a holiday, the collection day will be moved to a different day which
shall be designated and posted by the Township as needed.
§ 235-14. Collection of leaves and brush.
§ 235-15. Collection of bulky waste items.
A. Collection of bulk leaves generally will occur during the beginning of
April and the months of November and December on a schedule to be
posted by the Public Works Department. The Director or Deputy
Director of the Public Works Department may adjust the general
collection period for bulk leaves for any reason he or she deems
necessary, including but not limited to weather conditions. Any changes
to the posted collection schedule will be posted by the Township.
B. Leaves should not be bagged. Residents who live on Route 30 (White
Horse Pike) and not having access to any side street or alley may bag
the leaves and place them out for collection. Residents in this location
shall call the Department of Public Works to schedule a collection time.
C. Collection will begin on Monday and continue until the entire route is
complete for that week. Leaves should be curbside loose at the
beginning of the scheduled collection week. Leaves shall be free from
all other yard debris, including sticks, twigs, acorns, and trash. Vehicles
in front of or too close to the leaves will not be picked up.
A. Items such as couches and furniture shall be placed at the curb for
pickup during the last full week of the month, and collected on the
regular scheduled trash day. The hauler will regularly pick up two small
bulk items (twin mattress, small chair, small table).
§ 235-12 SOIL REMOVAL § 235-15
232:799
B. Bulk trash pickup for oversized/large items will be one time a month
during the last full week of the month. (A full week of the month is the
last week which includes Monday to Friday of the same month.)
C. Construction and/or remodeling material is not bulk trash and is not
collected by the Township or hauler.
D. Bulk items that will not be collected. The Township will not collect
debris such as paneling, insulation, decks, fences, railroad ties, bricks,
concrete, roofing, etc. Contractors working for homeowners and/or
homeowners are responsible for the removal and disposal of these
items.
§ 235-15 WATERFORD CODE § 235-15
232:800
ARTICLE IV
Recycling
§ 235-16. Recycling program established.
There is hereby established a program for the mandatory separation of
recyclable materials from the waste stream by all occupants within the
Township for the purpose of processing and returning recyclable materials
to the economic mainstream in repurposed form.
§ 235-17. Collection regulations.
In addition to the general collection regulations established in Articles II
and III of this chapter, collection of recyclable materials shall be subject to
the following:
A. For residential properties, approved commercial properties and/or
approved commercial occupants: The following recyclable materials
shall be placed for collection within the Township-provided recyclables
cart in accordance with the minimum standards set forth herein:
(1) Newspaper, corrugated cardboard, phone books, paperboard boxes
(cereal, pasta, tissue, etc.), beverage cartons, cardboard beverage
carriers, paper bags, file folders, office paper, paper towel rolls,
paperback books, magazines, brochures, inserts, greeting cards,
regular and junk mail, aluminum and metal can containers, No. 1,
No. 2, No. 4, No. 5 and No. 7 plastic food, beverage and other
materials containers (caps removed), steel bottle caps, loose metal
jar lids and glass bottles and jars (caps and lids removed) shall be
placed together in the Township-issued recyclables cart.
(2) Corrugated cardboard and paper bags must be flattened.
Newspapers, magazines and other paper recyclables shall not be
placed in bags, tied or bundled prior to placement in the
recyclables cart.
(3) All containers to be recycled must be emptied and rinsed.
(4) No plastic bags, scrap metal, plastic lids and caps, plastic six-pack
holders, needles or syringes, plastic microwave trays, window
panes, mirrors, ceramics, Pyrex or similar dishware, plastics other
than those listed, paints, pesticides, oil and cleaners, stickers or
address label sheet waste, waxed paper or cardboard, styrofoam or
paper to-go containers, organic materials and food waste,
electronics waste, broken concrete, bricks or wood products are to
be placed in the recyclables cart.
(5) Loose recyclable materials which are required to be placed within a
recyclables cart are prohibited from being placed outside of the
cart and will not be collected by the Township.
§ 235-16 SOIL REMOVAL § 235-17
232:801
B. For residential occupants only: Appliances/white goods shall be
collected one day per month which shall be designated and posted by
the Township. Appliances/white goods shall be placed curbside in
accordance with the requirements of § 235-9B. Occupants must call the
Township at least one week prior to the scheduled collection date to
arrange for the collection of these items on the assigned collection day.
Residential occupants may drop off appliances/white goods at the
dropoff facility which is designated by the Township for such items
during the normal operating hours of that facility.
§ 235-17 WATERFORD CODE § 235-17
232:802
ARTICLE V
Yard Waste and Bulky Waste
§ 235-18. Yard waste.
In addition to the general collection regulations established in Articles II
and III of this chapter, collection of yard waste shall be subject to the
following:
A. Collection standards.
(1) Designated yard waste shall be placed entirely within a yard waste
container and shall not be placed in the street. If yard waste is
placed within the street and is not placed inside the yard waste
container, the responsible party must remove the yard waste from
the street or said party will be deemed in violation of this article.
(2) Yard waste must be placed within and not exceed 50 pounds and
the height of the yard waste container. No bags shall be placed
within the yard waste container.
(3) Yard waste which is designated for placement inside the yard waste
container but is placed along the curb and outside of the container
in a bag or in any receptacle other than the yard waste container
will not be collected by the Township.
B. Bulk leaf collection.
(1) Bulk leaves shall only be placed curbside and no more than 10 feet
in depth during the collection periods established pursuant to
§ 235-14.
(2) Bulk leaves shall be placed curbside and at least 10 feet from any
storm drain inlet. Leaves shall not be placed within the street.
Leaves shall be placed behind the curb no earlier than seven days
before the announced collection date. It is recommended that the
leaves be placed in the required location within a temporary fence
corral which is able to be easily disassembled by the collection
crew for access to the leaves.
(3) Placement of leaves within the street at any time, or in any manner
other than specified herein, is a violation of this article. If leaves
are placed within the street, the responsible party must remove the
leaves from the street immediately upon notice from the Township
or said party shall be deemed in violation of this chapter.
C. Township PIT. Only Township residents may drop off yard waste at the
Township PIT during normal operating hours. Yard waste which is
dropped off to the Public Works Department cannot contain grass
clippings. Prior to dropoff, the resident must have the yard waste
inspected and approved for dropoff by the Public Works staff.
§ 235-18 SOIL REMOVAL § 235-19
232:803
§ 235-19. Bulky waste.
In addition to the general collection regulations established in Articles II
and III of this chapter, collection of bulky waste shall be subject to the
following additional collection standards:
§ 235-20. Business, industry and multiple use.
A. Bulky waste shall be placed curbside for collection and shall not be
placed in the street. If bulky waste is placed within the street and is not
placed curbside, the responsible party must remove the bulky waste
from the street or said party will be deemed to be in violation of this
article.
B. No bulky items placed for collection shall be of any weight and/or size
which is greater than can be conveniently and safely handled by two
persons.
C. Bulky waste shall be placed in a neat and orderly manner and no closer
than three feet to any cart, container or receptacle.
A. The owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of any property listed
below shall arrange for the removal of the substance and/or materials
herein referred to in § 235-18A and B from such premises each and
every business day, unless sufficient and suitable facilities are provided
and used for the storage thereof or until removal from the premises.
Collection and disposal as well as any and all tipping fees are to be the
sole responsibility of the property owner, lessee, tenant or occupant.
Receptacles shall be conveniently located on the premises for the
storage of the substances and/or materials referred to in this article and
shall be maintained in such manner as to prevent the creation of a
nuisance or menace to health. In all instances of combination use where
the commercial entity is in a separate building, the two shall be treated
as separate uses, with the commercial entity being treated as
Subsection A(1) below.
(1) All nonresidential commercial properties.
(2) Combination residential/commercial properties shall only have the
residential nonrecyclable solid waste and recyclable solid waste
removed in accordance with the requirements of this article.
Commercial solid waste shall not in any manner be comingled with
the residential solid waste being removed.
(3) All religious and nonreligious places of worship and associated
buildings.
(4) All other tax-exempt properties.
B. Each aforesaid generator shall bear responsibility for the proper
disposition of recyclables, even though said generator may contract
with another party for disposition. Each generator shall submit to the
§ 235-19 WATERFORD CODE § 235-20
232:804
§ 235-21. Removing and transporting: granting of exclusive
privileges.
§ 235-22. Unlawful dumping.
It shall be unlawful for any person, resident or nonresident, to dump any
matter, other than that which is permitted, in any location of the Township
other than where approved by the appropriate sections of the Code or
otherwise approved by the Township Committee.
§ 235-23. Prohibited conduct.
Waterford Township Recycling Coordinator, by the first of February of
each year, documentation verifying the previous year's total recycling,
expressed in either weight or cubic yardage.
C. Documentation shall take the form of letters verifying weight of
volumes issued by the receptor to the generator of the recycled
materials. Weight slips or volume receipts or paid invoices must be
maintained by the generator and/or receptor for inspection of
requested by this municipality, county or state.
A. The Mayor and Township Committee shall have the right and power by
resolution to grant the exclusive privilege of collecting and transporting
recyclable and nonrecyclable solid waste from those property
classifications not specifically excluded in § 235-20 within the corporate
limits of the Township of Waterford, in the County of Camden, State of
New Jersey, or otherwise provide therefor.
B. All nonrecyclable solid waste collected within the Township of
Waterford and disposed of by the Township or its representative shall
be done in accordance with the sanitary landfill or incinerator method
in accordance with the standards for the design, operation and
maintenance of sanitary landfills and incinerators contained in Chapter
VII of the State Sanitary Code. Three copies of said Chapter VII of the
State Sanitary Code shall be kept on file with the Township Clerk.
A. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster shall ensure that such container or dumpster is covered at all
times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or overflowing onto the
ground.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster shall ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids on the ground or into
the municipal storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of
Waterford.
§ 235-20 SOIL REMOVAL § 235-24
232:805
§ 235-24. Proper collection and removal of nonrecyclable and
recyclable solid waste.
The collection and removal thereof shall be under the general supervision of
the Public Works Manager and shall be performed in a proper and orderly
fashion for the safety, health and welfare of its residents. It is anticipated
that occasional and minor breaches or violations may occur. Since these are
incapable of prompt and reasonable calculations, the following stipulated
penalties and damages, whose determination and certification shall be final
unless reversed by the Township Committee, shall apply. The Public Works
Manager and/or the Township Administrator shall notify the collector of
such violations when convenient and susceptible of immediate correction
otherwise; the Township shall deduct the same from the next payment to
the solid waste contractor.
A. Failure of truck and a crew to operate and finish a regular route: $250
per day in which noncollection takes place, plus the sum of $200 per
day for each vehicle hired or used by the Township for the purpose of
performing the collections service which the solid waste contractor has
failed to perform, and plus the sum of $85 per day for each person used
or employed, including Township employees assigned to the
performance of this service.
B. Failure to make any collection on any one collection day: The solid
waste contractor shall pay the Township $250 for each day in which
noncollection takes place, plus the sum of $200 per day for each vehicle
hired or used by the Township for the purpose of performing the
collection service which the solid waste contractor has failed to
perform, and also plus the sum of $125 per day for each person used or
employed, including Township employees assigned to the performance
of this service.
C. Trucks in leaking or unsanitary conditions: $200 for each offense.
D. Permanent containers or receptacle damaged or carried away, failure to
replace within three days: $30 for each.
E. Failure of truck and crew to follow prescribed route: $100 for each
violation.
F. Failure to clean spilled materials, such as fallen glass, cans, debris, etc.:
$100 for each occasion.
G. Failure to operate stated equipment or vehicles as specified in the
section titled "Equipment and personnel": $200 for each violation.
H. Failure to replace cans as specified in the section titled "Replacement of
trash containers": $50 for each violation.
I. For transferring solid waste from vehicle to vehicle: $25 for each
occurrence.
§ 235-24 WATERFORD CODE § 235-24
232:806
J. For failure to maintain radio communication between supervisors and
employees during the required hours: $25 for each truck for each such
violation.
K. For failure to answer a complaint pertaining to problems concerning
collection of solid waste within four hours of receipt of the complaint:
$50.
§ 235-24 SOIL REMOVAL § 235-24
232:807
Chapter 237
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pet waste — See Ch. 94, Art III.
Wildlife feeding — See Ch. 94, Art. IV.
Uniform Construction Codes — See Ch. 103.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 143.
Grading — See Ch. 155.
Land use, development and zoning — See Ch.
176.
Sewers — See Ch. 226.
Solid waste — See Ch. 235.
Water — See Ch. 278.
§ 235-24 WATERFORD CODE § 235-24
232:808
ARTICLE I
Illicit Storm Sewer Connections
[Adopted 4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-5]
§ 237-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) operated by the Township of Waterford,
so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties
for failure to comply.
§ 237-2. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, processed
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of
Waterford, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit
other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES
Permit Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are
not limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Waterford or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A et seq.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides, or
§ 237-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 237-2
232:809
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESSED WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Processed wastewater includes, but is not limited to,
leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal or equipment.
§ 237-3. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Township of Waterford any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water,
processed wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 237-4. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or other
municipal officials of the Township of Waterford.
§ 237-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, entity or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, before the Municipal Court
of the Township of Waterford, be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both,
in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge before whom such defendant
shall be convicted. A separate offense may be deemed committed on each
day that a violation occurs or continues.
§ 237-2 WATERFORD CODE § 237-5
232:810
ARTICLE II
Prohibited Storm Sewer Discharges
[Adopted 4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
§ 237-6. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal
of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) operated by the Township of Waterford, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 237-7. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Waterford or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal or equipment.
§ 237-8. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of
Waterford is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials
other than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of
pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 237-9. Exceptions to prohibition.
Exceptions to prohibition includes:
A. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
§ 237-6 SOIL REMOVAL § 237-9
232:811
§ 237-10. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or other
municipal officials of the Township of Waterford.
§ 237-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person, entity or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, before the Municipal Court
of the Township of Waterford, be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both,
in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge before whom such defendant
shall be convicted. A separate offense may be deemed committed on each
day that a violation occurs or continues.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use for
their intended purposes; and
(2) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing materials
immediately following salt and de-icing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded. Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the
above situation, is limited to exterior, undercarriage, and exposed
parts and does not apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 237-9 WATERFORD CODE § 237-11
232:812
ARTICLE III
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Adopted 6-23-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-6]
§ 237-12. Purpose.
This article requires the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which are
in direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing
or alterations of facilities on private property, to prevent the discharge of
solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers and other
litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the
Waterford Township so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and
to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 237-13. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by Waterford Township or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NOTE: In municipalities with combined sewer systems, add the following:
"MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems
that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and
transport stormwater from streets and other sources."
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 237-14. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
§ 237-12 SOIL REMOVAL § 237-14
232:813
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 237-15. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 237-14 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see
Subsection C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 237-15 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they
use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an
area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is no greater than 0.5
inches across the smallest dimension.
(3) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than 7.0
square inches, or be no greater than 2.0 inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
§ 237-14 WATERFORD CODE § 237-15
232:814
§ 237-16. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or other
municipal officials of Waterford Township.
§ 237-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment in the county
jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the
Municipal Court Judge before whom such defendant shall be convicted for
each storm drain inlet that is not retrofitted to meet the design standard.
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New-Jersey-Register-listed historic property.
§ 237-15 SOIL REMOVAL § 237-17
232:815
Chapter 239
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 100.
Fees — See Ch. 124, Art. II.
Loitering — See Ch. 184.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 201.
§ 237-17 WATERFORD CODE § 237-17
232:816
ARTICLE I
Street Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 11-23-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-19175]
§ 239-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
APPLICANT — Any person making written application to the Township
of Waterford for a road opening permit hereunder. If the applicant is a
contractor who will be performing the excavation work on behalf of another
party, the contractor shall be coapplicant, and the party on whose behalf
the work is being performed shall be the applicant. The applicant must be
a contractor, either corporate, individual or partnership, a utility company,
municipality or utility authority who will be actually engaged in the
performance of the work under the permit and who will be directly
responsible for the protection of the work, for the adherence of the work
specifications and for the safety of the public. The application shall be made
for and on behalf of the owner for whom the work is being done and shall be
countersigned by the owners. Permits will not be issued to private owners
and developers without written approval of the Township Public Works
Superintendent. The owner shall agree as a condition of the issuance of the
permit that any facilities, pipes, etc., to be installed within the Township
right-of-way pursuant to the permit shall be promptly relocated at the
owner's expense as required by the Township Public Works Superintendent
to accommodate the installation of Township facilities, existing or future.
COAPPLICANT — A contractor who will be performing excavation work on
behalf of the applicant and who is jointly and severally responsible and
liable along with the applicant for compliance with all terms and conditions
of this article and any penalty or claim filed by the Township as a result of
any violation of the article.
EXCAVATION — The digging, displacing, undermining, opening, boring,
tunneling, auguring, or in any manner breaking up any improved or
unimproved street, sidewalk, curb, gutter, or other public property in any
roadway or any other portion of a Township right-of-way.
LINEAR FOOT — Common unit of English measurement used to determine
openings in Township roads. It is equal to 12 inches.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Security in the form of either a bond,
letter of credit or a certified check posted by an applicant or coapplicant to
guarantee proper maintenance of the reconstruction of the site of any road
opening for a period of two years after final acceptance.
MAINTENANCE PERIOD — Permit applicant is responsible for maintenance
of the excavation for a period of two years after final acceptance of the
work.
175. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Street Openings and
Excavations, adopted 6-13-1984 by Ord. No. 84-9, as amended.
§ 239-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 239-1
232:817
MUTCD — Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
PER-DIEM INSPECTOR — In cases where permit openings require specific
oversight, openings of 200 LF and/or at the discretion of the Public Works
Superintendent or his designee, any applicant shall be required to pay the
hourly fee for a per-diem inspector. The per-diem inspector will physically
visit each site as outlined in the specific permit to ensure proper guidelines
are being followed as documented in the permit application. Weekly written
reports will be given to the Township by the per-diem inspector, along with
a weekly time sheet.[Added 5-25-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-11]
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Security in the form of either a bond,
letter of credit or a certified check posted by an applicant or coapplicant
to guarantee proper closure and satisfactory reconstruction of the road
opening.
PERMITTEE — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY — An excavation for a single-family dwelling,
duplex or common driveway, which serves two single-family residences.
SQUARE FOOT — The surface area of the opening made in the Township
roadway or property by the permit applicant. It shall be the product of the
length and width of opening measured in feet; in cases of irregular opening
the Township may in its discretion choose to average the length and/or
width.
STREET — Any street, highway, road, roadway, sidewalk, alley, avenue,
pavement, shoulder, gravel base, subgrade, curb, gutter, including drainage
structures, utility structures, all other appurtenant structures, trees and
landscaping or any other public right-of-way or public ground in the
Township of Waterford and under the control of the Township of Waterford.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Waterford, Camden County.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — The person appointed to the position of
Township Engineer, or any person authorized to act as his or her
representative.
TOWNSHIP PUBLIC WORKS SUPERINTENDENT — The person appointed
to the position of Township Public Works Superintendent or any person
authorized to act as his or her representative.
UTILITY COMPANY — Includes telephone, fiber optic, cable, water, sewer,
gas and electric.
§ 239-2. Permit required; emergencies.
A. Activities requiring permit.
(1) It shall be unlawful, except in an emergency as set forth in
Subsection B hereunder, for any person to engage in any of the
§ 239-1 WATERFORD CODE § 239-2
232:818
following activities on Township property or Township right-of-way
(including Township air space and waterways) unless such person
shall first have obtained a permit from the Township as herein
provided.
(a) To dig up, excavate, tunnel, undermine or in any manner break
up any street or other Township property.
(b) To make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the
surface of any street, to install any street improvements, or for
any purpose construct, remove or alter improvements which
are located within a right-of-way.
(c) To place, deposit or leave upon any street any earth or other
excavated material obstructing or tending to interfere with the
free use of the street or drainage.
(d) To perform any other operation on any street which in any
manner interferes with or disturbs the surface of such street.
(e) To place and/or relocate any type of building or structure,
including towers and billboards, along a Township road.
(f) To install an irrigation system in the Township right-of-way.
(g) To install fiber optic cable underground at the discretion of the
Township.
(h) To install or replace utility poles: at the discretion of the
Township.
(2) Telecommunications: complete available application and
agreement from Township.
B. In the event that any sewer main, conduit or other utility installation in
or under any street, alley, sidewalk or public way shall burst, break or
otherwise be in such condition as to seriously endanger persons or
property, the owner of such sewer main, conduit or other installation
shall immediately remedy such trouble and shall immediately take all
such necessary steps to make said location safe and secure. The
Township Public Works Superintendent must be notified immediately of
the occurrence. In the event that the Township Public Works
Superintendent's office is closed, the applicant must contact the
following answering service and also secure a permit within 24 hours of
the emergency opening: Emergency Answer Service telephone number,
856-767-2359. Payment must be made within five business days from
the applicant's notification to the Township. Failure to do so will result
in a fine of $100 per day for every day the permit is not secured. The
necessary permanent repairs to the street, alley or sidewalk shall be
made as directed by the Township Public Works Superintendent and
shall be completed within the time frames set forth in § 239-5C. Such
owner shall not, however, begin making any permanent repairs to such
§ 239-2 SOIL REMOVAL § 239-2
232:819
§ 239-3. Application procedure.
street, alley or sidewalk until a permit is secured as hereinafter
provided. Such permit shall be applied for within three business days
after such break or serious trouble shall have developed, and the
necessary permanent repairs to the street, alley, or sidewalk shall
be made as directed by the Township Public Works Superintendent
and shall be completed within the time period stated in the permit.
[Amended 5-25-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-11]
A. A written application for the issuance of a road opening permit shall be
submitted to the Township and may be sent via facsimile transmission
or submitted in person at the Township Municipal Building between the
hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Facsimile applications may be
transmitted 24 hours a day and seven days per week and shall include
the name and address of the applicant, the owner and the contractor
performing the work, the street location of the side to be opened, the
exact location of the opening from the nearest road intersection and the
location of the dimensions of the proposed work area, the purpose of
the project and the estimated dates of commencement, completion and
restoration of the excavation, and such other data as may reasonably be
required by the Township. Any applicants choosing to apply
electronically must submit payment to the Township within five
business days. The application shall also state the name of any and all
subcontractors being used for the work along with telephone numbers
of the contactor, the subcontractors and the applicant. These numbers
provided must include ones at which each of the above can be reached
24 hours a day, seven days per week. In lieu of providing these names
and numbers, utility companies may provide a twenty-four-hour
emergency phone number. The applicant shall certify to the
truthfulness of all information on the application. At the discretion of
the Township, the applicant may be required to submit permit
information on a computer disc that is compatible with the Township's
software for engineering, planning, and/or other public works related
computer applications.
B. Drawings must be attached to the applications and must be drawn to a
scale sufficient to show clearly the proposed work. For access permits
the drawing should include driveway location and proposed apron area
installation. Plans should show all utilities within 25 feet of the
proposed work. The Township reserves the right to require plans or
drawings to be prepared by a New Jersey licensed professional
engineer to be paid for by the applicant. Where the road opening
involves a site plan or subdivision plan approved by the Township Land
Use Board, a copy of the approved site plan or subdivision shall be
submitted with the application.
C. The Township assumes no responsibility for identifying the location or
condition of any existing utility lines, cables, or other facilities, the
review of plans or issuance of a Township permit. It shall be the
§ 239-2 WATERFORD CODE § 239-3
232:820
§ 239-4. Permit issuance.
responsibility of the applicant to verify the locations of underground
utility lines, cables and other facilities and to determine the appropriate
scope of work and safety requirements. Prior to the commencement of
work, the applicant shall contact the Garden State Underground Plant
Identification Service at 1-800-272-1000 (or such other number as the
service may from time to time employ) and, if facilities of utilities are
located in the vicinity of the proposed excavation, the applicant shall
comply with any statutes or regulations pertaining thereto.
A. The Township Public Works Superintendent and, where applicable, the
Township Engineer shall review and approve all requests for road
opening permits and the release of all guaranties involved in the
permitting process. Upon application and payment of the fees and
deposits for which provision is hereinafter made, the Township Public
Works Superintendent, in his or her discretion, may issue a permit to
excavate or open the surface of any Township road.
B. No permit shall be issued for an opening on any roadway surface which
has been reconstructed, repaved or otherwise improved by the
Township or other developer for a five-year period after completion of
said construction except in the event of an emergency. The moratorium
period shall commence on the date of final acceptance of the road
which has been resurfaced or reconstructed or otherwise improved,
and the restoration shall include the infrared process unless otherwise
directed by the Township. Opening of any roadway during the
Township's moratorium period, without approval, shall result in a fine of
$1,000, and repairs will be made by the applicant to the satisfaction of
the Township.
C. If the application for a permit is denied, the Township Public Works
Superintendent shall send the applicant written notification of the
denial and shall state the reason for the denial.
D. Any permit issued under this article may be revoked at any time by the
Township for failure to comply with the resolution. The Township Public
Works Superintendent also reserves the right to stop work for failure to
comply with the article and/or to order the completion of sufficient work
to ensure the safety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
E. The Township shall have a maximum of 30 calendar days to review
permit applications, commencing upon the date that the Township has
received a completed permit application and other information
required.
F. In the event that the Township deems appropriate, no permit shall be
issued until the applicant has submitted the bonds and insurance
certificate required by §§ 239-6 and 239-8 in a form acceptable to the
Township Counsel.
§ 239-3 SOIL REMOVAL § 239-4
232:821
§ 239-5. Time frames for completion of work.
G. The Township may require the permit applicant to video tape or
photograph all the areas of proposed construction of extensive
openings to protect the interests of the Township and all adjoining
properties to the construction area.
H. The applicant's supervisor on the project site must possess a copy of the
permit at all times.
A. Permits shall become null and void unless work is commenced within 90
calendar days of the issuance of said permit, and permit work shall be
diligently pursued until completed unless an extension of time for good
cause is granted by the Township or the Township may declare the
permit null and void. Work commenced under a permit shall be
continued without interruptions during normal working hours until
completed.
B. If a permit is revoked or becomes null and void due to the passage of
time, then the applicant shall apply for a new permit. The new
application shall be revised to include any changes in the work or
conditions of the work site and shall be accompanied by a new fee.
C. The applicant must give a minimum 24 hours' notice to the Township
Public Works Superintendent prior to performing any work under the
jurisdiction of the Township except in cases of emergency as provided
for in § 239-2B, and five working days' notice shall be provided for
openings which require detours. No opening shall be done on
weekends, Township holidays or outside normal Township working
hours (8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.) without the prior written permission of
the Township except in cases of emergency. Failure to provide notice as
required by this section may result in the revocation of the permit, the
issuance of a stop order, and a fine of $1,000. If special conditions
require weekend work, or work on Township holidays or night work, the
permittee shall obtain the prior written consent of the Township Public
Works Superintendent and shall reimburse the Township for all
overtime costs incurred for its inspectors and engineers.
D. All openings must be backfilled immediately and temporarily paved as
specified in §§ 239-10 and 239-11, subject to asphalt plant closings in
winter months. Permanent pavement restoration shall be done within
two months of temporary restoration for shallow road openings (four
feet or less in depth for finish grade). Permanent pavement restoration
for deep road openings (depths of more than four feet below finish
grade) shall be completed within three months from the time of
temporary restoration or when directed by the Township Public Works
Superintendent. At no time shall the applicant utilize dirt, gravel,
millings, stone or any other construction debris as a temporary road
surface. The applicant shall give a minimum twenty-four-hour notice to
the Township prior to final restoration operations. In addition, the
Township shall be notified when final restoration is completed.
§ 239-4 WATERFORD CODE § 239-5
232:822
§ 239-6. Fees; guaranty requirements.
E. The applicant is responsible for notifying the Township when all work
has been completed and is ready for final inspection. All inspections
shall be performed during the Township's normal business hours. The
maintenance of the project shall begin only when the Township Public
Works Superintendent has accepted the permanent restorations and
the applicant has posted a satisfactory maintenance surety with the
Township.
F. No permits will be issued for extensive road openings between
December 15 and March 15 or where conditions exist due to severe
weather, freeze, frost, etc., without written permission from the
Township.
A. A permit fee shall be charged by the Township for the issuance of a
permit, which shall be in addition to all other fees for permits or
charges relative to any proposed construction work. A permit fee
should be in the form of a check or money order. No cash will be
accepted. The permit fee shall be in an amount varying with the size of
the road opening. County utilities authorities are subject to all
restoration, insurance, and performance and maintenance bond
provisions of this article whether or not they are also subject to
payment of permit fees. Permit fees shall be fixed as follows.176 (NOTE:
Permit fees will be doubled for work within roads that are under
moratorium, but have been approved for opening by the Township.
Operating without a permit will result in a fine of $1,000 and permit
fees will be doubled.)
B. Guaranty requirements.
(1) Surety.
(a) Contractors shall be required to post a surety, in a form
acceptable to Township Counsel. The surety shall include a
performance guaranty that the road opening will be properly
closed and the road, street or highway over the opened road
will be satisfactorily reconstructed. The surety shall also
include a maintenance guaranty, which shall ensure that the
road as reconstructed will remain in good condition after the
work has been accepted. The performance guaranty shall not
be required if the applicant has already posted a performance
guaranty with the Township as a condition of a site plan or
subdivision approval. Proof of the posting must be supplied
with the permit application.
(b) The amount of the performance guaranty shall be computed by
the Township Engineer on the basis of costs required to make
176. Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
§ 239-5 SOIL REMOVAL § 239-6
232:823
proper restorations or repairs, but at a minimum shall be at
least $2,500.
(2) Maintenance bond.
(a) The maintenance bond will serve to guarantee that the road as
reconstructed will remain in good condition and free of defects
after acceptance, as follows:
[1] For a period of two years after the date of acceptance for
work which involves trenches within a paved road surface,
which have depth of four or more feet from the road
surface; or
[2] For a period of two years after the date of final acceptance
for all other work which requires a permit as set forth
herein.
(b) No performance bond shall be released prior to the submission
of a maintenance bond.
(c) The maintenance bond amount shall be 50% of the
performance bond amount.
C. All bonds submitted must meet the following minimum requirements:
(1) The bond must have an identifying number.
(2) The name and address of the principal must be listed on the bond
and, in the case of a corporation or partnership, the state of
incorporation or partnership must be noted.
(3) The name, address and phone number of the surety company must
be listed on the bond and, in addition, the company must be
authorized to issue bonds in the State of New Jersey pursuant to
the New Jersey Department of Insurance.
(4) The work to be performed must be clearly defined in the bond.
(5) The lot and block number, street address and the Township road
opening permit application number must be listed on the bond.
(6) Determination of the acceptability of all the work covered by the
bond shall be at the sole discretion of the Township Public Works
Superintendent or Township Engineer.
(7) The term or expiration date of the bond must be clearly stated and
must conform to the time periods set forth in § 239-6B(2)(a) above.
Bonds must be automatically extended by the bonding company
until notified by the Township.
(8) The manner in which a bond may be called in the event of
nonperformance must be specified in the bond.
§ 239-6 WATERFORD CODE § 239-6
232:824
§ 239-7. Hold harmless clause required.
Upon receipt of the permit, the applicant agrees that it shall defend and
save the Township, its agencies, departments, bureaus, boards, officials
and employees harmless from any and all claims of any nature arising out
the construction and road opening work covered by the permit, and also
agrees that the Township of Waterford, in issuing the permit, shall not
assume liability in connection therewith. In the event of any suit or claim
against the Township due to the negligence or default of the permittee, the
Township shall give written notice to the permittee of such suit or claim.
Any final judgment requiring the Township to pay for such damage shall be
conclusive upon the permittee, and the permittee shall be liable to repay the
(9) The bond shall be signed and attested to by the appropriate
persons for the principal and the surety company together with the
appropriate form of notarization.
D. In lieu of bonds, a certified check in the full amount required to
guarantee performance and maintenance may be provided. The amount
of the surety may be reduced by 50% for the maintenance surety
period. The check will be held in a separate designated escrow account
by written agreement.
E. In lieu of bonds, an irrevocable letter of credit in the full amount
required to guarantee performance and maintenance may be provided.
The amount of the surety may be reduced by 50% for the maintenance
surety period. Letters of credit must be submitted in substantially the
same form as the sample, which is available upon request from the
Township. Letters of credit must be automatically extended
continuously until notified by the Township.
F. A utility company, in lieu of giving a separate bond for each project,
annually in January of each year, may post a blanket performance/
maintenance bond or corporate bond in the amount of $5,000. However,
when, in the opinion of the Township, the openings of trenches
contemplated by an application exceed the amount of the bond posted,
additional bonds/or cash security will be required.
G. All checks and bonds and letters of credit under this article shall be
submitted to the Township before approval and shall be made payable
to the Township of Waterford. Performance bonds will be held until
receipt of the certification of satisfactory completion issued by the
Township Public Works Superintendent. Performance bonds shall not
be released until satisfactory maintenance bonds have been posted as
required by this article.
H. If it becomes necessary for the Township to sue under a performance
bond or maintenance bond or letter of credit because of unsatisfactory
work and if the cost of corrective work exceeds the original bond value,
the Township reserves the right to recover all additional cost from the
applicant.
§ 239-6 SOIL REMOVAL § 239-7
232:825
Township for all costs in connection with such suit, including, as applicable,
any attorney fees.
§ 239-8. Insurance requirements.
A. The permittee and any contractor hired by the permittee shall provide
insurance coverage of such types and in such amounts as will
completely protect the permittee, contactor and the Township, its
elected officials, officers, agents, servants, employees and assigns
against any and all risk of loss or liability arising out of any work under
this permit. The insurance must be furnished by insurance companies
authorized by the Commissioner of Insurance to do business in the
State of New Jersey and must be approved by or acceptable to the
Township. The permittee shall furnish the Township with certificates of
insurance naming the Township as an additional insured, and providing
further that any liability insurance coverage shall be considered as
primary and not as excess insurance, describing the types and amounts
of insurance, identifying the coverage to this permit by reference and
providing for 30 days' written notice to the Township by registered mail
prior to any modifications, cancellation, nonrenewal or other change in
coverage. The policies must be effective prior to the commencement of
work and must remain in force until the certificate of satisfactory
completion is issued by the Township Public Works Superintendent. If
the permittee returns to the site to perform maintenance work during
the maintenance period a current certificate of insurance must be
provided to the Township.
B. The following are the minimum mandatory types and minimum amount
of insurance coverage to be carried in accordance with this article.
(1) Workers' compensation: statutory limits; employer's liability:
unlimited.
(2) General liability in a comprehensive form with a minimum limit of
$1,000,000, including:
(a) Premises-operations.
(b) Blanket contractual.
(c) Products-completed operations.
(d) Broad form property damage.
(e) Independent contractors and subcontractors.
(f) Personal injury.
(3) Motor vehicle liability insurance in a comprehensive form with a
minimum of $1,000,000 C.S.L. including:
(a) Owned automobiles.
§ 239-7 WATERFORD CODE § 239-8
232:826
§ 239-9. Traffic control.
(b) Hired automobiles.
(c) Nonowned automobile.
C. Utility companies may submit blanket insurance certificates from
themselves and/or their contractors, which shall be valid until the
expiration of the coverage listed thereon.
D. The permittee shall provide proof that any contractor or subcontractor
has in force during the term of this permit insurance equal to the
coverage as herein set forth, or shall make arrangements to ensure that
the activities of any contractors of subcontractors are included under
the permittee's policy. If the contractor does not have adequate
insurance, then the permittee must agree to indemnify the Township for
all the contractor's actions. Neither approval by the Township nor
failure to disapprove certificates of insurance furnished by the
permittee shall release the permittee of full responsibility for all
liability and casualty claims or losses. The certificate shall be subject to
the review and approval of the Township. If at any time during the term
of this permit or any extension thereof any required policies of
insurance should expire or be canceled, it will be the responsibility of
the permittee to furnish to the Township a certificate of insurance or an
acceptable replacement of the expiring policy prior to the expiration or
cancellation date so that there shall be no lapse in any coverage.
E. Residential driveways.
(1) The permittee shall provide to the Township a copy of a current
liability policy insuring the premises in question where the
driveway is being constructed; the policy shall be necessary if the
work is to be performed by the applicant/policyholder. The
minimum limits of liability coverage must be $300,000.
(2) If any of the work is to be performed by an outside contractor, the
contractor must supply an insurance certificate meeting the
requirements set forth in Subsections A, B and D of this section.
A. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that during
the performance of the excavation work both vehicular and pedestrian
traffic, as applicable, shall be maintained as nearly as normal as
practicable. The permittee shall plan and carry out this work to provide
for the safe and convenient passage of such traffic and to cause as little
inconvenience as possible to the occupants of adjoining properties. The
permittee shall notify the owners of adjoining properties, in writing, at
least 48 hours prior to the time he proposes to begin any work which
will interfere with their normal passage and must provide the Township
with proof of such notice. No Township roadways will be closed without
review and written approval by the Township Public Works
Superintendent or designee.
§ 239-8 SOIL REMOVAL § 239-9
232:827
B. The permittee shall open no greater part of a roadway or pedestrianway
than shall be reasonably necessary as determined by the Township
Public Works Superintendent or Township Engineer.
C. The permittee shall provide, erect, and maintain all necessary
barricades, suitable and sufficient lights, danger signals, signs and
other traffic control devices in accordance with Section 110 of New
Jersey Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction, latest edition, and any amendments thereto
and in accordance with any direction of the Township Public Works
Superintendent or Township Engineer and shall take all necessary
precautions for the protection of the work and safety of the public.
Roadways closed to traffic shall be protected by effective barricades,
and obstructions shall be illuminated during hours of darkness.
Barricades must have a twenty-four-hour accessible phone number
stenciled on the barrel or barricade. Specified warning signs shall be
provided to properly control and direct traffic. The permittee shall erect
warning signs at a reasonable distance ahead of any place where
operations may interfere with the use of the road by traffic. All
barricades, warning signs, lights and other protective devices shall
conform to the United States Department of Transportation MUTCD
and any amendments thereto. The use of flagmen is encouraged on all
construction and may be deemed mandatory by the Township Public
Works Superintendent or Township Engineer. If the use of flagmen is
deemed necessary, all cost for same shall be the responsibility of the
permittee. Use of two flagmen shall be deemed mandatory if one lane of
traffic is to be closed. All flagmen must have an orange safety vest, shall
use STOP/SLOW paddles and shall be trained in proper traffic control
procedures. Off-duty police officers shall be employed for traffic control
where required by either the local Police Chief or by the Township
Public Works Superintendent or Township Engineer.
D. Street closing.
(1) In the event that it will become necessary to close off any street to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, the permittee shall provide a
detailed detour plan to the Township Public Works Superintendent
and appropriate county authority for their approval. This plan shall
be prepared by a New Jersey licensed professional engineer and
shall be submitted at the time of application.
(2) The permittee shall notify the Township Public Works
Superintendent, in writing, at least five working days in advance of
putting the detour in effect. It shall be the contractor's
responsibility to notify the appropriate police department, rescue
squads, Board of Education, Municipal Administrator and Clerk
and public transportation at least seven working days before
closure and show proof of that notification. The permittee shall be
responsible for the repair and maintenance of such detours, the
regulation and direction of traffic thereon, and signing. Uniformed
traffic control personnel wearing safety vests and using paddles for
§ 239-9 WATERFORD CODE § 239-9
232:828
§ 239-10. Required safety measures.
It shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant to conduct, install and
maintain all work permitted by or subject to this article in a manner which
ensures the continuing safety and protection of the public.
traffic control shall be provided at selected locations on all detours
as determined by the Police Department. The cost of all work with
such detours shall be borne by the permittee. The applicant, at the
discretion of the Township Public Works Superintendent, may be
required to employ uniformed police to act as traffic directors. If
other than uniformed police are utilized, the personnel directing
traffic must have within their employ a person certified by the New
Jersey Department of Transportation in traffic control, if allowable
by the Township.
E. The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to
interfere with access to emergency facilities (i.e., fire stations, police
stations, hospitals, etc.) and fire hydrants. Materials and obstructions
shall not be placed within 25 feet of fire hydrants or as directed by the
Fire Marshal. Passageways leading to fire escapes, fire equipment and
emergency accessways shall be kept free of obstruction.
A. All openings must be backfilled immediately and temporarily paved the
same day as the opening is made. Additionally, all traffic markings
(crosswalks, center lines, berm lines, etc.) must be restored in kind in a
manner satisfactory to the Township Public Works Superintendent and
in accordance with the MUTCD immediately upon final restoration.
Final restoration must be performed within the time periods described
in § 239-5D.
B. If the nature of the work requires leaving an excavation unfinished
overnight or for an extended period of time, the permittee shall notify
the Township Public Works Superintendent at least five days in advance
of construction. Alternatively, in case of an emergency, in writing, the
permittee shall notify the Township Public Works Superintendent by
phone using the twenty-four-hour phone number provided in § 239-2B,
which should be followed up by a notification to the Township within 24
hours of such telephone call. The permittee shall place safety barriers
with appropriate lighting around the unfinished excavation area. The
barriers and lighting devices shall conform to the specifications set
forth in the United States Department of Transportation MUTCD and
any amendments thereto, Part VI; additionally, the permittee must place
his name and phone number where he can be reached at all times on
these barriers. He shall also notify the Township in writing of the
condition of the unfinished excavation and furnish the above with his
name and phone number where he can be reached at all times.
C. Any portions of work areas not closed to traffic shall be brought to the
existing grade with at least six inches of approved paving materials
bituminous stabilized base, mix 1-2, applied over a six-inch subbase of
§ 239-9 SOIL REMOVAL § 239-10
232:829
§ 239-11. Excavation and restoration specifications.
dense graded aggregate. All lifts must be mechanically compacted and
continuously maintained until final restoration is performed.
D. The permittee shall construct and maintain adequate and safe crossing
over excavations and across highways under improvement to
accommodate vehicular and/or pedestrian crossings. The applicant
shall submit all plans, design calculations, and specifications to the
Township at the time application is made.
E. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to secure information
regarding buried utilities by contacting the New Jersey One Call
Service (as specified above in § 239-3C) and to undertake such
measures as may be required to ensure the safety and protection of
underground utilities within the work area.
F. The permittee and contractor shall comply with the OSHA trench
sheeting regulations and all other OSHA regulations, and with any
other applicable laws, in the performance of the work.
G. No construction activity shall begin on any day until all traffic control
devices are in place.
H. Temporary restoration must be smooth with no ruts or bumps. All
temporary pavement over openings must be rolled or mechanically
tamped the same day as the opening is made. Hand raking of temporary
pavement is prohibited.
A. Street and improvement construction and restoration shall conform to
the NJDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
However, the Township may require specific street improvements based
upon a review of the applicant's plans and specifications, and after
considering the impact of the project on the street and its users.
B. Relocation of utility poles; layout for construction.
(1) It will be the full responsibility of the contractor to administer the
relocation of utility poles before restoration. For construction
layout: the applicant shall employ a New Jersey professional land
surveyor to provide all the work required in connection with the
layout for the construction of concrete curbing, storm sewer pipe,
drainage structures and highway paving grades and lines.
(2) The applicant's professional engineer and/or professional land
surveyor shall provide and maintain offset stakes to be identified
and marked to show the offset distance from the concrete
curblines, drainage structures, etc. The applicant's engineer and/or
surveyor shall furnish grade sheets to the Township a minimum of
one week prior to construction of any curbing, showing the cut of
fill to the finished curbline profile with reference to the offset
stakes.
§ 239-10 WATERFORD CODE § 239-11
232:830
(3) The applicant's professional engineer and/or professional land
surveyor shall immediately upon discovery bring to the attention of
the Township Public Works Superintendent error or apparent
discrepancies from the plans.
(4) The applicant shall be responsible for the work conforming to the
lines and grades called for on the plans, and the applicant shall
correct all errors caused by the applicant's professional engineer
and/or professional land surveyor at no cost to the Township.
C. Backfill.
(1) Trenches and other open excavations shall be backfilled with clean
granular soil free of excessive fines or clay material, construction
debris, or other aggregate over six inches in diameter in lifts not to
exceed 18 inches in height. Compaction shall be done in six-inch
lifts with vibratory tamper such as jumping jacks, hoe packs, or
Dynapacks. Jackhammer compaction methods are prohibited.
Standing water in backfill is prohibited. If there is a deficiency of
backfill material, additional backfill shall be supplied by the
permittee.
(2) Whenever the Township Public Works Superintendent deems the
backfill material unsatisfactory, the permittee shall provide
acceptable material that is clean, granular and free from excessive
fines. Ninety-eight-percent relative modified proctor compaction is
required for all backfilled operations. The Township Public Works
Superintendent or Engineer may require the permittee to have a
certified soil testing laboratory test backfill for compaction at any
given lift. These tests shall be done at the expense of the permittee,
and a copy of the test results shall be furnished to the Township
immediately upon receipt. If the certified laboratory tests result do
not achieve the ninety-eight-percent relative compaction required,
the Township Public Works Superintendent or Township Engineer
may require re-excavation and compaction.
D. Temporary pavement restoration.
(1) In all roadways except those with a concrete surface, the permittee
shall restore said road or street with a compacted subgrade of
material acceptable to the Township Public Works Superintendent,
six inches of compacted dense graded aggregate, and temporary
pavement consisting of eight inches of bituminous stabilized base,
HMA 19M64. The top of the bituminous stabilized base course shall
be brought even with the existing finished grade of the roadway.
Cold patch will not be permitted as temporary pavement course,
unless the asphalt plants are closed during the winter month. (See
Township Detail 18 in Appendix 1).177
177. Editor's Note: Said Appendix is on file in the Township offices.
§ 239-11 SOIL REMOVAL § 239-11
232:831
(2) Temporary pavement surface course for any opening must be
mechanically rolled; hand raking is prohibited. The temporary
pavement shall stay in place for a period of at least four weeks
unless further time is deemed necessary by the Township Public
Works Superintendent. In general, deeper excavations shall
require a longer period of time for soil consolidation. The permittee
is responsible for maintaining the temporary pavement in passable
condition and shall apply additional courses of skin patches.
Immediately prior to applying the surface course, the permittee
shall mill out the temporary pavement above the trench and to
sufficient widths on both sides of the trench to assure straight and
uniform surface restoration limits.
E. Restoration standards.
(1) The milling depth shall be two inches. The permittee shall then
apply a tack course followed by two inches of bituminous concrete,
HMA 12.5M64. Alternatively, a thin sand release layer may be
applied beneath the temporary bituminous stabilized base course
so that the course may be replaced with final pavement of other
method subject to prior approval by the Township Public Works
Superintendent. (See Township Detail 16 in Appendix 1.)
(2) The total width of the restored roadway surface shall comply with
the policies stated in Subsection E(3) below. Roadways with a
concrete base shall be restored using a combination of concrete
and asphalt as approved by the Township. All concrete bases under
asphalt shall be doweled in accordance with NJDOT Details
CD-4-51.1, CD 405-1.3, CD-405-1.4, CD-405-1.5, and CD-405-1.6,
and the concrete depth replaced to the in-kind concrete depth. All
disturbed full depth concrete roadways shall be doweled in
accordance with NJDOT Details CD-453-1, CD-405-1.4, CD-405-1.5,
and CD-405-1.6, and the concrete depth replaced to match the
existing concrete depth but no less than nine inches thick. (See
NJDOT Detail Sheets CD-405-1 and CD-453-1 in Appendix 1.).
(3) Width and location of concrete base of full depth restoration will be
determined depending on the excavation trench's location or
concrete replacement to the nearest concrete joint. The size and
location of concrete base restoration will be determined by the
Township depending on the opening's relation to the nearest seam
and location of wheel loads to both new and old concrete sections.
The time limitations prescribed in § 239-5C also apply to this
section.
(4) All disturbed concrete base shall be doweled and replaced in kind
to depth. Width and location of concrete trench restoration will be
determined by the Township. Size and location of box opening
restoration will be determined by the Township.
§ 239-11 WATERFORD CODE § 239-11
232:832
F. Concrete/asphalt surface restoration standards are further delineated
as follows:
(1) Concrete surface. Disturbed concrete surface must be replaced at
full depth (nine inches or greater), pad for pad. The permit holder
is required to replace the full existing pad of any concrete surface
that is disturbed, cut, jackhammered or opened in any way. All
openings in a concrete pad require full pad replacement regardless
of the size of the opening.
(2) Asphalt surface. Multiple openings within 30 feet of one another
shall be milled and shall have continuous top paving longitudinally
and transversely as outlined below. Additional limits of restoration
may be required by the Township depending on damage from
equipment and the impact of the project on the street and
motorists. All trenches/multiple openings shall be restored as
follows:
(a) Paved shoulders. Standard full width trench restoration will be
decided prior to final restoration by the Township.
(b) One travel lane or deceleration lane. Surface restoration shall
extend for 1/2 of the road width, including shoulder, for a twolane
road and a full lane width for a multilane road.
(c) Openings down the middle of a road or exceptionally deep
trench openings. Surface restoration shall extend across the
full width of the paved road.
(d) All seams and joints (including curb to roadway joint) are to be
sealed.
G. All final edges of trench restoration shall be straight: uniform cuts with
no keys or edge realignments. The Township may require a diamond
restoration pattern for cross trenches and intersection crossings
depending upon the amount of traffic on the road and the depth of the
trench. The permittee is responsible for the full restoration of the
roadway surface, including restriping and installing raised pavement
markers.
H. Pipes, trenches, and hook-ups, six inches in diameter or less, used for
making opposite side of the street hook-ups may be driven or bored
under the paved portion of the road or street without disturbing the
surface upon review of the Township.
I. Upon completion of work, the applicant will request a final inspection
by the Township. The Public Works Superintendent may require that
random core samples be taken on the project if in the opinion of the
Township Public Works Superintendent there appears to be a question
regarding either quality of the asphalt or the thickness thereof. These
core samples will be the responsibility of the contractor and shall be
taken and tested by a certified testing laboratory. All cost associated
§ 239-11 SOIL REMOVAL § 239-11
232:833
with this testing will be borne by the permittee. If these samples reveal
the use of improper material or insufficient thickness, the permittee
shall be required to remove, replace, or take other actions to
satisfactorily complete the restoration work as directed by the
Township Public Works Superintendent. If the work is completed in a
manner satisfactory, the Township Public Works Superintendent will
then issue a certificate of satisfactory completion to the applicant with
a copy to the Township Treasurer and to the Township Committee. The
performance surety will be returned by the Township Counsel upon
receipt of satisfactory maintenance guaranty.
J. If a permittee fails to complete work or provide required work zone
safety measures in a timely manner satisfactory to the Township, the
Township or a Township-hired contractor shall complete the work and
the permittee shall be obliged to pay the Township for labor, materials
and equipment as follows:
(1) For labor, the permittee shall pay at the current prevailing wage
rate as determined for the Township by the New Jersey Department
of Labor or the Township's current rate. Payment shall be made on
a per-hour basis for all time expended by each Township employee
involved in completing the work. Payment shall be required for a
minimum of three hours for each occasion Township employees are
needed to complete work left unfinished by the permittee.
(2) For materials, the permittee shall pay for all material used at the
Township's cost, based upon the Township's bid prices.
(3) For equipment, the permittee shall pay for usage on per-hour based
upon the fee schedule listed in the current edition of the
publication "Rental Rates Compilation Construction Equipment"
published by Associated Equipment Distributors.
(4) In addition, failure to complete the work in a timely and
satisfactory manner shall be deemed to constitute a violation of this
article.
K. Traffic striping; traffic control signs, raised pavement markings.
(1) All traffic striping damaged during construction shall be restored
with temporary striping that same day. Final traffic striping and
symbol restoration shall consist of Long Life materials, as
described in the NJDOT Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, latest edition.
(2) All traffic control signs removed for construction activities shall be
reinstalled that same day.
(3) All raised pavement markers affected by construction activities
shall be replaced with new units of the same design.
§ 239-11 WATERFORD CODE § 239-11
232:834
§ 239-12. Violations and penalties.
L. All driveways damaged during construction shall be restored with the
same material and size existing prior to construction. Minimum
restoration depths shall be six inches.
M. All landscaping damaged during construction shall be restored in kind
to the size existing prior to construction. Replacement of lawn
irrigation systems that existed prior to the work will be required to be
relocated outside the Township right-of-way unless specifically
authorized by the Township. Lawn areas shall be restored with four
inches of loamy topsoil and two applications of hydroseeding and or sod
as directed by the Township.
N. All main installations of plastic or nonferrous materials must contain a
wire or detection device to accurately determine locations after
installation so as to facilitate other proposed utilities and drainage.
O. The uncompleted length of the opening allowed under a permit at any
time shall not exceed 50 linear feet.
P. Reconstruction of all pavements will require that a tack coat be applied
to all vertical surfaces and the placement of the two-inch surface
course. Tack coat shall also be applied to the horizontal joints after the
placement of the surface course.
Q. Manhole rim elevations are to be set level to road grade.
R. No permit will be issued for any opening that is less than 24 inches in
any direction from an existing roadway seam(s) or previous road
opening. In such cases the opening must include or abut the existing
roadway seam(s).
S. The surface of any residential driveway apron shall be constructed with
permanent pavement, as approved by the Township Public Works
Superintendent. Such pavement shall extend to the paved traveled way
or paved shoulder of the Township road and shall extend throughout the
area defined by the required driveway dimensions and Township road
right-of-way or maximum 10 feet. Depressed concrete curbing shall be
installed at the end of driveways where they meet the Township
highway. Aprons should be constructed with six inches of compacted
dense graded aggregate and two feet of 1-5 bituminous concrete or six
inches of Class B concrete. Driveway elevation at the shoulder shall be
supplied by the applicant's engineer. A proper turnaround driveway
detail should be shown on the submitted plan. (See Details 6, 7, and 9 in
Appendix.)178
T. Applicants must notify residents adjacent to work zone in writing before
any work commences at site and copy the Township with notification.
178. Editor's Note: Said Appendix is on file in the Township offices.
§ 239-11 SOIL REMOVAL § 239-12
232:835
§ 239-12.1. Per diem inspections.
§ 239-12.2. Appeal of permit denial.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to
exceed $1,000, or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or
by both such fine and/or imprisonment to be determined is the
discretion of the Judge.
B. A written stop notice may be issued by the Township Public Works
Superintendent for failure to procure a permit, failure to comply with
the terms of an issued permit, or violation of any of the provisions of
this article. Failure to stop work after issuance of stop order will subject
the applicant to prosecution and the penalties enumerated in
Subsection A.
A. For any opening more than 200 feet, or at the sole discretion of the
Township, a per-diem inspector on the job may be required. The permit
holder shall be responsible for paying the per-diem inspector.179 (The
duties of the per-diem inspector are defined in Section 1.)
B. The check for the per-diem inspector should be forwarded by the permit
holder to the Township. The Township will send a voucher to the permit
holder indicating the time spent on the project.
A. Any applicant who is denied a permit in accordance with the provisions
of this article may appeal in writing to the office of the Township Clerk.
B. Appeals must be made within five business days of the permit denial.
The written appeal and any written documentation in support thereof
shall be sent to the office of the Township Clerk. The Township Public
Works Superintendent shall provide the Township Committee with a
copy of the permit application plans and a copy of the notification of
permit stating the reasons for the denial.
C. The Township Committee shall hear the appeal within 30 days following
receipt of the appeal.
D. After reviewing the material submitted, the Township Committee shall
discuss and decide the matter. The decision shall be final and binding.
The Committee shall send the applicant written notification of this
decision within 10 business days after the decision has been made.
179. Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
§ 239-12 WATERFORD CODE § 239-12.2
232:836
ARTICLE II
Maintenance
[Adopted 10-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-13]
§ 239-13. Township to maintain road to full width.
The Township shall maintain every road laid out, opened, taken over, or
acquired by it as a Township Road, between the curblines, and keep it in
repair, safe and convenient for travel during all seasons of the year.
§ 239-14. Curbs and sidewalks.
For any road maintained by the Township as described in § 239-13 that
is lined with curbing and/or sidewalk, said curbing and/or sidewalk,
regardless of the installer and absent of an agreement and resolution to
assume responsibility, shall be maintained by the fronting property owner.
§ 239-15. Trees, plantings and other objects.
For any road maintained by the Township as described in § 239-13 that is
lined with trees, plantings or has any other object within its right-of-way,
said trees, plantings or any other object, regardless of the installer and
absent of an agreement and resolution to assume responsibility, shall be
maintained by the fronting property owner.
§ 239-16. Violations and penalties.
This article may be enforced by the filing of a complaint against any person,
firm, corporation, party of interest or occupant who shall violate any of its
provisions. Said party shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000,
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or community service of not more
than 30 days, or any combination thereof. Every day in which said person,
firm, corporation, party of interest or occupant remains in violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense. A continuance
of a violation or noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed a nuisance, and the governing body shall have the right to apply
to the courts of the state for injunctive or other relief in addition to the
penalties prescribed herein.
§ 239-13 SOIL REMOVAL § 239-16
232:837
Chapter 243
TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use, development and zoning — See Ch.
176.
§ 243-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BODY PIERCING — Piercing the skin for the express intention of insertion
of any object, including but not limited to jewelry; provided, however, that
the piercing of the lobes of the ears shall be specifically excluded from the
purview of this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION — Written approval from the County Health
Officer or his authorized representative that said tattooing and/or body
piercing establishment has been inspected and meets all of the terms of this
chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION — The certificate held by an operator
upon registration with the Camden County Health Department by meeting
the required provisions of this chapter.
COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER — The Camden County Public Health
Coordinator or his authorized representative of Camden County
Department of Health and Human Services.
ESTABLISHMENT — The premises wherein tattooing or body piercing is
performed.
OPERATOR OR PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, corporation or
association that owns or operates an establishment where tattooing or body
piercing is performed and any individual who performs or practices the
above on the person of another.
TATTOO, TATTOOED OR TATTOOING — Refers to any method of placing
designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any marks under the skin with
ink dye or any other substance resulting in the coloration of the skin by the
aid of needles or any other instruments designed to puncture the skin.
§ 243-2. Licensing and registration.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
operating an establishment where tattooing or body piercing is
performed without first obtaining a license from the Township of
Waterford to engage in such business in accordance with the provisions
hereof. Also, it shall be unlawful for any operator to engage in the
§ 239-16 WATERFORD CODE § 243-2
243:838
practice of tattooing or body piercing without first obtaining a
certificate of registration from the Camden County Health Department.
B. Persons applying shall submit to the Camden County Health
Department a medical certificate issued by a physician duly licensed to
practice medicine and surgery in the State of New Jersey stating that
the prospective licensee or registrant is free from all contagious or
communicable diseases or conditions which may endanger the health of
the client.
C. Municipal license.
(1) The annual license fee for engaging in the business of operating a
tattooing and/or body piercing establishment within the Township
of Waterford shall be as set by the Township Fee Schedule
Ordinance.180 Any person, firm or corporation desiring to engage or
presently engaged in the tattooing or body piercing business shall
first apply to the Clerk of the Township of Waterford, in writing, on
forms supplied by the Clerk of this municipality for said purpose.
The application to the municipality shall be accompanied by the
license fee and shall set forth the following:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The local and permanent addresses and telephone number of
the applicant.
(c) The name, local address and telephone number of the manager
of the business if different from the applicant.
(d) If the applicant is a corporation, the name and address of its
registered agent.
(e) The federal employer identification number if the applicant is a
corporation, partnership or firm; the social security number if
the applicant is a sole proprietorship.
(f) The certificate of inspection and certificate of operator
registration issued by the Camden County Health Department
as parts of the application documents.
(2) All licenses shall expire on the last day of each calendar year. Any
change of ownership shall require a new application and license
with payment of the appropriate fees.
(3) Each tattooing and body piercing business license issued by the
Clerk of the Township of Waterford shall contain a license number,
and no such license shall be transferable. If a renovation of the
tattooing or body piercing establishment is anticipated after
acquisition of the annual license, plans must be submitted to the
Camden County Health Department and a copy to the Township of
180. Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
§ 243-2 TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING § 243-2
243:839
§ 243-3. General provisions.
Waterford, and the applicant will be required to comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Operating registration. An applicant shall submit a floor plan of the
establishment to the Camden County Health Officer with a copy to the
Township of Waterford prior to initiation or construction and shall
receive a preopening inspection. All establishments shall be subject to a
periodic compliance and/or annual inspection by the Camden County
Health Department. Every operator shall be registered with the
Camden County Health Department and shall acquire a certificate of
registration upon payment of a fee prior to business operation or
practice. Fees for a plan review, inspections and operator registration
shall be payable to the county and established by the Camden County
Board of Chosen Freeholders. These fee schedules are available from
the Office of the County Health Officer.
E. Nothing in the foregoing shall be construed so as to affect the practice
of medicine and surgery or any other recognized profession or
occupation by a person duly licensed by the State of New Jersey to
engage in such practice, profession or occupation and whose license
would lawfully authorize the tattooing or body piercing.
F. Nothing in the foregoing shall be construed to indicate that an
applicant or operator is not required to comply with the Township of
Waterford's Land Use, Development and Zoning Ordinance.181
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for anyone or any tattooing or body
piercing business to tattoo or pierce the body of a minor under 18 years
of age without the written consent/authorization signed by the parent
or legal guardian as witnessed by the operator. In addition, the parent
or legal guardian of the minor who signed the written consent/
authorization shall be present at the time of the tattooing or body
piercing. The operator shall be responsible for maintaining the original
consent form for a period of two years beyond the recipient's 18th
birthday. [Amended 2-27-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
B. If the applicant is suspected to be under the influence of alcohol, drugs
or any other behavior-modifying substance, the operator must refuse
the applicant.
C. Inquiry shall be made for anyone with a history of recent jaundice,
hepatitis B or HIV/AIDS, and the person shall not be tattooed or body
pierced.
D. Each person wishing to be tattooed or pierced must fill out an
application which will include the name, date of birth, address and
telephone number of the client, as well as the design and location(s) of
181. Editor's Note: See Ch. 176, Land Use, Development and Zoning.
§ 243-2 WATERFORD CODE § 243-3
243:840
§ 243-4. Sanitary requirements.
No person, partnership, firm nor corporation engaged in the tattooing or
body piercing business shall be issued a municipal mercantile license to
engage in such activity unless the premises at which such activity is to be
conducted and the equipment to be utilized in conjunction therewith meet
the following standards and inspected/approved by the Camden County
Health Department:
the tattoo(s) or piercing(s). The operator shall verify applicable
information from a valid photo identification of the applicant and so
note it on the application. All records regarding tattooing or body
piercing are to be maintained for a minimum of two years.
E. No person or operator shall state or imply, in any advertisement, that
the tattooing or body piercing establishment is endorsed or approved
by the Camden County Health Department in compliance with terms of
this chapter.
F. Tattooing or body piercing of genitalia shall not be permitted.
A. Each tattooing and/or body piercing facility shall have a bathroom
accessible to the client and staff. Each bathroom shall be equipped with
a commode and a sink with the sink being connected to hot and cold
running water. Soap and sanitary towels, or other approved handdrying
devices, shall be available at the sink at all times. Common
towels are prohibited. In addition to the above, each tattooing or body
piercing cubicle or work station must be provided with a sink connected
to hot and cold running water. This area shall also be provided with
soap and appropriate hand-drying devices.
B. The chair, seat or exam table reserved for the person receiving the
tattooing or body piercing shall be of a material that is smooth and
easily cleanable and constructed of material that is nonabsorbent. Any
surfaces on the chair, seat or exam table that become exposed to blood
or body fluids must be cleaned and sanitized prior to use by the next
customer.
C. The work table or counter used by the operator shall be smooth and
easily cleanable and constructed of material that is nonabsorbent.
There shall be a covered junction between the table/counter and the
wall if the table/counter is to be placed against the wall. This table/
counter must be cleaned and sanitized and use single-use disposable
sheets/or papercloth, as approved by the Camden County Health
Department, for each customer.
D. The walls in the tattooing or body piercing area shall be smooth and
easily cleanable and constructed of nonabsorbent materials. Floors
shall be kept clean.
E. Lighting within the tattooing or body piercing area shall be adequate so
as to provide a minimum of 100 footcandles in all areas.
§ 243-3 TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING § 243-4
243:841
§ 243-5. Requirements of tattooing and body piercing practices.
F. The work area reserved for the tattooing or body piercing shall be not
less than 100 square feet and shall be separated from other areas of the
establishment by walls or durable partitions extending at least 6 feet in
height.
G. Any surfaces in the establishment that become exposed to blood or
body fluids must be cleaned and sanitized using a method approved by
the Camden County Health Department.
H. Products used in the cleaning, sanitizing and sterilizing procedures
must be clearly marked and stored in an acceptable manner. Smaller
working containers filled on-site from larger containers must be clearly
marked with the name of the product.
I. Proper waste receptacles shall be provided and water disposed of at
appropriate intervals.
A. Tattooing or body operators.
(1) All operators while performing services shall neither be under the
influence of alcohol or drugs nor be infected with hepatitis B, HIV/
AIDS, contagious dermatitis or any other communicable disease.
(2) Hepatitis B preexposure vaccination or proof of immunity shall be
required for all operators. If a person cannot obtain the vaccination
for medical reasons, he/she shall submit to the Camden County
Health Department a letter from his/her physician certifying that
the individual does not have hepatitis B and vaccination is
contraindicated. This certification shall be annually renewed. Any
accidental needle stick injury shall be immediately reported to the
Camden County Health Department.
(3) All tattooing or body piercing operators shall attend a training
program sponsored by the Camden County Health Department to
assure basic knowledge on sterile technique and universal
precautions.
(4) Before working on each patron, each operator shall scrub and
thoroughly wash his/her hands with hot water and antiseptic soap.
The hands shall be dried with individual, single use towels.
Fingernails shall be kept clean and short.
(5) Disposable vinyl or latex gloves shall be worn by the operator
during tattooing or body piercing preparation and application to
prevent contact with blood or body fluids. Universal precautions as
described by the United States Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) shall be followed. All materials shall be disposed
of in accordance with waste disposal provisions of this chapter
after contact with each patron. Hands shall be washed immediately
§ 243-4 WATERFORD CODE § 243-5
243:842
after removal of gloves. Any skin surface that has contact with
blood shall be washed immediately.
(6) Immediately after tattooing or piercing a patron, the operator shall
advise the patron on the care of the site tattooed or pierced and
shall instruct the patron to consult a physician at the first sign of
infection. Printed instructions regarding these points shall be given
to each patron by the operator.
(7) All infections resulting from the practice of tattooing or body
piercing which becomes known to the operator shall be promptly
reported to the County Health Officer by the person owning or
operating the body piercing establishment or by the operator.
B. Skin preparation.
(1) Tattooing or body piercing shall be done only on normal healthy
skin surface that is free of cuts, wounds, rashes, boils, pimples,
moles or infection or manifests any evidence of unhealthy
conditions.
(2) Only safety razors with disposable blades shall be used for the skin
preparation. Blades shall be disposed of according to the waste
disposal procedure of this chapter after each use and a new blade
used for each patron.
(3) Following shaving, the tattooing area shall be thoroughly cleaned
and scrubbed with tincture of green soap, or its equivalent, and
warm water. Before placing the tattoo design or body piercing on
the patron's skin, the area shall be treated with 70% alcohol and
allowed to air dry. A single-use sponge shall be used to scrub the
area.
(4) Only petroleum jelly (United States Pharmacopeia or National
Formulary) or antiseptic ointment shall be applied to the tattoo
area prior to tattooing. The ointment shall be applied in a sanitary
manner, disposing of the utensil after spreading. Collapsible tubes
of ointment or jelly may also be used.
(5) Design stencils shall be thoroughly cleansed and rinsed in an
approved germicidal solution for at least 20 minutes or disposed of
following each use.
(6) Only nontoxic dyes or pigments may be used. Premixed sterile
materials are preferred. Premixed dyes shall be used without
adulteration of the manufacturer's original formula. It shall be the
responsibility of the operator to provide certification to the Camden
County Health Department of the nontoxicity of the dyes or inks at
the time of license application and renewal.
§ 243-5 TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING § 243-5
243:843
(7) No skin area shall be penetrated, abraded or treated with
chemicals for the purpose of removing, camouflaging or altering
any blemish, birthmark, scar or tattoo.
(8) Ear-piercing guns may not be used for body piercing but may only
be used for piercing of the ear lobes.
C. Needles, instruments and supplies.
(1) All clean and ready-to-use needles, gloves, gauze and instruments
shall be kept in a closed glass or metal case or storage cabinet
while not in use. Such cabinet shall be maintained in a sanitary
manner at all times.
(2) Single-service sterilized needles shall be used.
(3) If needles and needle bars are to be reused, these items shall be
steam sterilized (autoclave) before reuse on any customer. Any
other method of sterilization shall be approved by the County
Health Officer.
(4) The sterilizer shall be well maintained with a tight-fitting gasket
and a clean interior.
(5) The manufacturer's operating instructions and the sterilization
specification shall be at hand. The operation of the sterilizer shall
conform to the manufacturer's specifications with regard to
temperature, pressure and time of the sterilization cycle.
(6) Proper functioning of sterilization cycles shall be verified.
(7) Each item to be sterilized shall be individually wrapped using a
chemical indicator or strip to verify steam exposure.
(8) Any needle that penetrates the skin of the operator shall be
immediately disposed of in accordance with the waste disposal
procedure of this chapter.
(9) If the primary source of sterilization malfunctions, the County
Health Officer shall be notified within 24 hours. In an emergency
situation, the Camden County Health Officer may approve alternate
sterilization techniques.
D. Disposal of wastes.
(1) Needles shall not be bent or broken prior to disposal. Operators
shall take precautions to prevent puncture injuries from
contaminated needles. Needles shall be disposed of directly into a
solid puncture-resistant container.
(2) These medical wastes shall be disposed of by an authorized
contractor as per the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection's regulation.
§ 243-5 WATERFORD CODE § 243-5
243:844
§ 243-6. Imminent closure.
When it appears to the County Health Officer that the operation of the
tattooing or body piercing establishment poses an immediate and imminent
threat to the public health and safety such that irreparable harm will occur
if the tattooing or body piercing establishment is not immediately closed,
the County Health Officer shall have the power to order the immediate
closure of the tattooing or body piercing establishment until such time that
the violations compliance of have been corrected. Notice of same shall also
be provided to the Township of Waterford.
§ 243-7. Violations and penalties; reimbursable fees; revocation or
suspension.
(3) If blood-contaminated gloves, gauze and other materials are
sterilized by autoclaving, these wastes can be placed for off-site
waste collection.
A. Any person, partnership, firm or corporation who knowingly tattoos or
engages in body piercing of a minor under the age of 18 years without
first having obtained the written permission of the minor's parent or
legal guardian or, if neither exist, a person who stands in place of a
parent shall have committed a disorderly person's offense and be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for each violation of this
chapter. Any person, partnership, firm or corporation who violates any
other provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$250 nor more than $1,000 for each violation of this chapter, or
imprisonment in the county jail up to 90 days, or both. Each day that the
violation exists is considered to be a separate offense. [Amended
2-27-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
B. Reasonable counsel fees incurred by the Camden County Health
Department in the enforcement of this chapter shall be paid by the
defendant. The amount of such reimbursable fees and costs shall be
determined by the court hearing the matter.
C. In addition to being subject to the penalties provided herein, any
license or certificate of registration issued under this chapter may be
revoked or suspended for any intentional misstatement in any
application or for any violation of this chapter. No license shall be
revoked or suspended until the licensee has been afforded a hearing.
Notice of the filing of a complaint which seeks to suspend or revoke any
license or certificate of registration issued under this chapter shall be
served on the defendant personally or on the person designated to
receive service of such notice. This notice will establish a date for a
hearing to be held not more than 10 days from the date of such notice,
at which time the defendant shall have the right to be represented by
counsel, call witnesses, cross-examine witnesses produced in support of
the complaint as well as such other rights necessary in order to insure
due process. Should any license or certificate of registration be revoked
§ 243-5 TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING § 243-7
243:845
Chapter 245
TAXATION
or suspended, no part of the license or registration fee shall be
returned.
§ 243-7 WATERFORD CODE § 243-7
243:846
ARTICLE I
(Reserved)182
§ 245-1. through § 245-5. (Reserved)
182. Editor’s Note: Former Art. I, Exemption from Assessment for Home Improvement, adopted
3-22-1978 by Ord. No. 78-2 (Ch. 109, Art. I, of the 1974 Code), was repealed 3-25-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-5.
§ 245-1 TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING § 245-1
243:847

ARTICLE II
Tax Abatements for Commercial and Industrial Properties
[Adopted 12-13-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-12; readopted 5-8-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-6]
§ 245-6. General authorization.
§ 245-7. Specific requirements. [Amended 3-25-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-5]
To be considered for tax abatement a new commercial or industrial
structure must contain a minimum of 5,000 square feet of floor space for
use. The commercial or industrial structure may be divided into ownership
interests of less than 5,000 square feet as long as the structure itself is at
least 5,000 square feet. In this type situation the initial applicant must seek
tax abatement for the lesser ownership interests, as may be approved by
the Township Planning Board, and any future owner of the lesser interest
shall meet the conditions which initially qualified the property for tax
abatement to continue to receive this benefit. An enlargement of an existing
commercial or industrial structure must be more than 30% of the existing
volume of the structure as defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:21-9. An improvement to
an existing commercial or industrial structure must meet the requirements
as defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:21-3n.
§ 245-8. Application procedure.
A. The Preamble hereinabove is hereby incorporated by reference
herein.183
B. The Township of Waterford may enter into agreements with applicants
for tax abatement on commercial and industrial projects which satisfy
the article requirements hereinafter set forth. The agreement shall
provide for an abatement from real property taxation on these projects
for a period of not more than five years. During such five-year period,
the agreement shall provide for payments to the Township of Waterford
in lieu of full property taxes, which payment shall be calculated as set
forth hereinafter in this article. Applications for abatement from
taxation may be filed to take effect for the first full year commencing
after the tax year in which the authorizing ordinance is adopted, and
upon completion of the project for tax years thereafter as set forth in
P.L. 1991, c. 441 (N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq.), but no application for tax
abatement shall be filed for an abatement to take initial effect for the
11th full tax year or any tax year occurring thereafter unless this article
is readopted by the governing body of the Township of Waterford.
[Amended 3-25-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-5]
183. Editor's Note: Original Ord. No. 2000-12, including the Preamble is on file in the Township
offices.
§ 245-6 TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING § 245-8
243:849
A. A preliminary application is required to be filed with the Township Tax
Assessor, with a copy to the Township Governing Body, prior to the
issuance of a construction permit for the project. No construction
permit shall be issued to an applicant seeking tax abatement until such
time as the preliminary application has been filed in accordance with
the Township ordinance requirements and the Construction Office
advised of same in writing by the Township Tax Assessor. If a
preliminary application is not filed, said property will not be eligible for
tax abatement. In the event a construction permit is not issued within
one year from the date the preliminary application is filed, the
preliminary application shall be deemed null and void. [Amended
3-25-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-5]
B. Upon the filing of a preliminary application, the Township Tax Assessor
will review said application to determine if it meets the requirements of
the Township ordinance for abatement and a tax abatement agreement.
The Tax Assessor shall provide this determination to the Township
Governing Body within 60 days of receipt of a properly completed
preliminary application. In the event the Tax Assessor determines that
the application meets the ordinance requirements, then the Township
Committee shall adopt an ordinance authorizing a tax abatement
agreement with the applicant, subject to the following conditions:
(1) That the applicant shall file a final application for tax abatement
with the Tax Assessor in the form prescribed, within 30 days,
including Saturdays and Sundays, following completion of
construction. A copy of the final application shall also be filed with
the Governing Body. Failure to file shall automatically void the
preliminary application approval.
(2) The completed construction shall be in accordance with the
original Township approvals on which the tax abatement
agreement was initially authorized based on the preliminary
application.
(3) The applicant has continued to meet the requirements of the
Township ordinance for tax abatement.
C. Every properly completed final application for abatement shall be
evaluated for approval by the Township Tax Assessor within 30 days of
filing. The Tax Assessor shall notify the Governing Body in writing of the
approval determination. Upon receipt of the written approval from the
Township Tax Assessor the appropriate Township officials shall then
proceed to execute the tax abatement agreement previously authorized
by the specific ordinance adopted as part of the preliminary application
approval process. The applicant shall be required to sign this tax
abatement agreement prior to the Township signatories.
D. Separate applications must be filed for each building involved in phased
projects. [Added 3-25-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-5]
§ 245-8 WATERFORD CODE § 245-8
243:850
§ 245-9. Form of preliminary and final application.
The preliminary and final application must be on a form prescribed by the
Township Tax Assessor and by the Director of the Division of Taxation in the
Department of Treasury, and shall provide the following information:
E. In the event the use listed on the preliminary application is changed
subsequent to the issuance of the construction permit for the project,
the Township Committee shall adopt an ordinance authorizing a tax
abatement with the applicant, provided that the new use is of a type
listed in § 245-10 as a qualifying project, that the applicant has
submitted a revised preliminary application listing the new use, and
that the Township Tax Assessor determines that the revised preliminary
application meets the requirements of this article. [Added 3-25-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-5]
A. A general description of this project for which abatement is sought;
B. A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project;
C. Plans and drawings including a site layout on the total lot area, and
other documents as may be required by the Governing Body to
demonstrate the structure and design of the project;
D. A description of the number, classes, types of employees and average
estimated wages and salaries by employee class, to be employed at the
project site within two years of the completion of the project;
E. A statement of the reasons for seeking tax abatement on the project,
and a description of the benefits to be realized by the applicant if tax
abatement is granted;
F. Estimates of the cost of completing such project;
G. A statement showing:
(1) The real property taxes currently being assessed at the project site;
(2) Estimated tax payments that would be made annually by the
applicant on the project during the period of tax abatement; and
(3) Estimated tax payments that would be made by the applicant on the
project during the first year following the termination of the tax
abatement agreement.
H. A description of any lease agreements between the applicant and
proposed users of the project, and a history and description of the
user's business;
I. Proof of payment of taxes through the current quarter;
J. Other pertinent data regarding the relationship, agreements and status
of other properties owned by the applicant within the Township of
Waterford; and
§ 245-8 TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING § 245-9
243:851
§ 245-10. Projects qualifying for program.
The following type projects/uses will be considered for Tax Abatement by
the Township of Waterford:
§ 245-11. Payments in lieu of full property taxes.
K. Such other pertinent information as the Governing Body may require.
A. Light industrial, light manufacturing, and indoor warehousing facilities
which are nonpolluting and nonnoxious;
B. Scientific or industrial research engineering laboratory, testing or
experimental laboratory or similar establishment for research or
product development;
C. Administrative offices;
D. Wholesale distributorships;
E. Experimental, research testing, dental or medical laboratories;
F. Carpet or rug cleaning: laundry and dry cleaning;
G. Job printing and newspaper or book publishing;
H. Baking and food and dairy processing;
I. Corporate and professional offices;
J. General service and repair shops, including carpenter, cabinet making,
furniture repair, plumbing or similar shop;
K. Office of a builder, carpenter, caterer, cleaner, contractor, decorator,
electrician, furrier, mason, painter, plumber, roofer, upholsterer, and
similar nonnuisance businesses, excluding open storage of materials
and excluding open storage of motor vehicles;
L. Veterinary hospital, provided that all animals are kept in a permanent
enclosed structure and are not within 150 feet of any existing
residential use or zone;
M. Businesses and instructional school, including trade school;
N. Nursing homes, philanthropic clinics, residential health care facilities
and convalescent centers;
O. General commercial establishments permitted by zoning;
P. Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any of
the above-permitted uses as approved by the Township Planning Board.
Q. Charter schools. [Added 3-25-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-5]
§ 245-9 WATERFORD CODE § 245-11
243:852
A. All tax abatement agreements must be authorized by a separate
ordinance for each application.
B. A tax abatement agreement shall provide for the applicant to pay to the
Township in lieu of full property tax payments an amount annually to be
computed by the following formula:
TAX PHASE-IN BASIS — The applicant must pay to the Township in lieu
of full property tax payments an amount equal to a percentage of taxes
otherwise due, according to the following schedule:
In the first full tax year after completion, no payment in lieu of
taxes unless otherwise due
(1)
In the second tax year, an amount not less than 20% of taxes
otherwise due;
(2)
In the third tax year, an amount not less than 40% of taxes
otherwise due;
(3)
In the fourth tax year, an amount not less than 60% of taxes
otherwise due;
(4)
In the fifth tax year, an amount not less than 80% of taxes otherwise
due.
(5)
C. All tax agreements entered into by virtue of this article shall be in effect
for no more than five full tax years next following the date of completion
of the project. Within 30 days of the execution of a tax abatement
agreement, the Township shall forward a copy of said agreement to the
Director of the Division of Local Government Services in the
Department of Community Affairs.
D. No exemption or abatement shall be granted, or tax agreement entered
into, with respect to any property for which property taxes are
delinquent or remain unpaid, or for which penalties for nonpayment of
taxes are due.
E. If during any tax year prior to the termination of the tax agreement, the
property owner ceases to operate or disposes of the property, or fails to
meet the conditions for qualifying, then the tax which would have
otherwise been payable for each tax year shall become due and payable
from the property owner as if no abatement had been granted. The
property owner shall advise the Township of any change in use or
ownership prior to same occurring. Failure to so advise shall be cause
to declare the property owner in breach of the tax abatement
agreement. The Township Governing Body shall notify the property
owner and the Tax Collector of the disqualification, and upon such
notice, the Tax Collector shall within 15 days thereof notify the owner of
the property of the taxes due and payable to the Township. With respect
to the disposal of property, where it is determined that the new owner of
the property will continue to use the property pursuant to the
conditions which qualified the property for tax abatement, no tax shall
§ 245-11 TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING § 245-11
243:853
§ 245-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
ASSESSOR — The officer of the Township of Waterford charged with the
duty of assessing real property for the purpose of general taxation.
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURE — A structure or part thereof
used for the manufacturing, processing or assembling of material or
manufactured products, or for research, office, industrial, commercial,
retail, recreational, hotel or motel facilities, or warehousing purposes, or
for any combination thereof, which the Governing Body determines will
tend to maintain or provide gainful employment within the municipality,
assist in the economic development of the municipality, maintain or increase
the tax base of the municipality and maintain or diversify and expand
commerce within the municipality. It shall not include any structure or
part thereof used or to be used by any business relocated from another
qualifying municipality unless the total square footage of the floor area of
the structure or part thereof used or to be used by the business at the new
site together with the total square footage of the land used or to be used
by the business at the new site exceeds the total square footage of that
utilized by the business at its current site of operation by at least 10%; and
the property that the business is relocating to has been the subject of a
remedial action plan costing in excess of $250,000 performed pursuant to
an administrative consent order entered into pursuant to authority vested
in the Commissioner of Environmental Protection.
COMPLETION — Substantially ready for the intended use for which a
building or structure is constructed.
CONSTRUCTION — The development of a commercial or industrial
structure or the enlargement of the volume of an existing commercial or
industrial structure by more than 30%, but shall not mean the conversion of
an existing building or structure to another use.
IMPROVEMENT — A modernization, rehabilitation, renovation, alteration,
or repair which produces a physical change in an existing building or
structure that improves the safety, sanitation, decency or attractiveness of
the building or structure as a place for human habitation or work, and which
does not change its permitted use. In the case of commercial or industrial
structures, it shall not include ordinary painting, repairs and replacement
of maintenance items, or an enlargement of the volume of an existing
be due and the agreement shall remain in effect. The new owner shall
be required to submit necessary information to the Tax Assessor to
verify continuing eligibility for the tax abatement benefit.
F. At termination of the tax abatement agreement, the property shall be
subject to all applicable real property taxes as provided by law; but
nothing herein shall prohibit a project, at the termination of an
agreement, from qualifying for and receiving the full benefits of any
other tax preferences provided by law. [Amended 3-25-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-5]
§ 245-11 WATERFORD CODE § 245-12
243:854
structure by more than 30%. In no case shall it include the repair of fire or
other damage to a property for which payment of a claim was received by
any person from an insurance company at any time during the three-year
period immediately preceding the filing of an application pursuant to this
article.[Added 3-25-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-5]
PHASED PROJECTS — Commercial or industrial construction involving
multiple structures that are built separately.[Added 3-25-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-5]
§ 245-13. Application fee.
An application filing fee of $300 shall be paid by the applicant at the time
of filing the preliminary application. The application fee will provide for
the administrative services to be undertaken by the Township Tax Assessor,
and any other Township official, in order to render a determination on the
applicant's eligibility for a tax abatement. The filing fee shall cover the
cost for both the preliminary application and final application review and
determination process.
§ 245-14. Escrow for five-year tax abatement agreements. [Added
3-25-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-5]
A. Every tax abatement agreement required by this article shall be subject
to payment of a nonrefundable escrow in the amount of $1,000 to be
paid by the applicant at the time the applicant submits a preliminary
application to the Tax Assessor in accordance with § 245-8 of this
article. The required escrow shall be used to pay the cost of
professional review by the Township Solicitor, Engineer, or the
professionals employed by the Township to review and make
recommendations regarding the tax abatement agreement.
B. At the time of submission of an application to the Township Tax
Assessor, the applicant shall be required to execute an escrow
agreement with the Township to cover all necessary and reasonable
costs incurred for the technical and professional review of the tax
abatement agreement. The amounts specified for escrow are estimates
which shall be paid prior to the Township's review of the tax abatement
application. In the event an additional amount is required for more than
the amount specified in the escrow agreement, the applicant shall pay
all additional sums required prior to the Township's execution of the tax
abatement agreement.
C. To the extent not otherwise inconsistent with this section, the escrow
fee required by this article shall be administered by the Chief Financial
Officer of the Township in the manner and as set forth generally in
Chapter 176 of the Code of the Township of Waterford, captioned "Land
Use, Development and Zoning," § 176-20.
§ 245-12 TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING § 245-14
243:855
D. The Township Clerk or his/her designee shall maintain an itemized
account of the escrow on deposit for each application and shall, upon
the request of the applicant, supply a copy of said account.
§ 245-14 WATERFORD CODE § 245-14
243:856
Chapter 251
(RESERVED)
Chapter 257
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 50.
Fees — See Ch. 124, Art. II.
Business registration permits — See Ch. 188.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 239.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 266.
§ 257-1. Purpose.
The towing and storage of motor vehicles, damaged, stolen or impounded,
within the Township of Waterford shall be performed by towing operators
qualified and licensed pursuant to the provisions set forth below on a
rotating basis without competitive bid. This ordinance is intended to replace
the current sections of this chapter184 as in effect as of the date of the first
reading of this ordinance.
§ 257-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMOBILE — A private passenger automobile of a private-passenger- or
station-wagon-type that is owned or hired and is neither used as public or
livery conveyance for passengers nor rented to others with a driver; and
a motor vehicle with a pickup body, or delivery sedan, a car, or a panel
truck or a camper-type vehicle used for recreational purposes owned by
an individual or by a husband and wife who are residents of the same
household, not customarily used in the occupation, profession or business
of the owner other than farming or ranching. An automobile owned by a
farm family, copartnership or corporation, which is principally garaged on a
farm or ranch and otherwise meets the definitions contained in this section,
shall be considered a private-passenger automobile owned by two or more
relatives resident in the same household.
INSIDE SECURED — A vehicle storage facility that it completely indoors,
having one or more openings in the walls for storage and removal of
vehicles and that is secured by a locking device on each opening.
184. Editor's Note: In this instance "this chapter" refers to former Ch. 257, Towing, adopted
9-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-10.
§ 245-14 (RESERVED) § 257-2
251:857
MOTOR VEHICLE — All vehicles propelled otherwise than by muscular
power, excepting such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks and
motorized bicycles.
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT — An occurrence in which a motor vehicle
comes in contact with any other object for which the motor vehicle must be
towed or removed for placement in a storage facility.
OUTSIDE SECURED — An area not indoors secured by a fence, wall or
barrier at least six feet high with a passive alarm system or similar alarm
system and continuously lighted at night, with all gates, doors or entryways
secured by locks.
OUTSIDE UNSECURED — An area not indoors that is not secured by a
fence, wall or other barrier, and to include all other areas not defined as an
inside building and outside secured facility.
STORAGE CHARGES PER TWENTY-FOUR-HOUR PERIOD — Starts at
12:01 a.m. for a twenty-four-hour period or fraction thereof.
TOW VEHICLE — Those vehicles equipped with a boom or booms, winches,
slings, tilt beds, wheel lifts or under-reach equipment specifically designed
by its manufacturer for the removal or transport of private passenger
automobiles.
§ 257-3. Rotating call list.
§ 257-4. License required; duration; license fee.
A. Towing operators performing towing services for the Township of
Waterford shall perform on a rotating basis. The Chief of Police is
hereby authorized and directed to establish a tow truck call list of
towing operators' licenses pursuant to this chapter and to establish a
system of rotation in the assignment of tow trucks. Towing operators
shall be assigned duties from the tow truck call list only. No licensed
towing operator or other party shall respond to the scene of an accident
except upon notification by the officer in charge at police headquarters
or upon request of the driver or owner of the disabled vehicle. The
towing operator shall respond to each call with the equipment
requested by the police and/or dispatcher.
B. All towing operators must be available for service on a twenty-fourhour,
seven-day-per-week basis when on rotation.
A. In order for a towing operator to be listed on the tow truck call list, a
license is required pursuant to the provisions set forth below. Each
license issued hereunder shall terminate on December 31 of the year in
which it is issued, and each renewal license shall be for the one-year
period of January 1 through December 31 of the following year.
B. Specifically exempted from the licensing requirement is the towing,
transporting, conveying or removing motor vehicles from private
§ 257-2 WATERFORD CODE § 257-4
251:858
§ 257-5. Application for license.
property by towing operators who have been privately engaged or
designated by the owner of the vehicle to be so removed.
C. All applicants for licenses shall pay a sum as set forth by the Township
Fee Schedule Ordinance185 at the time the application is filed. This is a
nonrefundable fee which shall be utilized to cover the cost of
investigation and review and shall also be considered to be the fee for
the balance of the year for which the application is filed. Therefore, the
annual fee shall be in the amount set forth in the Township Fee
Schedule Ordinance.
A. Licenses hereunder shall be approved by the governing body of the
Township of Waterford and issued by the Township Clerk. The
application therefor shall contain the following information:
(1) The full name and address of the applicant and, if such application
is a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and
directors thereof, and the registered office and registered agent
thereof; or, if such applicant is a partnership, the names and
addresses of all partners.
(2) The year, make, model and serial number, registration number and
owner of each tow vehicle which is to be used by the applicant in
responding to calls from the Waterford Police Department
requesting the towing and storage of disabled motor vehicles.
(3) The tow vehicle's base of service for each tow vehicle to be used by
the licensed operator.
(4) The location to which the applicant will tow, transport, convey or
remove and thereafter store any motor vehicle towed, transported,
conveyed or removed by the applicant pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
(5) The specific area at the location referred to above that the
applicant has available for properly storing and protecting disabled
motor vehicles. The applicant shall attach to his application a
diagram of its property showing the secured area (inside or outside
secured) intended for the storage and protection of vehicles
removed from the roadway.
(6) The place and location where the applicant will maintain an office
at which any person whose vehicle has been towed, transported,
conveyed or removed may obtain information relative thereto,
attend to the payment of any money to be paid in connection
therewith and arrange for any further removal or possession of
such vehicle.
185. Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees, Art. II.
§ 257-4 (RESERVED) § 257-5
251:859
§ 257-6. Investigation and licensing authority.
(7) A statement that the applicant has sufficient personnel and
equipment to provide twenty-four-hour towing and storage services
and will be available 24 hours per day while on rotation to respond
to police calls in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
(8) A certification that the fees charged will not exceed those set forth
in this chapter.
(9) The name of the insurance company and its address and policy
number showing the limits of coverage required by this chapter,
along with a certification that the Township of Waterford will be
added as an additional insured under the liability provisions of such
policy.
(10) A representation that the applicant will execute an indemnification
and hold harmless agreement with the Township of Waterford.
(11) A listing of the applicant's prior towing experience, including the
years in business and other municipalities served.
(12) Such other information as deemed appropriate by the governing
body of the Township of Waterford or the Chief of Police.
B. Any applications filed after four licensees acceptable to the Township
appear on the rotating list shall not be accepted. Until further
amendment of this chapter, the Township rotating call list shall be
limited to four.
C. An application for any license is always required. However, in lieu of
any application fee, any licensee accepted by the Township of Waterford
shall be required to tow all vehicles owned by the Township of
Waterford free of charge.
A. Application forms may be obtained from the Township Clerk, and all
completed applications together with the licensing fee if applicable
shall be submitted to the Township Clerk.
B. All applications shall be investigated and evaluated by the Township
Police Chief or his designee regarding the applicant's background and
qualifications, and a report of the Police Chief's findings and
recommendations shall be submitted to the governing body within 30
days of the receipt of said application. All applicants shall execute a
release for information to be obtained by the Police Chief to complete
the investigation and evaluation.
C. All applications are subject to review and approval by the governing
body of the Township of Waterford. Only those applicants which are
responsible and qualified pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be approved. All approved applicants shall be required to execute
a contract with the Township of Waterford to provide the towing and
§ 257-5 WATERFORD CODE § 257-6
251:860
§ 257-7. Licensing standards.
No license shall be issued unless all of the following standards are met:
storage services referred to herein. A certificate of insurance naming
the Township of Waterford as an additional insured shall be submitted.
D. Storage areas for vehicles towed under the direction of the Waterford
Township Police Department being in the jurisdiction of the Waterford
Township Police Department boundaries shall be made continuously
accessible to police officers of the Waterford Township Police
Department for the purpose of investigation, which may include but not
be limited to searches, photographs, fingerprint dusting, and/or
collection of other evidence. During impoundment of vehicles, no
towing/storage licensee shall allow access to said vehicle without the
express permission of the Waterford Township Police Department in
which jurisdiction said vehicle is impounded and remains so until
properly released.
E. Any past, present or future applications of record, not having governing
body approval, shall be subject to immediate compliance with this
chapter and be processed accordingly.
A. Equipment requirement. No license shall be issued to a towing operator
who does not possess, for utilization in this business, the following tow
vehicles and equipment, which tow vehicles and equipment shall be
inspected by the Chief of Police or his authorized representative prior
to a license being issued:
(1) At least one four-ton tow vehicle with a boom and drum rating of
four tons; a one-hundred-foot-long, three-eighths-inch diameter
cable with a recommended working limit of at least 3,500 pounds;
recommended gross vehicle weight of a truck or chassis of 10,000
pounds; and dual rear wheels maintained and equipped in
accordance with manufacturer's specifications.
(2) At least one sixteen-ton tow vehicle with two booms and two drums,
with each boom having an eight-ton capacity, and each drum
having an eight-ton capacity, and each drum having a two-hundredfoot-
long, one-half-inch cable; recommended gross vehicle weight
of truck of chassis of 16,000 pounds; dual rear wheels; heavy-duty
truck tow bar air brakes; connecting air lines for connection with
air compressor and air brake lines of the towed vehicle; two-speed
rear axle and differential or dual transmission or five-speed
transmission; two heavy-duty high-test pickup chains; and heavyduty
truck sling and tow bar. In lieu of having this piece of
equipment in its possession, the licensee shall supply the Township
Clerk with an agreement in writing between the licensee and any
other entity, or corporation or person who possesses this specific
equipment that he or it will provide services to the licensee
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for the term of the
§ 257-6 (RESERVED) § 257-7
251:861
license. This agreement shall provide that the response time shall
be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and that the
licensee shall assume all responsibility for compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. The licensee shall make provision for the
equipment to be available for inspection at his place of business
at the time and place requested by the Chief of Police or his
authorized representative prior to the issuance of the license. If
said agreement shall be canceled for any reason, the licensee must
notify the Township of Waterford within twenty-four hours.
(3) At least one flatbed or car carrier with at least one-car capacity;
wheel chokes; and four tie-down chains or grab locks.
(4) At least one vehicle equipped with tie-down equipment for carrying
motorcycles.
(5) Safety equipment to be carried on all trucks shall include universal
towing sling; tow hooks and chains; one snatch block for threeeighths-
to one-half-inch cable; two high-test safety chains; fourlamp
or three-lamp revolving amber emergency light with New
Jersey state permit; a toolbox with assortment of hand tools; rear
working lights and rear marker lights; cab lights; body clearing
lights located to clear the towed vehicle; a block choke for the tow
vehicle while working; safety cones; a shovel and a broom; and a
steering wheel lock or tie-down.
(6) In lieu of having the required equipment in his possession, the
licensee shall supply the Township Clerk with an agreement in
writing between the licensee and any other entity, or corporation or
person who possesses, this specific equipment that he or it will
provide services to the licensee pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter for the term of the license. This agreement shall provide
that the response time shall be in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter and that the licensee shall assume all responsibility for
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The licensee shall
make provisions for the equipment to be available for inspection at
his place of business at the time and place requested by the Chief of
Police or his authorized representative prior to the issuance of the
license. If the said agreement shall be canceled for any reason, the
licensee must notify the Township of Waterford within 24 hours.
B. The tow vehicle's base of service, the towing operator's place of
business, the proposed storage areas, and any other premises to be
utilized by the towing operator as set forth in the license application
shall comply with all provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, Property
Maintenance Code,186 and all other applicable laws of the Township of
Waterford, or the municipality wherein the property is located,
pertaining to the use or condition of said premises.
186. Editor's Note: See Ch. 176, Land Use, Development and Zoning, and Ch. 220, Property
Maintenance.
§ 257-7 WATERFORD CODE § 257-7
251:862
C. Each towing operator shall have the ability to store all motor vehicles
within an inside secured area. The enclosure shall be in good repair and
well-maintained, and must be continuously lighted from dusk to dawn.
No vehicles shall be stored in an outside unsecured area. Each storage
area shall be subject to inspection and approval by the Chief of Police or
his designee prior to a license being issued.
D. The secured storage area must be available 24 hours a day, 365 days
per year and open to the public on weekdays during normal business
hours from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. and limited hours to be approved by
the governing body of the Township of Waterford on Saturdays from
8:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. The storage yard shall be made available for the
pickup of a motor vehicle after normal business hours on weekdays
from 5:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m., Saturday from 2:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m., and
Sunday from 1:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m., during which time there will be a
gate fee charged in addition to the standard fees addressed in this
chapter.187 This storage area must be located within the Township of
Waterford and the towing operator's place of business shall be located
within the Township of Waterford and/or a contiguous adjoining
municipality.
E. All towing operators shall maintain and produce proof of the following
insurance coverage, with the Township of Waterford named as an
additional insured, with the application when submitted to the
Township Clerk:
(1) Automobile liability in the amount of not less than $1,000,000
combined single limit.
(2) Comprehensive liability insurance in the amount of not less that
$1,000,000 combined single limit.
(3) Garage keepers liability in an amount of not less than $75,000, both
on hook and for each storage location.
(4) Garage liability in an amount of not less that $1,000,000 combined
single limit.
(5) The policies shall be endorsed to provide collision coverage for
vehicles in tow.
F. To provide the public with prompt and adequate tow truck service, the
licensee must respond within 25 minutes after being summoned.
G. Operators and their employees shall be fully trained and knowledgeable
in the operation of all required equipment and shall be subject to
background investigations by the Township of Waterford Police
Department.
187. Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
§ 257-7 (RESERVED) § 257-7
251:863
§ 257-8. Rules and regulations.
H. All billings for towing and storage services shall be itemized for the
services actually rendered pursuant to the fee schedules set forth
herein. A copy of the fee schedule set forth in this chapter shall be
available to the public and at the towing operator's place of business
during normal business hours.
I. Agree to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the Township of
Waterford for any and all suits, judgments, costs, expenses, including
attorney's fees, and claims on account of breach of contract, damaged
property, or personal injuries, including death arising out of or in any
way connected with the towing and storage services to be provided.
J. Priority for a license shall be given to businesses located within the
Township of Waterford which perform towing services as a part of their
business operation.
A. The governing body hereby designates the Police Department generally
and the Chief of Police in particular as the supervising authority to
enforce the provisions of this chapter as well as the rules and
regulations adopted hereunder.
B. Each licensed towing operator shall at times maintain the necessary
equipment to remove disabled vehicles as required by this chapter.
Each towing operator, prior to the departure from the scene of towing
services, shall clean and clear the streets of any customary debris
resulting from any motor vehicle accident at such scene and shall at all
times carry the necessary equipment to perform said cleaning services.
C. Refusal to tow an abandoned or stolen motor vehicle or at the scene of a
motor vehicle accident may result in the disqualification of any towing
operator, and a report of said refusal shall be furnished to the Chief of
Police and the Township Clerk by the investigating officer at the scene
of the accident as soon as possible.
D. If the licensee summoned is unable to respond within the time
constraints specified in this chapter, he shall so notify the individual
requesting the service, and the next-named towing operator on the tow
truck call list shall be called to respond by the Police Department.
E. No towing operator operating pursuant to the license issued hereunder
shall employ, either directly or indirectly, any personnel or employees of
the Township of Waterford.
F. The Township of Waterford Police Department shall maintain a record
of impound calls to licensed towing operators and said record shall be
available for inspection by any licensed tow operator upon reasonable
notice.
G. An individual whose motor vehicle has been towed and/or stored has
the right to retrieve any of his or her personal possessions therefrom,
§ 257-7 WATERFORD CODE § 257-8
251:864
even when said motor vehicle is within the possession of the towing
operator. "Personal property" shall be defined to mean anything that is
not permanently attached to the motor vehicle so as to be an integral
part thereof. An individual seeking the retrieval of any personal items
shall arrange with the towing operator to obtain said items and shall
be required to execute a receipt therefor. The towing operator shall
maintain copies of all said receipts. An individual who seeks return or
retrieval of his or her motor vehicle which has been towed shall appear
at the office of the Waterford Township Police Department to obtain a
release for said motor vehicle. Upon completing a designated release
form for his or her vehicle, said individual whose motor vehicle has
been towed and/or stored pursuant to this chapter shall pay a fee to the
Township of Waterford and present same to the Clerk at the Township
of Waterford Police Department.188 This fee may be waived by the Chief
of Police, if deemed applicable, on a case-by-case basis.
H. The Township of Waterford reserves the right to review the
qualifications of any personnel employed by the towing operator at any
time.
I. The towing operator and any of its employees are independent
contractors, and they do not represent nor are they employed by the
Township of Waterford.
J. The towing operator shall at all times be responsible for the conduct of
its employees and shall be liable to the Township of Waterford and the
owners of any motor vehicles towed or stored by the towing operator
for any injuries, damages or costs incurred as a result of the conduct of
said employees.
K. All towing operators shall comply with all state and federal laws and
regulations concerning the hiring of employees, their wages, hours and
terms of employment.
L. The Township of Waterford is not liable for any of the services
performed by the contractor unless those services are performed for
municipal vehicles. The contractor shall proceed directly against the
individual owner of the motor vehicle for all fees and charges incurred.
M. No licensed towing operator shall pile or store vehicles on public
streets or sidewalks.
N. Each towing operator shall maintain a record of all vehicles towed,
including the date towed, where the vehicle was stored, when the
vehicle was released, and the fees charged, together with any and all
other services rendered. Said records shall be maintained at the
principal place of business of the towing operator as set forth on the
application, and said records shall be maintained for a minimum of
three years and will be made available to the Police Department for
inspection within 48 hours' notice.
188. Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
§ 257-8 (RESERVED) § 257-8
251:865
§ 257-9. Towing and storage fees.
§ 257-10. Denial; revocation; suspension of license.
A license may be denied, suspended or revoked upon any of the following
grounds after an appropriate hearing in accordance with the terms of this
chapter:
O. Any towing operator with a current license who attempts to apply as an
additional applicant as a spin off applicant, i.e., a business entity with
similar owners, equipment, or relatives or employees as alter egos of
another applicant or current licensee shall be rejected as ineligible,
discriminatory, and misleading.
A. The fees for the towing of an automobile as defined above, which is
damaged in a motor vehicle accident or recovered after being stolen or
abandoned, shall be as follows:189
B. A licensed towing operator may petition the governing body of the
Township of Waterford for permission to charge fees for the towing and
storage of motor vehicles other than automobiles as defined above. Said
fees must be approved by resolution of the governing body, shall be
valid for a minimum period of one year or until modified by the
governing body, and must be on file with the Township Clerk and at the
principal place of business of the towing operator and available to the
public during normal business hours.
C. The fees for the storage of an automobile as defined above, which is
damaged in a motor vehicle accident or recovered after being stolen or
abandoned, shall be as follows:190
D. The fees charged by a licensed towing operator to the Township of
Waterford shall not exceed those fees established at N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.50.
E. Storage charges per twenty-four-hour period shall start at 12:01 a.m.
for a twenty-four-hour period or fraction thereof.
F. The Township Clerk and each licensed towing operator shall have
available at the Township hall and the principal place of business of the
towing operator a copy of the fee charges herein.
G. If any municipally owned vehicles require towing, there shall be no
charge to the Township.
A. Submitting a fraudulent or misleading application.
B. A criminal connection that reflects on the applicant to deal with the
problem in a fair and reputable manner.
189. Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
190. Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
§ 257-8 WATERFORD CODE § 257-10
251:866
§ 257-11. Hearings.
§ 257-12. Violations and penalties.
C. Failure to respond reliably and promptly to calls for assistance or any
other action which interferes with the proper operation of the rotating
system maintained by the Police Department.
D. Violations of motor vehicle law and/or municipal ordinances.
E. Failure or refusal to tow or remove a motor vehicle when requested to
do so by an appropriate municipal officer.
F. Violations of the Zoning Ordinance, Property Maintenance Code191 or
any other applicable ordinances or codes of the Township of Waterford
pertaining to the use or condition of the premises used by the licensee
in conducting the towing business.
G. Violations of the provisions of this chapter or any of its rules or
regulations.
A. Proceedings for the suspension or revocation of a license shall be
initiated by the service of a notice of charges proffered against the
licensee. Said notice shall be served by the Chief of Police or his
designee, either personally or via certified mail, return receipt
requested, and shall contain a date, time and place for a hearing to be
held by the governing body of the Township of Waterford. Said hearing
shall be scheduled no less than seven days, nor more than 30 days, after
the notice of the proposed suspension or revocation shall be served
upon the licensee. The licensee shall have the right to file an answer to
the notice and to appear in person or be represented by counsel and
give testimony at the place and time fixed for the hearing.
B. When an application for a license is denied by the Township of
Waterford, the applicant may request a hearing on said application by
the service of a notice requesting a hearing. Said notice shall be served
on the Township Clerk, and at the next regularly scheduled meeting of
the governing body a hearing date shall be set which shall be no less
than seven days, nor more than 30 days, from the date scheduled.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000,
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days or a
period of community service not to exceed 90 days, or any combination
thereof.
B. These penalties shall be in addition to and separate from any action
taken by the Township of Waterford pursuant to § 257-10 hereof.
191. Editor's Note: See Ch. 176, Land Use, Development and Zoning, and Ch. 220, Property
Maintenance.
§ 257-10 (RESERVED) § 257-12
251:867
Chapter 262
TRAILERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 201.
§ 262-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association of
persons.
TRAILER OR CAMP VEHICLE — Any vehicle used or intended for
conveyance upon the public streets or highways, so designed or constructed
as to permit occupancy of the vehicle as a dwelling or sleeping place for
one or more persons or for other occupancy or use and capable of being
transported either under its own power or by attachment to a motor vehicle
or by other means of transportation.
§ 262-2. Parking and use restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or place any trailer or camp
vehicle upon or in any street or highway within the Township of Waterford
or upon any lands and premises within said township, except in accordance
with the provisions of all ordinances of said township, and no trailer or
camp vehicle shall, under any circumstances, remain so parked within the
township for a period longer than three weeks; provided, however, that such
limitation as to time of parking shall not be applicable where repairs or
service to or upon any such trailer or camp vehicle are being furnished
in any public garage or public automobile repair shop or where any such
trailer or camp vehicle shall remain stored and unoccupied on private
property.
§ 262-3. Parking on private or public lands.
No trailer or camp vehicle, while such trailer or camp vehicle shall be
parked or placed upon or in any public street or highway or upon lands and
premises or while repairs or service to or upon such trailer or camp vehicle
are being furnished in any public garage or public automobile repair shop or
while such trailer or camp vehicle shall remain stored upon private property
within said township, shall be used by any person as a dwelling or sleeping
place, except that when stored or parked upon private property it may be
so used for a period not in excess of five days.
§ 257-12 WATERFORD CODE § 262-4
262:868
§ 262-4. Violations and penalties.192
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000, to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or a period of community
service not to exceed 90 days, or any combination thereof, in the discretion
of the court or Judge before whom such person shall be so convicted.
Chapter 266
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks -- See Ch. 239.
Towing -- See Ch. 257.
Trailers -- See Ch. 262.
Unlicensed vehicles -- See Ch. 270.
192. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 262-4 TRAILERS § 262-4
262:869

Part 1
[AdopPtaerdk 1in0g-1 I1n- 1Q9u9a5s iB-Pyu Obrlidc. ANroe.a 9s5-19]
ARTICLE I
Purpose; Authority; Designation of Zones
§ 266-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 1 is to establish parking prohibitions in certain
areas that are on private property which is open to the public or to which
the public is invited as set forth below.
§ 266-2. Authority.
This Part 1 is enacted in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, which does
confer upon Waterford Township the right to establish certain regulations
in order to preserve and safeguard the public health, safety, morals and
welfare.
§ 266-3. Zones designated.
§ 266-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-23-1997 by Ord. No.
97-4]
For violations of any provision of this Part 1, the minimum penalty shall be
as follows:
A. The following areas shall be designed as HANDICAPPED PARKING, NO
STOPPING OR STANDING OR FIRE ZONES and shall be so marked by
signs in conformance with the current Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices for streets and highways.
(1) The Atco Multiplex Cinema.
(2) The Atco Shopping Plaza.
(3) The Waterford Shopping Plaza.
B. Areas covered by this Part 1 pursuant to the properly adopted site plan
are located in the Township Planning Board Office.
A. Fire zones.
(1) First offense: $50.
(2) Second offense: $75.
(3) Third offense: $150.
(4) Fourth and subsequent offenses: minimum fine of $250 to a
maximum of $500, plus mandatory court appearance.
B. Handicap zone.
§ 266-1 TRAILERS § 266-4
262:871
(1) First offense: $75.
(2) Second offense: $150.
(3) Third offense: $250.
(4) Fourth and subsequent offenses: minimum fine of $300 to a
maximum of $500, plus mandatory court appearance.
§ 266-4 WATERFORD CODE § 266-4
262:872
Part 2
[Adopted 6G-e1n2e-1ra9l9 P6 rAosv iOsirodn. sNo. 96-16]
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 266-5. Definitions and word usage.
§ 266-6. Authorization for the closing of any street.
§ 266-7. Tow-away.
Any vehicle parked in violation of this Part 2 shall be deemed a nuisance
and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any peace
officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall bear
the reasonable costs of removal and storage which may result from such
removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
A. Words and phrases. Whenever any words and phrases are used in this
Part 2, the meaning respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title
39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to
such words and phrases used herein.
B. Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this Part 2,
they shall mean either Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight
Saving Time, as may be in current use.
A. The Director of the Department of Public Safety or, in his or her
absence, disability or inability to act, the Mayor and, in the event of his
or her absence, disability or inability to act, then the Chief of Police of
the municipality, is hereby authorized to provide by regulation for the
closing of any street or portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic on any
day or days during specified hours on any day or days whenever he
finds that such closing is necessary for the preservation of public safety,
health or welfare.
B. Any regulations promulgated by the Director of Public Safety or his
designee and in accordance with Subsection A above, shall provide for
the posting of proper warning signs of such closing on any street or
portion thereof during the time the same is closed in pursuance thereof.
C. Any violation of this regulation promulgated thereunder shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $50 but not more than $250.
D. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any street for a
period greater than 48 consecutive hours shall not become effective
unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
§ 266-5 TRAILERS § 266-8
262:873
§ 266-8. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this Part 2 or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $50 but not
to exceed $250 and/or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 15 days.
§ 266-9. Severability.
If any part or parts of this Part 2 are, for any reason, held to be invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Part 2.
§ 266-10. Repeal.
All former traffic ordinances of the Township of Waterford are hereby
repealed, and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or
inconsistent with the provisions of this Part 2 are hereby repealed, except
that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment
of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance
hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this Part 2.
§ 266-11. Speed.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle in excess of the speed limit set
forth and described below.
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
3rd Street [Added
5-11-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-10]
35 Between Jackson Road and
Raritan Avenue
Atco Avenue (Zone 1) 25 From U.S. No. 30 to Second
Street
Atco Avenue (Zone 2) 35 From Second Street to Jackson
Road
Cooper Folly Road 35 From U.S. No. 30 to Township line
East Atlantic Avenue
[Added 5-11-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-10]
35 Between the Old White Horse
Pike Bridge and Bartram Avenue
Gennessee Avenue
[Added 11-28-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-18]
25 From Raritan Avenue to East
Atlantic Avenue
Hayes Mill Road (Zone
1) [Added 6-28-2000
by Ord. No. 2000-8]
30 Between the Winslow Township -
Waterford Township line and
Cooper Folly Road
§ 266-8 WATERFORD CODE § 266-11
262:874
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Hayes Mill Road (Zone
2) [Added 6-28-2000
by Ord. No. 2000-8]
25 Between Cooper Folly Road and
435 feet east of Gibbons Court
Hopewell Road [Added
4-26-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-5]
25 Beginning at the intersection with
Jackson Road (CR 534) to the
Camden County - Burlington
County line
Jackson Road, Atsion
Avenue, Shamong Road
(School Zone)
35 In the Archway School Zone In
Zone 1 During recess or while
children are going to or leaving
school, during opening or closing
Jackson Road, Atsion
Avenue, Shamong Road
(Zone 1)
45 From the Berlin Township/
Waterford Township Line to Third
Street
Jackson Road, Atsion
Avenue, Shamong Road
(Zone 2)
50 From Third Street to the Camden
County/Burlington County line
Linden Avenue [Added
11-28-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-18]
25 From Jackson Road to Raritan
Avenue
Maple Avenue (Zone 1) 35 From Gennessee Avenue to Fifth
Street
Maple Avenue (Zone 2) 40 From Fifth Street to Rossella
Old White Horse Pike
(C.R. 716) [Added
9-8-1999 by Ord. No.
99-14]
35 Beginning 500 feet in a southerly
direction from the northerly
property line of Block 255, Lot 4,
to 50 feet north of the
intersection of the Old White
Horse Pike and Chew Road
Pestleton Road 40 Entire Length
Raritan Avenue (Zone
1)
35 From Cooper Road to Atco
Avenue
Raritan Avenue (Zone
2)
40 From Atco Avenue to Third Street
Raritan Avenue (Zone
3)
45 From Third Street to Tremont
Avenue
Taunton Road 40 Entire length
Tremont Avenue (Zone
1)
35 From Maple Avenue to Raritan
Avenue
§ 266-11 TRAILERS § 266-11
262:875
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Tremont Avenue (Zone
2)
40 From Raritan Avenue to Jackson
Road
West Atlantic Avenue
[Amended 7-11-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-12;
6-11-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-5]
25 From Cooper Road to Gennessee
Avenue
§ 266-12. One-way streets.
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated. Parking on these streets will be
permitted on the sides indicated below:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Alley Lane West One way
§ 266-13. No turn on red.
No person shall make a right turn on the red signal at any location listed:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Right Turn on Red
Signal Onto
(Reserved)
§ 266-14. Turn prohibitions.
No person shall make a turn at any location listed and only in the manner
described:
Name of
Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 266-15. Through streets.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the through
street, except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
§ 266-11 WATERFORD CODE § 266-15
262:876
Name of Street Limits
Almira Avenue Between Raritan Avenue and Third Street
Atlantic Avenue West Between Atco Avenue and Bartram
Avenue
Atlantic Avenue West Between Atco Avenue and Cooper Road
Atlantic Avenue West Between Bartram Avenue and Gennessee
Avenue
Atco Avenue Between U.S. No. 30 and Jackson Road
Auburn Avenue Between U.S. No. 30 and West Atlantic
Avenue
Bartram Avenue Between U.S. No. 30 and Raritan Avenue
Bartram Avenue Between Raritan Avenue and Third Street
Blueberry Drive Between Atco Avenue and Medford Road
Chew Road Between Old W.H.P. and Township line
Church Street Between Atco Avenue and Bartram
Avenue
Cooperfolly Road Between U.S. No. 30 and Township line
Cooper Road Between U.S. No. 30 and Jackson Road
Ellwood Avenue Between Third Street and Richards
Avenue
Fernwood Avenue Between Jackson Road and Raritan
Avenue
Fifth Street Between Atco Avenue and Ellwood Avenue
Gardens Avenue Between Cooper Road and Bellevue
Avenue
Hayesmill Road Between U.S. No. 30 and Township line
Jackson Road Between Taunton Road and county line
Linden Avenue Between Jackson Road and Raritan
Avenue
Maple Avenue Between Gennessee Avenue and Rossella
Avenue
Old White Horse Pike Between Gennessee Avenue and Township
line
Raritan Avenue Between Atco Avenue and Tremont
Avenue
Raritan Avenue Between Atco Avenue and Cooper Road
Richards Avenue Between Jackson Road and Raritan
Avenue
§ 266-15 TRAILERS § 266-15
262:877
Name of Street Limits
Richards Avenue Between Jackson Road and Fox Run Drive
Sixth Street Between Atco Avenue and Ellwood Avenue
Third Street Between Jackson Road and Atco Avenue
Third Street Between Atco Avenue and Raritan Avenue
Tremont Avenue Between Jackson Road and Maple Avenue
Whispering Pines Drive Between U.S. No. 30 and Todd Court
§ 266-16. Stop intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Almira Avenue South Hasselhan Drive
Almira Avenue Both West Front Street
Anthony Road East Ashland Avenue
Aqua Lane West Lake Drive
Aqua Lane East Beach Drive
Ashford Terrace East Ashland Avenue
West Atlantic Avenue East Hendricks Avenue
A-Avenue North New Jersey Avenue
Autumn Crest Drive East (2) Curry Avenue
B-Avenue North New Jersey Avenue
Bartram Avenue
[Added 3-22-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-11]
Both First Street
Beach Drive South Shoreline Drive
Bellevue Avenue South West Front Street
Bellevue Avenue Both Church Street
Bellevue Avenue North Fifth Street
Bellevue Court East (2) Bellevue Avenue
Blueberry Drive North Medford Road
Blueberry Drive South Atco Avenue
Brookfield Drive North (2) Condo Avenue
Bruno Lane East Hayesmill Road
§ 266-15 WATERFORD CODE § 266-16
262:878
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Bruno Lane West Atco Avenue
Camila Avenue South West Front Street
Carolyn Lane East Murry Hill Drive
Chestnut Street West Cherry Street
Church Street West Camila Avenue
Clifford Avenue South First Avenue
Colgate Road Both Briarcliff Drive
Colgate Road South Columbia Drive
Columbia Avenue Both Lincoln Avenue
Columbia Avenue Both Raritan Avenue
Columbia Avenue
[Added 7-27-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-6]
West Atsion Road
Conrad Avenue Both Middle Avenue
Curry Avenue East Pestleton Road
Dayton Avenue North Gardens Avenue
Dorothy Avenue South Pederson Boulevard
Edgewood Avenue East Fourth Street
Elm Avenue North West Atlantic Avenue
Elm Avenue South Pacific Avenue
Fourth Street Both Auburn Avenue
Fourth Street South Bartram Avenue
Fox Court South Fox Run Drive
Fox Run Drive North Fox Run Drive
First Street Both Gennessee Avenue
First Street West Auburn Avenue
Gennessee Avenue South East Atlantic Avenue
Gibbons Court North Hayesmill Road
Granger Avenue East Atco Avenue
Grant Avenue South East Atlantic Avenue
Green Meadow Drive South Lincoln Avenue
Harrison Avenue South East Atlantic Avenue
Harvest Lane East Curry Avenue
Harvest Lane West Pilgrim Way
§ 266-16 TRAILERS § 266-16
262:879
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Hillside Drive North Pinewood Lane
Hilltop Drive North Joyce Way
Hunt Boulevard East Tremont Avenue
Hunters Lane North Autumn Crest Drive
Hunters Lane South Curry Avenue
Ilene Lane North Judith Lane
Jersey Avenue West Lake Drive
Joseph Maurone Drive South(2) Lincoln Avenue
Joyce Way West Taunton Road
Judith Lane East Linden Avenue
Lake Drive East Beach Drive
Lambert Avenue South Pacific Avenue
Laurie Court East Waterbridge Drive
Lexington Drive North Plymouth Drive
Louden Lane Both Longwood Lane
Martha Boulevard West Tremont Avenue
Martha Boulevard East Columbia Drive
McAdams Avenue South Hunt Boulevard
Merion Avenue North West Atlantic Avenue
Middle Avenue South Arrowhead Drive
Norris Avenue North West Atlantic Avenue
O'Neill Avenue East Tremont Avenue
Oak Avenue East Pennington Avenue
Oak Knoll Road West Atco Avenue
Oakwood Lane East Oakwood Lane
Pacific Avenue Both Ohio Avenue
Pacific Avenue Both Norris Avenue
Partridge Way West Louden Lane
Pederson Boulevard West Tremont Avenue
Pederson Boulevard West Columbia Drive
Pilgrim Way East Autumn Crest Drive
Pilgrim Way West Hunter Lane
Pinehurst Drive South Columbia Avenue
§ 266-16 WATERFORD CODE § 266-16
262:880
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Pinewood Lane South Hillside Drive
Plymouth Drive West Ashland Avenue
Revere Court North Plymouth Drive
Rising Sun Avenue East Pinehurst Drive
Salem Court West Ashland Avenue
School House Lane Both Carl Hasselhan Drive
School House Lane Both West Front Street
West Second Street Both Almira Avenue
Shady Lane South Acorn Drive
Sherman Avenue South East Atlantic Avenue
Shoreline Drive North Lake Drive
State Street South Gardens Avenue
Station Lane South Arrowhead Drive
Sunset Drive West Deerpond Boulevard
Sunset Drive East Pinehurst Drive
Sylvia Lane South Conrad Avenue
Sylvia Lane North Victoria Lane
Third Street South Gennessee Avenue
Waverly Avenue North Pederson Boulevard
Wedgewood Way East Lorkim Lane
Wexford Way East Lorkim Lane
Windsor Drive West Fourth Street
§ 266-17. Yield intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed
as provided therein.
Yield Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 266-18. Vehicles over designated weight excluded from certain
streets.
Vehicles over the registered gross weight are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described except for the pick up and delivery of
materials on such streets.
§ 266-16 TRAILERS § 266-18
262:881
Name of Street
Weight
(pounds) Location
Briarcliff Drive
Waterford
Over 26,000 From U.S. No. 30 to the
Township line.
Hayes Mill Road Over 26,000 From U.S. No. 30 through
Cooper Folly Road to the
Township line.
Bruno Lane Over 21,000 From Hayesmill Road to Atco
Avenue
§ 266-19. Lane use reservations.
The lane locations described are designated as Lane Use Reservations and
traffic shall move as directed.
Intersection Movement
(Reserved)
§ 266-20. Taxi stands.
The locations described are hereby designated as taxi stands. No vehicle
other than a taxi shall be permitted to occupy said locations during the
times indicated.
Street Location Hours
(Reserved)
§ 266-21. Bus stop.
The locations described are hereby designated as bus stops. No vehicle
other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging passengers, shall be
permitted to occupy said location between the hours indicated.
Street Hours
(Reserved)
§ 266-22. Loading zone.
The location described are hereby designated as loading zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in said location during the times indicated other than
for the loading or unloading of goods and material.
Street Time Sides Location
(Reserved)
§ 266-18 WATERFORD CODE § 266-23
262:882
§ 266-23. Parking.
Regulations not exclusive. The provisions of this Part 2 imposing a time
limit on parking shall not relieve any person of the duty to observe other,
more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping or standing
or parking of vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey
Statute or as hereinafter provided.
§ 266-24. Parking prohibited during state of emergency.
§ 266-25. Temporary parking prohibition for snow plowing and
removal.
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets within the Township of Waterford. The
Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking police officer is authorized
to declare an emergency and to direct the posting of EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs when weather conditions, accidents, road construction,
fire or public celebrations interfere with the free flow of traffic.
Notification that EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs are being or will be
posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has
been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
B. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
A. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is three inches or
more, an emergency shall exist and no vehicle shall be parked on the
streets or highways within the Township of Waterford. The above
parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has ceased
until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent that
parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
B. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation shall be deemed
a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic,
and any police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The
owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the
vehicle.
C. Immediately after a vehicle has been so removed, the Chief of Police, or
any member of the Police Department acting for him, shall give written
notice thereof to the registered owner by personal service or by mailing
said notice by registered mail addressed to said owners at his or her
last known address or addresses.
§ 266-23 TRAILERS § 266-26
262:883
§ 266-26. Stopping or standing prohibited during certain hours on
certain streets.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified on any
day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Jackson Road
[Added
12-30-1996 by
Ord. No.
96-23]
Both All times Entire length
Jackson Road
[Added
2-24-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-2;
amended
4-28-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-5]
Richards Avenue
[Added
2-24-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-2]
See "location"
column
All times For a distance of 410
feet to the south (left
side only) measured
from the intersection of
the center line of
Richards Avenue with
the center line of
Jackson Road
Whispering
Pines Drive
[Added
12-30-1996 by
Ord. No.
96-23]
Both All times Within 300 feet of the
intersection of U.S.
Route 30
§ 266-27. Parking time limited on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit between the
hours listed on any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described.
Name of Street Sides
Time Limit
Hours Location
Atco Avenue South 1 hour From Church Street to
Raritan Avenue
§ 266-26 WATERFORD CODE § 266-28
262:884
§ 266-28. Parking prohibited for street cleaning.
No person shall cause or permit to be parked any motor vehicle upon street
between the specified hours and days described.
Name of Street Sides Days/ Hours Location
(Reserved)
§ 266-29. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.
A. No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any streets or parts
thereof described:
Name of Street Side Location
Albert Court [Added
7-11-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-17]
n/a Entire Court area except in areas
designated for parking
Andrea Court [Added
7-11-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-17]
n/a Entire Court area except in areas
designated for parking
Atco Avenue [Added
10-22-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-22]
West From intersection of Raritan
Avenue for 200 feet north along
Atco Avenue
Burnt Mill Road
[Added 11-21-2011
by Ord. No.
2011-18]
North From the west corner of 1111
Burnt Mill Road easterly to the
end of the paved portion
Carl Hasselhan Drive Both From Atco Avenue to Auburn
Avenue
Carl Hasselhan Drive Both From Atco Avenue to Cooper
Road
Church Street Both From Atco Avenue to Almira
Avenue
Colombia Avenue
[Added 7-27-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-6]
West Entire length
Cooper Road Both From U.S. No. 30 to the Railroad
Crossing
Fernwood Avenue West From Lincoln Avenue to
Wedgewood Drive
Gerald Court [Added
7-11-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-17]
n/a Entire Court area except in areas
designated for parking
§ 266-28 TRAILERS § 266-29
262:885
Name of Street Side Location
Jackson Road [Added
12-30-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-23; amended
6-9-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-6]
Both Entire length, to include the
right-of-way (applies to motor
vehicles, trailers and other
movable objects)
Laurie Court [Added
7-11-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-17]
n/a Entire Court area except in areas
designated for parking
Leon Court [Added
7-11-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-17]
n/a Entire Court area except in areas
designated for parking
Memorial Court
[Added 7-11-2001
by Ord. No.
2001-17]
n/a Entire Court area except in areas
designated for parking
Pamela Court [Added
7-11-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-17]
n/a Entire Court area except in areas
designated for parking
Pliner Court [Added
7-11-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-17]
n/a Entire Court area except in areas
designated for parking
Susan Court [Added
7-11-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-17]
n/a Entire Court area except in areas
designated for parking
Todd Court [Added
7-11-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-17]
n/a Entire Court area except in areas
designated for parking
Tricia Court [Added
7-11-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-17]
n/a Entire Court area except in areas
designated for parking
Waterbridge Drive
[Added 8-11-1999
by Ord. No. 99-11]
Both Entire length
West Atlantic Avenue
[Added 6-13-2012
by Ord. No.
2012-10]
South/
West
Starting 200 feet east of the
intersection of West Atlantic
Avenue and Cooper Road and
continuing easterly 90 feet
Whispering Pines
Drive [Added
12-30-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-23; amended
8-11-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-11]
Both Entire length
§ 266-29 WATERFORD CODE § 266-29
262:886
§ 266-30. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain
streets.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified any day (except
Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
(Reserved)
§ 266-31. Parking of trucks weighing in excess of 19,000 pounds
(9 1/2 tons) prohibited.
No person shall park a truck, tractor, trailer, semi-trailer, omnibus or school
buses having registered gross weights in excess of 19,000 pounds (9 1/2
tons) upon any street within the Township of Waterford without the written
consent from the Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking police officer.
§ 266-32. Routes for trucks over ______ tons.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.1, the streets or parts of streets as described
are hereby designated as routes for vehicles over ______ tons. All trucks
having a total combined registered gross weight of vehicle plus load in
excess of ______ tons shall be excluded from all streets, except from those
streets listed which form a part of the system of truck routes. Vehicles
will be permitted on all streets for the purpose of pick up and delivery of
materials.
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 266-33. Parking of unattended trailers.
No person shall park an unattended or deattached boat trailer, house trailer
or any vehicle registered as such upon any street or parts there of within
the Township of Waterford without the written consent from the Chief of
Police or, in his absence, the ranking police officer.
§ 266-34. No-passing zones. [Added 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 96-23]
No-passing zones are hereby established and shall be maintained upon the
following described streets or parts of streets:
B. Violations and penalties. Notwithstanding the penalties set forth in §
266-8 hereof, for violation of this provision, the penalty shall be a fine of
$25. [Added 4-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-4]
§ 266-29 TRAILERS § 266-34
262:887
Name of Street Location
Fifth Street From 600 feet prior to the intersection of Atco
Avenue to the intersection of Atco Avenue
Fifth Street North from the intersection of Atco Avenue for a
distance of 400 feet
Fifth Street From 400 feet prior to the intersection of Elwood
Avenue to the intersection of Elwood Avenue
Fifth Street North from the intersection of Elwood Avenue for
a distance of 400 feet
Fifth Street From 380 feet prior to the intersection of Jackson
Road to the intersection of Jackson Road
Fifth Street North from the intersection of Maple Avenue for
a distance of 880 feet
Fifth Street North from the intersection of Raritan Avenue
for a distance of 400 feet
Taunton Road,
northbound lane
(County Road 534)
[Added 2-26-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-2]
From the intersection of Jackson Road to the
culvert at the Burlington County line
§ 266-35. Obstructions; traffic flow interference. [Added 8-26-1998
by Ord. No. 98-13]
§ 266-36. Restricted parking zones. [Added 10-27-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-18]
A. No person or persons shall obstruct any street or alley with any
encumbrance whatsoever unless as otherwise expressly permitted
herein, nor shall any person or persons operate a vehicle upon a street
or alley in such a way as to interfere with the efficient flow of traffic.
B. Any person or persons violating this section of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, in the
discretion of the Municipal Court.
A. A restricted parking zone is hereby established in front of the residence
located at 226 Hayes Mill Road, Atco, New Jersey.
(1) The use of said restricted parking zone is reserved for the
occupants at 226 Hayes Mill Road. A permit shall be issued by the
municipality identifying the specific motor vehicle and the location
wherein it is to be parked. Said permit shall be displayed
prominently within the vehicle when it is parked so as to be seen
from the middle of the street. Only the motor vehicle for which the
permit has been issued and which has such permit properly
§ 266-34 WATERFORD CODE § 266-36
262:888
displayed shall be permitted to be parked in the restricted parking
zone indicated on such permit.
(2) The restricted parking zone shall be identified by a sign restricting
the area for handicapped parking only.
B. A restricted parking zone is hereby established in front of the residence
located at 467 Atco Avenue, Atco, New Jersey. [Added 3-9-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-1]
(1) The use of said restricted parking zone is reserved for the
occupants at 467 Atco Avenue, Atco, New Jersey. A permit shall be
issued by the municipality identifying the specific motor vehicle
and the location wherein it is to be parked. Said permit shall be
displayed prominently within the vehicle when it is parked so as to
be seen from the middle of the street. Only the motor vehicle for
which the permit has been issued and which has such permit
properly displayed shall be permitted to be parked in the restricted
parking zone indicated on such permit.
(2) The restricted parking zone shall be identified by a sign restricting
the area for handicapped parking only.
C. A restricted parking zone is hereby established in the rear of the
Municipal Building located at 2131 Auburn Avenue, Atco, New Jersey.
[Added 4-25-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-7]
(1) The use of said restricted parking zone is reserved for the Police
Department vehicles and police personnel. Only vehicles privately
owned by police personnel and Police Department vehicles shall be
permitted to park in this restricted parking zone.
§ 266-36 TRAILERS § 266-36
262:889
Chapter 268
VEHICLES, SALE OF USED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 266. Unlicensed vehicles — See Ch. 270.
§ 268-1. Prohibition.
The sale of used vehicles within Waterford Township is prohibited unless
the individual or entity selling used vehicles is licensed by the State of New
Jersey and the sale is conducted at a properly zoned and licensed location
within Waterford Township.
§ 268-2. Exemptions.
The prohibition set forth in § 268-1 hereof shall not apply to the sale of used
vehicles from private property in Waterford Township, provided the used
vehicle is being sold by the owner or occupant of said property, and further
provided that no more than one used vehicle may be listed for sale or sold
from private property at any given time.
§ 268-3. Sale of used vehicles on public property.
The sale of used vehicles on public property is prohibited.
Chapter 270
VEHICLES, UNLICENSED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 195.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 201.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 239.
§ 270-1. Unlicensed vehicles unlawful.193
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any type of unlicensed
motor-driven vehicle or conveyance, including but not necessarily limited
to snowmobiles, two-wheel motor vehicles known as "mini-bicycles," trail
bicycles, motor scooters, four-wheel motor vehicles, commonly known as
"go-carts" and all-terrain vehicles, commonly known as "ATV's," upon any
public property or township-owned land in the Township of Waterford, New
Jersey.
193. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 266-36 WATERFORD CODE § 270-2
270:890
§ 270-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
PUBLIC PROPERTY — All streets, sidewalks, easements or any other areas
dedicated or commonly used for vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
TOWNSHIP-OWNED LAND — All parks, recreation areas, ball parks, lake
areas, storage facilities, garage areas, Board of Education property and any
and all other township or publicly owned land and premises.
§ 270-3. Use on private property restricted.
The operation of said motor-driven vehicle, as defined in § 270-1 of this
chapter, is additionally prohibited upon private property unless the operator
of said motor-driven vehicle has in his possession an express written
permission to operate said vehicle on said private property by the owner of
said property.
§ 270-4. Unnecessary noise.
It shall be unlawful to operate any unlicensed motor-driven vehicle, as
defined in § 270-1, in a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual
noise so as to disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons.
§ 270-5. Operation in a careless, reckless manner.
It shall be unlawful to operate any unlicensed motor-driven vehicle, as
defined in § 270-1, in a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to
endanger the safety of any person or the property of any person.
§ 270-6. Operation in connection with public work.
It shall not be unlawful for any employee of this township to operate
motor-driven vehicles, as defined in § 270-1, for the purpose of maintaining,
repairing or doing any public work within the scope of his employment.
§ 270-7. Operation by minors.
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or any person having the care,
custody and control of any child under the age of 17 years to permit such
child to operate a motor-driven vehicle in violation of the terms of this
chapter.
§ 270-8. Violations and penalties.194
Any child, operator or parent, as defined in this chapter, who shall violate
any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to a fine not exceeding $1,000, to imprisonment for any term not
194. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 270-2 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 270-8
270:891
exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not to exceed 90 days,
or any combination thereof.
Chapter 278
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Utilities Authority — See Ch. 66.
Land use, development and zoning — See Ch.
176.
Sewers — See Ch. 226.
§ 270-8 WATERFORD CODE § 270-8
278:892
ARTICLE I
Water Emergencies
[Adopted 11-8-1989 by Ord. No. 89-13]
§ 278-1. Declaration.
Upon the finding by the governing body that a water emergency exists
within the Township of Waterford, said governing body may adopt a
resolution declaring such a fact and the reasons therefor. Said resolution
shall identify that portion or portions of the municipality affected by the
water emergency. Furthermore, the resolution shall specify the applicable
water use restrictions, set forth in § 278-2 of this chapter. The resolution
shall become effective upon the adoption thereof and shall continue in effect
for a period of 90 days, unless extended, repealed or otherwise modified as
set forth in § 278-3 of this chapter. A water emergency exists if:
§ 278-2. Restrictions.
In the event that the governing body declares a water emergency in
accordance with § 278-1 of this chapter, all citizens shall be urged to
observe voluntary indoor conservation measures and must comply with any
of the following water use restrictions which were adopted in accordance
with the resolution set forth in § 278-1 hereof:
A. The public utility providing water service to all or a portion of the
municipality has adopted water use restrictions, has notified the
Township of Waterford, the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities195 and
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy, as
well as any other state, county or local agency entitled to notice of such
restrictions and such restrictions are not overruled or declared invalid
by any state, county or local agency having the jurisdiction and power
to do so. [Amended 12-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-24]
B. The governing body is otherwise satisfied that a water emergency
exists in the municipality.
A. The complete ban and prohibition of outside water usage, including the
watering of lawns and plants, the filling of pools and the washing of
cars.
B. Outside water usage on alternate days by persons, firms,
establishments or businesses with even-numbered addresses on evennumbered
days and those having odd-numbered addresses on oddnumbered
days with outside water usage being completely banned and
prohibited on the 31st day of any month during the water emergency.
C. Any other water use restriction specified by the governing body in the
resolution adopted pursuant to § 278-1 of this chapter, said water use
195. Editor's Note: See Ch. 66, Municipal Utilities Authority.
§ 278-1 WATER § 278-2
278:893
§ 278-3. Duration.
The resolution of the governing body as required by § 278-1 of this chapter
shall provide a period of time during which the water use restrictions shall
be applicable, said restrictions being no longer than reasonably necessary
to abate the water emergency. At the expiration of the time period specified
in the resolution, the water use restrictions shall lapse. In the event that
the governing body is satisfied that the water emergency has been abated
prior to the expiration of the time set forth in the resolution, the governing
body may adopt a resolution declaring that the water emergency has ended.
On the other hand, if, at the expiration of the time period specified in the
resolution, the governing body is satisfied that the emergency continues to
exist, it may adopt a resolution, in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter, continuing the water use restrictions.
§ 278-4. Enforcement.
The water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be
enforced by any local authorized official. The resolution adopting the water
emergency, in accordance with § 278-1 of this chapter, shall specify the
enforcement officials which may be the members of the Township Police
Department or other authorized township employees. Whenever a local
authorized official shall find a violation of the water use restrictions, said
official shall give the violator a written warning for a first offense and
explain to the violator the penalty section in this chapter for any additional
offenses. The local authorized official shall keep such records as may be
reasonable and necessary for the purpose of determining those who have
been issued a warning for first offense. The local authorized officials are
hereby empowered to write summonses for the violation of the water use
restrictions imposed pursuant to this chapter.
§ 278-5. Violations and offenses. [Amended 12-11-1996 by Ord. No.
96-24]
After the warning for a first offense as set forth in § 278-4 of this chapter,
any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before the
Municipal Court of the Township, be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000,
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days or a period
of community service not to exceed 90 days, or any combination thereof,
in the discretion of the Municipal Judge before whom such defendant shall
be convicted. A separate offense may be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
restrictions being reasonable under the circumstances, considering the
nature and extent of the water emergency.
§ 278-2 WATERFORD CODE § 278-5
278:894
ARTICLE II
Sealing of Private Water Wells
[Adopted 10-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-19196]
§ 278-6. Sealing required; exemption.
§ 278-7. Notice to be given.
Notice of the requirement to seal the water well shall be given by the
Waterford Township Municipal Utilities Authority. The notice shall be served
upon the owners of said properties personally or by leaving the same at
their usual place of abode with a member of the family over the age of 18
years or, if such mode of service cannot be effected, then by mailing a copy
of said notice to said owner or owners by certified mail addressed to the
owner at said property or properties or at the property owner's usual place
of abode.
§ 278-8. Sealing service to be provided; written authorization.
The Waterford Township Municipal Utilities Authority will provide the
service of sealing the private water well at its cost conditioned on receiving
written authorization from the property owner to enter onto the property to
perform this service.
A. The owner of every existing house, building or structure within the
Groundwater Impact Area with an identified private water well as set
forth on Exhibit A197 attached hereto shall be required to seal his or her
privately owned water well upon the availability of public water service
to said property and the connecting of said property into the public
water system. The sealing of the private water wells shall occur within
30 days of the date when the property connects into the public water
system.
B. An exemption shall be granted to the sealing of private water wells on
residential properties in such a case as the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection determines to convert said residential well to
a groundwater monitoring well for use by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection. No other exemption shall be granted to a
residential property for the sealing of its private water well. A
commercial property may make application to the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection for an exemption from the
well sealing requirement, which application shall be considered by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection on a case by case
basis. [Added 7-22-1998 by Ord. No. 98-7]
196. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed Ord. No. 97-10, adopted 6-25-1997, which
required the sealing of private water wells.
197. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the township offices.
§ 278-6 WATER § 278-9
278:895
§ 278-9. Refusal to seal well; enforcement.
If the owner of any house, building or structure referred to in § 278-6 of this
article and as identified on Exhibit A shall fail to seal the property's private
water well as required by this article and refuse to permit the Waterford
Township Municipal Utilities Authority entry onto the property to seal said
well, then the township may proceed to enforce this article by obtaining an
order from the Waterford Township Municipal Court permitting entry onto
the property by the township, the Municipal Utilities Authority or its agents,
servants or employees to cause the well to be sealed.
§ 278-9 WATERFORD CODE § 278-9
278:896
ARTICLE III
Connection to Public Water System
[Adopted 11-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-24198]
§ 278-10. Connection required.
The owner of every existing house, building or structure identified on
Exhibit A199 attached hereto shall, within 90 days after the date on which
the service of such water is made available to such house, building or
structure, connect the same to the public water system pursuant to the
rules and regulations applying thereto, which rules and regulations shall be
on file in the office of the Waterford Township Municipal Utilities Authority,
and thereafter utilize only the water supply provided by said public water
system.
§ 278-11. Notice to be given.
Notice of the availability of water service shall be given by the Waterford
Township Municipal Utilities Authority. The notice shall be served upon the
owners of said properties personally or by leaving the same at their usual
place of abode with a member of the family over the age of 18 years or,
if such mode of service cannot be effected, then by mailing a copy of said
notice to said owner or owners by certified mail addressed to said owner or
owners at said property or properties or at the property owner's usual place
of abode.
§ 278-12. Connection to be provided; written authorization.
The Waterford Township Municipal Utilities Authority will provide at its cost
the service of installing the connection to the public water system of any
house, building or structure identified on Exhibit A conditioned on receiving
written authorization from the property owner to enter onto the property to
perform this service.
§ 278-13. Refusal to connect; enforcement.
If the owner of any house, building or structure referred to in § 278-10 of
this article and as identified on Exhibit A shall fail to make the installation
for connection required by this article within the time herein required and
refuse to permit the Waterford Township Municipal Utilities Authority entry
onto the property to install the connection to the public water system, then
the Township may proceed to enforce this article by obtaining an order from
the Waterford Township Municipal Court permitting entry onto the property
by the township, the Municipal Utilities Authority or its agents, servants or
employees to cause the installation of the connection to the public water
system.
198. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed Ord. No. 97-11, adopted 6-25-1997, which
required connection to the public water system.
199. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the township offices.
§ 278-10 WATER § 278-13
278:897

ARTICLE IV
Public Noncommunity and Nonpublic Water Systems
[Adopted 12-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-20]
§ 278-14. Adoption of standards.
The New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act is hereby adopted as regulated
under N.J.A.C. 7:10-12.1 to 43, including any amendments thereto, by
reference herein.
§ 278-15. Licensing; enforcement agency.
The Camden County Department of Health and Human Services is hereby
recognized and designated as the agency to receive applications, issue
licenses or permits, conduct inspections and provide enforcement of the
regulations in regard to the standards adopted in this article.
§ 278-16. Permit required.
No person shall locate, construct or alter any water supply until a permit for
the location, construction or alteration of said water supply shall have been
issued.
§ 278-17. Fees and charges.
The fees and charges for services in this article shall be fixed, collected
by and payable to the Camden County Department of Health and Human
Services.
§ 278-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
or any order promulgated under this article shall, upon conviction thereof,
pay a penalty of not more than $1,000, imprisonment in the county jail for a
term not exceeding 90 days, or a period of community service not to exceed
90 days, or any combination thereof, in the discretion of the Municipal
Judge whom such defendant shall be convicted. A separate offense may be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
§ 278-14 WATER § 278-18
278:899
Chapter 284
YARD SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 208.
§ 284-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to control yard sales, garages sales, lawn
sales, rummage sales, attic sales, flea market sales or other casual sales of
tangible personal property. The chapter requires the obtaining of a permit
to conduct such sales. It also limits the number of permits which may
be issued to any one person in a twelve-month period. Restrictions are
established as to hours of operation and advertising signs. Certain persons
and sales are exempted from the requirements of this chapter as set forth
in § 284-8.
§ 284-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GOODS — Includes used personal property and merchandise capable of
being the object of a sale regulated hereunder. This definition also includes
objects of personal property which have been previously owned by any
person for private use as opposed to commercial or retail use.
PERSON — Includes individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations and
corporations.
YARD SALE — Includes all sales entitled "yard sale," "garage sale," "lawn
sale," "attic sale," "rummage sale," "flea market sale," or any similar casual
sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means
whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of said sale.
§ 284-3. Permit required; limit on number.
§ 284-4. Issuance and display of permit.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a yard sale in the
Township of Waterford without first filing with the Township Clerk the
information hereinafter specified and obtaining from the Clerk a permit
to do so, to be known as a "yard sale permit."
B. No permit shall be issued to any person more than five times in any
twelve-month period.
C. No permit shall be issued for any location within the Township of
Waterford more than five times in any twelve-month period.
§ 278-18 WATERFORD CODE § 284-4
278:900
§ 284-5. Application information.
An application for a permit to conduct a yard sale shall be filed with the
Township Clerk on a form to be furnished by the Township, pursuant to this
chapter. The information on the forms filed with the Township Clerk shall
include the following:
§ 284-6. Hours of sale.
All yard sales shall be conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. only.
§ 284-7. Signs.
No signs advertising a yard sale shall be permitted, except that a sign not
larger than three feet by four feet may be placed on the property where the
sale is to be conducted. Such sign shall be posted not earlier than seven
days prior to the date of the sale, and shall be removed not later than 48
hours after completion of the sale. No sign shall be placed on any public
right-of-way or electrical poles or standards.
A. Such permit shall be issued to any one person only five times in a
twelve-month period. No such permit shall be issued for more than two
consecutive calendar days; except on holidays a permit can be issued
for up to three days. Charitable, religious and civic organizations may
be allowed more than five permits within a twelve-month period with
the approval of the Township Committee.
B. Each permit issued under this chapter must be prominently displayed
on the premises upon which the yard sale is conducted throughout the
entire period of the permitted sale.
A. Name of the person, firm, group, corporation, association or
organization conducting such sale.
B. Name of the owner of the property on which said sale is to be conducted
and the consent of owner if the applicant is other than the owner.
C. Location at which the sale is to be conducted.
D. Date of the sale and rain date if applicable.
E. Date, location and nature of any past sale.
F. Application of such permit shall be made not less than two weeks prior
to the date of the sale.
G. Sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the
information therein given is full, true and known to him to be so.
§ 284-4 WATER § 284-8
278:901
§ 284-8. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
§ 284-9. Enforcement; responsibility of permitee.
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Any sale conducted by any merchant or other business establishment in
a place of business wherein such sale would be permitted by the zoning
regulations of the Township of Waterford or under the protection of the
nonconforming use section thereof or any sale conducted by a
manufacturer, dealer or vendor which sale would be conducted from
properly zoned premises and would not otherwise be prohibited in the
Township ordinances.
D. Any bona fide, charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural or other
organization or association not for profit upon demonstrating to the
Township Committee its right to such exemption. The production of a
certified copy of a certificate of incorporation, pursuant to Title 15 of
the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, shall be presumptive evidence of
the right of such organization to this exemption. However, the terms
and conditions controlling signs as set forth in § 284-7 shall be
applicable to such organizations or associations.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department or Code
Enforcement of the Township of Waterford. It shall be the duty of the
Chief of Police, or his designee, to investigate any violation of this
chapter.
B. The person to whom such permit is issued and the owner or tenant of
the premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly
and severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and
decorum on the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No
such person shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on said
premises nor permit vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any
roads or streets or interfere with the orderly passage of pedestrian
traffic on sidewalks in the area of such premises. All such persons shall
obey the reasonable orders of any member of the Police Department or
Fire Department of the Township of Waterford in order to maintain the
public health, safety and welfare. All permitted premises shall be
subject to such reasonable rules as may be made from time to time, and
shall be subject to inspection by Code Enforcement, Police Department,
Fire Department or any of their agents or duly authorized
representative of the Township of Waterford.
§ 284-8 WATERFORD CODE § 284-10
278:902
§ 284-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000,
or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine
and/or imprisonment, to be determined in the discretion of the Judge.
Part III, Board of Health
Chapter 299
(RESERVED)
Chapter 302
CHARITABLE CLOTHING BINS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 180.
Solid waste — See Ch. 235.
Yard sales — See Ch. 284.
§ 302-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to implement the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.60 et seq. to establish guidelines for the location and use of
charitable clothing bins throughout the Township of Waterford.
§ 302-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLOTHING DONATION BIN — Any enclosed receptacle or container made
of metal, steel or any other material, or similar pattern or design, which
is intended for the donation and/or temporary storage of clothing or other
similar type materials.
SOLICITATION/SOLICIT — The request, directly or indirectly, for money,
credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of any kind or value.
Solicitation shall include, but not be limited to, the use or employment of
canisters, cards, receptacles or other similar devices for the collection of
money or other thing of value. The solicitation shall take place whether or
not the person making the solicitation receives any contribution.
§ 302-3. Permit required; annual renewal.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person
shall place, use or employ a donation clothing bin within the Township of
§ 284-10 WATER § 302-3
278:903
Waterford, for solicitation purposes, without obtaining a permit from the
Municipal Clerk. Permits shall be renewable on an annual basis during the
month of January.
§ 302-4. Permit fee.200
The annual permit fee is per bin and will be used to offset the cost involved
in enforcing this chapter.
§ 302-5. Application requirements.
The application for obtaining a permit shall include:
§ 302-6. Renewal application requirements.
In addition to the above application requirements, renewal applications
must include:
A. The locations where the bin will be situated as precisely as possible.
B. The manner in which the applicant anticipates any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin will be used, sold or disbursed and the
method by which the proceeds of collected donations will be allocated
or spent.
C. The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of any person or
entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin and where such person can be reached during
normal business hours. For the purposes of this subsection, an
answering machine or service unrelated to the person does not
constitute a bona fide office.
D. Written consent from the property owner to place the bin on his/her
property.
A. A statement of the manner in which the applicant used, sold or
disbursed any clothing or other donation collected via the bin, the
method by which the proceeds of collected donations have been
allocated or spent, and any changes the applicant anticipates it may
make in these processes during the period covered by the renewal.
B. The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of any entity
which shared or profited from any clothing or other donations collected
via the bin, and any of the entities which may do so during the period
covered by the renewal.
C. If the location of the bin is to be moved, a precise description of the new
location where the bin is to be situated as precisely as possible, and
written consent from the property owner of the new location.
200. Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Fees.
§ 302-3 WATERFORD CODE § 302-7
278:904
§ 302-7. Placement of bins.
No application for a permit to place, use, or employ a donation clothing
bin shall be granted if it is determined that the placement of the bin could
constitute a safety hazard. Such hazards shall include, but not be limited
to, the placement of a donation clothing bin within 100 yards of any place
which stores large amounts of, or sells, fuel or other flammable liquids
or gases; or the placement of a bin where it interferes with vehicular or
pedestrian circulation. Any person placing, using or employing a donation
bin shall maintain the bin and the area surrounding the bin so that there is
no accumulation of clothing or other donations outside the bin. No donation
clothing bin shall be permitted to be placed or operated on residential,
vacant and/or otherwise undeveloped property.
§ 302-8. Display of permit information.
The following information shall be clearly and conspicuously displayed on
the exterior of the donation clothing bin:
§ 302-9. Complaints; investigations; violations.
A. The permit number and its date of expiration.
B. The name and address of the registered person who owns the bin, and
of any other entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin.
C. The telephone number of the owner's bona fide office and, if applicable,
the telephone number of the bona fide office of any other entity which
may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected via
the bin. For purposes of this subsection, an answering machine or
service unrelated to the person does not constitute a bona fide office.
D. In cases where any entity other than the person who owns the bin may
share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected via the
bin, a notice, written in a clear and easily understandable manner,
indicating that the clothing or other donations collected via the bin,
their proceeds, or both, may be shared or given entirely to an entity
other than the person who owns the bin, and identifying all such
entities which may share or profit from such donations.
E. A statement consistent with the information provided to the Township
in the most recent permit or renewal application, indicating the manner
in which the owner anticipates any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin will be used, sold, or disbursed, and the method by
which the proceeds of collected donations will be allocated or spent.
A. The Township Construction Code Official, or authorized designee, shall
be the person to receive and investigate, within 30 days, any complaints
from the public about the bin. Whenever it appears to the Construction
Code Official, or authorized designee, that a person has engaged in or is
engaging in any act or practice in violation of this chapter, the person
§ 302-7 WATER § 302-9
278:905
§ 302-10. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any other penalty or remedies authorized by the laws of the
State of New Jersey, any person who violates any provision of this chapter
or the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq. which results in the seizure
of the charitable donation bin shall be:
Chapter 306
who placed the bin shall be issued a warning, stating that if the
violation is not rectified within 45 days, the bin will be seized or
removed at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin will be sold at public
auction or otherwise disposed of. In addition to any other means used
to notify the person who placed the bin, such warning shall be affixed
to the exterior of the bin itself.
B. In the event that the person who placed the donation clothing bin does
not rectify the violation or request a hearing within 45 days of the
posting of the warning, the Township may take the following action:
(1) The bin may be seized or removed at the expense of the person who
placed the bin, and the Township shall be permitted to sell at public
auction or otherwise dispose of the bin or any of its contents
collected via the bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the donations
collected via the bin shall be paid to the Chief Financial Officer of
the Township.
(2) The permit issued to the person who placed the bin in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter shall be revoked.
A. Subject to a penalty of up to $20,000 for each violation. The Township
may bring this action in the Township Municipal Court or the Superior
Court of New Jersey as a summary proceeding under the Penalty
Enforcement Law of 1999, P.L. 1999, c.274 (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.),
and any penalty monies collected shall be paid to the Township Chief
Financial Officer.
B. Deemed ineligible to place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin for
solicitation purposes pursuant to this chapter and P.L. 2007, c.209
(N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61). A person disqualified from placing, using, or
employing a donation clothing bin by violating the provisions of this
chapter or P.L. 2007, c.209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.) may apply to the
Township Committee to have that person's eligibility restored. The
Township Committee may restore the eligibility of a person who:
(1) Acts within the public interest; and
(2) Demonstrates that he/she made a good faith effort to comply with
the provisions of this chapter, P.L. 2007, and all other applicable
laws and regulations, or had no fraudulent intentions.
§ 302-9 WATERFORD CODE § 302-10
306:906
NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 32.
Littering — See Ch. 180.
Sewers — See Ch. 226.
Solid waste — See Ch. 235.
§ 302-10 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 302-10
306:907

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Standards
[Adopted 12-11-1974 as Ch. 126 of the 1974 Code]
§ 306-1. Acceptance of standards.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance, prohibiting certain noises or sounds,
prohibiting lease or rental of certain buildings, prohibiting spitting in or
upon public buildings, conveyances or sidewalks, authorizing the inspection
of premises by an enforcing official, providing for the removal or abatement
of certain nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of
Health201 in removing or abating such nuisances and prescribing penalties
for violations is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws of
1950.202 A copy of said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof
without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 306-2. Title.
Said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)," except, however, those portions of said code as have been stricken
therefrom or to which any addition, supplement or revision has been made
as is indicated or set forth on the printed code annexed hereto and made a
part hereof, as aforesaid.
§ 306-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of said Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)
have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of the Local Board of
Health upon the introduction of this Article and will remain on file there for
the use and examination of the public.
§ 306-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
Article or code established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than $2 nor more
than $500 for each offense.
201. Editor's Note: See Ch. 32, Health, Board of.
202. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3-69 to 26:3-69.6.
§ 306-1 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 306-4
306:909

ARTICLE II
Refuse
[Adopted 12-11-1974 as Ch. 130 of the 1974 Code]
§ 306-5. Unlawful maintenance of deposits.
No person, persons or corporation shall deposit, maintain or keep refuse
of any kind, including human excrement or material containing human
excrement, on the surface of the ground or in any stream or other body
of water within the limits of the Township of Waterford, which said refuse
of any kind or human excrement or material containing human excrement
shall give off offensive odors to the surrounding neighborhood creating a
nuisance dangerous to the public health.
§ 306-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, persons or corporation who shall violate the provisions of
§ 306-5 of this Article shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty
of not less than $2 nor more than $500 for each offense, at the discretion of
the court.
§ 306-5 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 306-6
306:911
Chapter 313
SWINE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 32.
Land development and zoning — See Ch. 176.
Animals — See Ch. 94.
§ 313-1. Acceptance of standards.
A code regulating premises on which swine are maintained; establishing
minimum standards governing the location and maintenance of such
premises; authorizing inspections of such premises; declaring and defining
certain acts or conditions on such premises as nuisances; and declaring and
fixing penalties for violations thereof is hereby adopted pursuant to Chapter
188, P.L. 1950 (N.J.S.A. 26:3-69 to 26:3-69.6). A copy of said code is annexed
hereto and made a part hereof without inclusion of the test thereof herein.
§ 313-2. Title.
Said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Maintenance of Swine Code of New Jersey
(1957)."
§ 313-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of said Maintenance of Swine Code of New Jersey (1957) have
been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of the Board of Health upon
the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file in said office for the
use and examination of the public.
§ 313-4. Permit required.
No person shall maintain swine, as defined in said code, on premises within
the boundaries of this municipality until a valid permit therefor shall have
been issued by the Board of Health. Those persons now maintaining swine
under a prior ordinance shall not be obliged to obtain a new permit until the
expiration of the permit issued under said prior ordinance.
§ 313-5. Denial or suspension of permits.
Permits required by this chapter or code may be denied or suspended by the
Board of Health for failure to comply with this chapter or code. The Board of
Health shall afford the person whose permit to maintain swine on premises
has been denied or suspended an opportunity to be heard in public hearing
and, following this, to be informed of the Board's decision within two weeks
thereafter.
§ 306-6 WATERFORD CODE § 313-6
313:912
§ 313-6. Fees.
The fee for a permit to maintain swine on premises shall be $10 annually.
§ 313-7. Expiration date of permit.
Permits issued for the maintenance of swine on premises shall expire
annually on April 1 of each year, and application for renewal thereof shall
be submitted together with the required fee prior to April 1 of each year.
§ 313-8. Number of swine limited.
Under no circumstances shall any person maintain more than four swine.
Additionally, this section shall be interpreted to mean that no more than four
swine may be maintained upon any property where a residence is situate.
§ 313-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or code established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than $2 nor more
than $500 for each violation.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the Township of
Waterford adopted since the publication of the Code, indicating its inclusion
in the Code or the reason for its exclusion. [Enabling legislation which is
not general and permanent in nature is considered to be non-Code material
(NCM).] Information regarding legislation which is not included in the Code
nor on this list is available from the office of the Township Clerk. The last
legislation reviewed for the original publication of the Code was Ord. No.
96-17, adopted 6-26-1996. A complete listing, including disposition, of all
legislation reviewed in conjunction with the original publication of the Code
is on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
96-18 8-14-1996 Solid waste amendment Ch. 235
96-19 8-14-1996 Parks, playgrounds and
recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 201
96-20 9-11-1996 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ 313-6 SWINE § DL-1
313:913
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
96-21 10-9-1996 Adult uses Repealed by Ord.
No. 97-14
96-22 11-26-1996 Street vacation NCM
96-23 12-30-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 266
96-24 12-11-1996 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
96-25 12-11-1996 Fee schedule Ch. 124, Art II
96-26 12-30-1996 Bond ordinance NCM
96-27 12-30-1996 Salaries NCM
96-28 12-30-1996 Administrator Ch. 7
96-29 12-30-1996 Department of Public
Works amendment
Ch. 54
97-1 2-26-1997 Housing standards;
property maintenance:
standards and
administration
amendment
Ch. 162, Ch. 220,
Art. I
97-2 2-26-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 266
97-3 CAP ordinance Not adopted
97-4 4-23-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 266
97-5 4-23-1997 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 50
97-6 5-14-1997 Hazardous substances Ch. 159
97-7 5-28-1997 Solid Waste Advisory
Commission
Ch. 63
97-8 5-28-1997 Parks and recreation
areas amendment
Ch. 201
97-9 6-11-1997 Taxicabs repealer Ch. 251 (footnote
only)
97-10 6-25-1997 Sealing of private water
wells
Repealed by Ord.
No. 97-19
97-11 6-25-1997 Connection to public
water system
Repealed by Ord.
No. 97-24
97-12 6-25-1997 Bond NCM
97-13 6-25-1997 Defense and
indemnification
Ch. 15
§ DL-1 WATERFORD CODE § DL-1
313:914
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
97-14 8-13-1997 Land use, development
and zoning
Ch. 176
97-15 8-27-1997 Purchasing procedures,
payment and payroll
Ch. 59
97-16 9-10-1997 Alarm systems Ch. 80
97-17 9-24-1997 Street name change NCM
97-18 Tabled
97-19 10-8-1997 Sealing of private water
wells
Ch. 278, Art. II
97-20 Defeated
97-21 10-22-1997 Land use, development
and zoning amendment
Ch. 176
97-22 10-22-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 266, Art. II
97-23 10-22-1997 Bond NCM
97-24 11-24-1997 Connection to public
water system
Ch. 278, Art. III
98-1 2-25-1998 Street vacation NCM
98-2 3-11-1998 CAP ordinance NCM
98-3 5-13-1998 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 124, Art. II
98-4 5-13-1998 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 124, Art. II
98-5 5-13-1998 Department of Planning
and Zoning
Ch. 47
98-6 5-13-1998 Code Enforcement Officer Ch. 40, Art. I
98-7 7-22-1998 Sealing of private water
wells amendment
Ch. 278, Art. II
98-8 5-13-1998 Salaries NCM
98-9 6-24-1998 Salaries amendment NCM
98-10 6-24-1998 Bond NCM
98-11 6-24-1998 Bond NCM
98-12 Towing amendment Rescinded
8-12-1998 at
introduction
98-13 8-26-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 2
98-14 9-9-1998 Bond amendment NCM
§ DL-1 SWINE § DL-1
313:915
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
98-15 10-14-1998 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 124, Art. II
98-16 10-14-1998 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 26
98-17 11-12-1998 Property maintenance:
standards and
administration
amendment
Ch. 220, Art. I
98-18 12-9-1998 Tattooing and body
piercing
Ch. 243
98-19 11-12-1998 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 124, Art. II
98-20 12-9-1998 Public noncommunity and
nonpublic water systems
Ch. 278, Art. IV
98-21 12-9-1998 Bond amendment NCM
98-22 12-23-1998 Salaries NCM
99-1 2-24-1999 Sale of property NCM
99-2 2-24-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 2
99-3 2-10-1999 Emergency appropriation NCM
99-4 4-14-1999 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 124, Art. II
99-5 4-28-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 2
99-6 6-9-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 2
99-7 6-23-1999 Bond NCM
99-8 Land use, development
and zoning
Rescinded
8-11-1999
99-9 Zoning Map amendment Rescinded
8-11-1999
99-10 7-28-1999 Bond amendment NCM
99-11 8-11-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 2
99-12 9-8-1999 Land use, development
and zoning amendment
Ch. 176
99-13 9-8-1999 Zoning Map amendment NCM
99-14 9-8-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 2
99-15 9-22-1999 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 WATERFORD CODE § DL-1
313:916
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
99-16 12-8-1999 Waiver of fees for
handicapped accessibility
construction
Ch. 124, Art. III
99-17 12-22-1999 Salaries NCM
2000-1 3-8-2000 Street vacation NCM
2000-2 3-8-2000 Street name change
(Recycle Court to Pearl
Court)
NCM
2000-3 3-22-2000 Charitable solicitations in
street rights-of-way
Ch. 208, Art. II
2000-4 4-12-2000 Street and sidewalks:
street openings and
excavations amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2015-19
2000-5 4-26-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 266, Part II
2000-6 5-10-2000 Bond NCM
2000-7 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Not adopted
2000-8 6-28-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 266, Part II
2000-9 6-13-2000 Bond NCM
2000-10 7-12-2000 Soliciting political
contributions on
municipal property
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2017-4
2000-11 8-9-2000 Redevelopment plan NCM
2000-12 12-13-2000 Tax abatement program
for commercial and
industrial properties
Ch. 245, Art. II
2000-13 11-8-2000 Eminent domain NCM
2000-14 11-20-2000 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 103
2000-15 12-13-2000 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 50
2001-1 2-28-2001 Salaries NCM
2001-2 3-38-2001 Land use, development
and zoning amendment
Ch. 176
2001-3 3-28-2001 Zoning Map Repealed by Ord.
No. 2002-9
§ DL-1 SWINE § DL-1
313:917
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2001-4 4-11-2001 Property maintenance:
standards and
administration
amendment
Ch. 220, Art. I
2001-5 4-11-2001 Fences amendment Ch. 131
2001-6 4-11-2001 Fees amendment Ch. 124
2001-7 4-25-2001 Salaries NCM
2001-8 5-9-2001 Bond NCM
2001-9 5-9-2001 Bond NCM
2001-10 5-23-2001 Business registration
permits
Ch. 188
2001-11 5-3-2001 Land use, development
and zoning
Ch. 176
2001-12 5-23-2001 Utility easements NCM
2001-13 6-13-2001 Fences amendment Ch. 131
2001-14 6-3-2001 Property acquisition NCM
2001-15 6-27-2001 Possession and
consumption of alcohol by
minors on private
property
Ch. 82, Art. III
2001-16 7-19-2001 Mandatory connection to
public water system
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2002-1
2001-17 7-11-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 266
2001-18 7-11-2001 Fees amendment Ch. 124
2001-19 9-12-2001 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 50
2001-20 7-11-2001 Property acquisition NCM
2001-21 9-12-2001 Bond amendment NCM
2001-22 9-12-2001 Property acquisition NCM
2001-23 9-12-2001 Property acquisition NCM
2001-24 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Tabled
2001-25 11-28-2001 Comptroller Ch. 40, Art. III
2001-26 11-28-2001 Department of Planning
and Zoning amendment
Ch. 47
2001-27 12-26-2001 Personnel amendment Ch. 44
§ DL-1 WATERFORD CODE § DL-1
313:918
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2001-28 Salaries Not adopted
2001-29 12-26-2001 Volunteer firefighters and
EMS squad stipend
Ch. 69, Art. I
2001-30 12-26-2001 Redevelopment plan NCM
2001-31 12-26-2001 Salaries NCM
2002-1 2-13-2002 Mandatory connection to
public water system
repealed
Repealer only
2002-2 Land use amendment Not introduced
2002-3 Zoning Map amendment Not introduced
2002-4 2-27-2002 Drug-free school zones
amendment
Ch. 118
2002-5 2-27-2003 Tattooing and body
piercing amendment
Ch. 243
2002-6 2-27-2002 Solid waste amendment Ch. 235
2002-7 3-27-2002 Land use, development
and zoning amendment
Ch. 176
2002-8 Dissolve WTMUA Not adopted
2002-9 5-22-2002 Zoning Map NCM
2002-10 7-10-2002 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 124, Art. II
2002-11 7-10-2002 Land use, development
and zoning amendment
Ch. 176
2002-12 9-11-2002 Salaries NCM
2002-13 9-11-2002 Street vacation NCM
2002-14 9-11-2002 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 124, Art. II
2002-15 Bond Not adopted
2002-16 Bond amendment Not adopted
2002-17 Bond Not introduced
2002-18 11-25-2002 Bond NCM
2002-19 11-25-2002 Street vacation NCM
2002-20 Salaries Not adopted
2002-21 Tenure for
Superintendent of Public
Works
Not adopted
2003-1 1-22-2003 Land use, development
and zoning amendment
Ch. 176
§ DL-1 SWINE § DL-1
313:919
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2003-2 Fire safety act
enforcement
Not introduced
2003-3 3-12-2002 Municipal Engineer Ch. 40, Art. IV
2003-4 3-12-2003 Municipal Attorney Ch. 40, Art. V
2003-5 3-12-2003 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 50
2003-6 3-12-2002 Township Coordinator Ch. 40, Art. VI
2003-7 4-9-2003 Salaries NCM
2003-8 4-9-2003 Employee Policy Manual Ch. 44, Art. III
2003-9 5-14-2003 Salaries amendment NCM
2003-10 Municipal Utilities
Authority dissolved
Tabled
2003-11 5-14-2003 Salaries amendment NCM
2003-12 6-25-2003 Salaries amendment NCM
2003-13 8-13-2003 Comptroller repealer Ch. 40, Art. III,
Editor's Note only
2003-14 10-8-2003 Salaries amendment NCM
2003-15 11-12-2003 Fees amendment Ch. 124
2003-16 11-123-2003 Bond NCM
2003-17 11-12-2003 Municipal Utilities
Authority dissolved
Ch. 66, reference
only
2003-18 12-17-2003
Ch. 72
Water/Sewer Utility Ch. 72
2003-19 12-17-2003 Salaries amendment NCM
2003-20 12-17-2003 Assistant to the Assessor Ch. 40, Art. VII
2004-1 1-28-2004 Police Department
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2004-29
2004-2 2-25-2004 Economic Development
Commission repealed
Ch. 16, Editor's note
only
2004-3 2-25-2004 Together-Endeavor Event
for Waterford Pride
NCM
2004-4 3-10-2004 Bond NCM
2004-5 3-24-2004 Bond NCM
2004-6 4-28-2004 Land use, development
and zoning amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 WATERFORD CODE § DL-1
313:920
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2004-7 6-9-2004 Defense and
indemnification
amendment
Ch. 15
2004-8 6-23-2004 Bond NCM
2004-9 6-23-2004 Street vacation NCM
2004-10 Not adopted
2004-11 7-14-2004 Police Department
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2004-29
2004-12 7-14-2004 Sewer and water service
regulations and rates
Ch. 72, Art. II
2004-13 7-14-2004 Economic Development
Committee
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2015-7
2004-14 7-14-2004 Police Department
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2004-29
2004-15 9-22-2004 Police Department
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2004-29
2004-16 9-22-2004 Police Department
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2004-29
2004-17 9-22-2004 Property acquisition NCM
2004-18 10-27-2004 Vehicles and traffic
(restricted parking for
handicapped person)
Ch. 266, Art. II
2004-19 10-27-2004 Bond NCM
2004-20 10-27-2004 Bond NCM
2004-21 11-22-2004 Salaries amendment NCM
2004-22 11-22-2004 Bond NCM
2004-23 11-22-2004 Bond NCM
2004-24 11-22-2004 Bond NCM
2004-25 12-15-2004 Fees amendment Ch. 124
2004-26 12-15-2004 Sewer connections NCM
2004-27 12-15-2004 Salaries amendment NCM
2004-28 1-26-2005 Parks, playgrounds and
recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 201
2004-29 1-26-2005 Police Department Ch. 50
§ DL-1 SWINE § DL-1
313:921
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2005-1 3-9-2005 Vehicles and traffic:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 2
2005-2 3-23-2005 Fee schedule amendment;
Ch. 124, Art. II; grading
and drainage of
residential lots
Ch. 155, Art. I
2005-3 4-13-2005 Pet waste Ch. 94, Art. IV
2005-4 4-13-2005 Containerized yard waste Ch. 235, Art. II
2005-5 4-13-2005 Illicit storm sewer
connections
Ch. 237, Art. I
2005-6 4-13-2005 Yard waste collection Ch. 235, Art. III
2005-7 4-13-2005 Wildlife feeding Ch. 94, Art. V
2005-8 4-13-2005 Prohibited storm sewer
discharges
Ch. 237, Art. II
2005-9 4-13-2005 Exceed budget cap NCM
2005-10 4-13-2005 Salaries NCM
2005-11 6-8-2005 Salaries amendment NCM
2005-12 7-13-2005 Bond NCM
2005-13 8-10-2005 Purchasing and payment
of bills amendment
Ch. 59
2005-14 8-24-2005 Form of government
ballot question
NCM
2005-15 9-28-2005 Salaries amendment NCM
2005-16 9-28-2005 Bond NCM
2005-17 9-28-2005 Bond NCM
2005-18 9-28-2005 Purchasing and payment
of bills amendment
Ch. 59
2005-19 10-12-2005 Salaries NCM
2005-20 11-9-2005 Bond amendment NCM
2006-1 2-22-2006 Sex offenders: residency
prohibition
Ch. 228, Art. I
2006-2 3-8-2006 Appropriation NCM
2006-3 3-22-2006 Salaries amendment See Ch. 61
2006-4 4-12-2006 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2006-5 4-12-2006 Salaries See Ch. 61
§ DL-1 WATERFORD CODE § DL-1
313:922
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2006-6 4-12-2006 Employee Policy Manual
amendment
NCM, see Ch. 44,
Art. II
2006-7 5-24-2006 Bond NCM
2006-8 6-28-2006 Salaries amendment See Ch. 61
2006-9 Bond amendment Not adopted
2006-10 8-9-2006 Salaries amendment See Ch. 61
2006-11 8-23-2006 Bond amendment NCM
2006-12 8-23-2006 Bond amendment NCM
2006-13 9-13-2006 Fees: fee schedule
amendment
Ch. 124, Art. II
2006-14 9-27-2006 Recreational motor
vehicles
Ch. 233
2006-15 9-27-2006 Professional service
contracts
Ch. 10
2006-16 12-13-2006 Recreation Advisory
Committee
Ch. 60
2006-17 12-13-2006 Historical Advisory
Committee
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2011-16
2006-18 12-13-2006 Salaries See Ch. 61
2006-19 1-6-2007 Land use, development
and zoning amendment
Ch. 176
2007-1 Bond amendment NCM
2007-2 3-28-2007 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 124, Art. II
2007-3 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2007-4 4-11-2007 Purchasing procedures,
payment of bills and
payroll amendment
Ch. 59
2007-5 Fee for returned checks Not adopted
2007-6 4-11-2007 Fee schedule amendment;
towing amendment
Ch. 124, Art. II; Ch.
257 (Repealed by
Ord. No. 2015-21)
2007-7 4-25-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 2
2007-8 5-9-2007 Salaries amendment See Ch. 61
2007-9 5-9-2007 Bond amendment NCM
2007-10 5-9-2007 Bond amendment NCM
2007-11 6-27-2007 Salaries amendment See Ch. 61
§ DL-1 SWINE § DL-1
313:923
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2007-12 7-11-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 2
2007-13 Bond NCM
2007-14 8-8-2007 Flood damage prevention Ch. 143
2007-15 8-8-2007 Fee schedule amendment;
recreational motor
vehicles amendment
Ch. 124, Art. II; Ch.
233
2007-16 8-8-2007 Police Department Rules
and Regulations
amendment
NCM; see § 50-29
2007-17 Bond NCM
2007-18 11-28-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 2
2007-19 11-28-2007 Sale of used vehicles Ch. 268
2007-20 12-12-2007 Salaries amendment See Ch. 61
2008-1 3-12-2008 Salaries amendment See Ch. 61
2008-2 3-12-2008 Bond amendment NCM
2008-3 5-14-2008 Bond NCM
2008-4 5-28-2008 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2008-5 6-11-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 2
2008-6 6-11-2008 Sexually oriented
businesses
Ch. 175
2008-7 6-11-2008 Salaries amendment See Ch. 61
2008-8 6-25-2008 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 26
2008-9 8-27-2008 Bond NCM
2008-10 9-23-2008 Towing amendment; fee
schedule amendment
Ch. 124; Ch. 257
(Repealed by Ord.
No. 2015-21)
2008-11 Sex offenders: residency
prohibition repealer
Tabled
2008-12 10-8-2008 Solid waste: collection
and disposal amendment
Ch. 235, Art. I
2008-13 10-8-2008 Streets and sidewalks:
maintenance
Ch. 239, Art. II
2008-14 11-24-2008 Salaries See Ch. 61
§ DL-1 WATERFORD CODE § DL-1
313:924
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2008-15 12-17-2008 Salaries amendment See Ch. 61
2008-16 12-17-2008 Salaries amendment See Ch. 61
2008-17 1-28-2009 Fees: development fees Ch. 124, Art. IV
2009-1 2-25-2009 Salaries amendment See Ch. 61
2009-2 2-25-2009 Salaries amendment See Ch. 61
2009-3 3-11-2009 Purchasing procedures,
payment of bills and
payroll amendment
Ch. 59
2009-4 3-11-2009 Emergency and
ambulance services
Ch. 27
2009-5 4-8-2009 Salaries amendment See Ch. 61
2009-6 4-8-2009 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 124, Art. II
2009-7 4-22-2009 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 124, Art. II
2009-8 5-13-2009 Water/sewer utility: rules,
regulations and rates
amendment
Ch. 72, Art. II
(footnote only)
2009-9 5-13-2009 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2009-10 5-27-2009 Personnel policies:
Defined Contribution
Retirement Program
Ch. 44, Art. IV
2009-11 6-24-2009 Business registration
permits amendment;
retail food establishments
repealer
Ch. 188; Ch. 299
(reference only)
2009-12 9-23-2009 Bond amendment NCM
2009-13 11-11-2009 Emergency appropriation NCM
2009-14 12-16-2009 Bond NCM
2009-15 12-16-2009 Towing amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2015-21
2009-16 12-16-2009 Solid waste: collection
and disposal amendment;
containerized yard waste
amendment; yard waste
collection amendment
Ch. 235, Art. I; Art.
II; Art. III
2009-17 12-16-2009 Salaries See Ch. 61
2010-1 2-24-2010 Salaries amendment See Ch. 61
2010-2 5-12-2010 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
§ DL-1 SWINE § DL-1
313:925
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2010-3 5-12-2010 Division of Emergency
Rescue Services
Ch. 18
2010-4 6-9-2010 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 124, Art. II
2010-5 6-23-2010 Solid waste: refuse
containers and dumpsters
Ch. 235, Art. IV
2010-6 6-23-2010 Stormwater management:
private storm drain inlet
retrofitting
Ch. 237, Art. III
2010-7 9-8-2010 Renewal of cable
franchise: Comcast
NCM
2010-8 10-27-2010 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 124, Art. II
2010-9 12-15-2010 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 124, Art. II
2011-1 3-9-2011 Salaries See Ch. 61
2011-2 4-13-2011 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2011-3 5-25-2011 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 124, Art. II
2011-4 6-22-2011 Bond NCM
2011-5 6-22-2011 General penalty Ch. 1, Art. II
2011-6 7-27-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 266. Part 2
2011-7 8-10-2011 Gas franchise NCM
2011-8 7-27-2011 Deputy Municipal Clerk Ch. 40, Art. VIII
2011-9 8-10-2011 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 124, Art. II
2011-10 8-10-2011 Charter Commission
ballot proposal
NCM
2011-11 8-24-2011 Bond NCM
2011-12 9-28-2011 Street vacation NCM
2011-13 9-14-2011 Salaries amendment See Ch. 61
2011-14 10-12-2011 Smoking in public
buildings and on public
property
Ch. 230, Art. I
2011-15 11-9-2011 Property maintenance:
standards and
administration
amendment
Ch. 220, Art. I
2011-16 11-9-2011 Historical Advisory
Committee repealer
Ch. 34, reference
only
2011-17 11-21-2011 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 124, Art. II
§ DL-1 WATERFORD CODE § DL-1
313:926
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2011-18 11-21-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 2
2011-19 11-21-2011 Land use, development
and zoning amendment
Ch. 176
2011-20 11-21-2011 Bond NCM
2011-21 12-14-2011 Emergency appropriation NCM
2011-22 12-28-2011 Salaries See Ch. 61
2011-23 12-28-2011 Professional service
contracts repealer
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2012-1; Ch. 10,
footnote only
2011-24 12-28-2011 Background checks for
volunteer sports
organizations
Ch. 96, Art. I
2012-1 1-25-2012 Professional service
contracts
Ch. 10, footnote only
2012-2 1-25-2012 Salaries amendment See Ch. 61
2012-3 2-8-2012 Director of Community
Development
Ch. 40, Art. IX
2012-4 2-8-2012 Salaries amendment See Ch. 61
2012-5 2-22-2012 Salaries amendment See Ch. 61
2012-6 4-11-2012 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2012-7 4-11-2012 Sewer and water service
regulations and rates
amendment
See Ch. 72, Art. II
2012-8 4-25-2012 Land use, development
and zoning amendment
Ch. 176
2012-9 7-18-2012 Pay to play Ch. 10, Art. II
2012-10 6-13-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 2
2012-11 Animals amendment Not adopted
2012-12 9-12-2012 Bond NCM
2012-13 9-12-2012 Land use, development
and zoning amendment
Ch. 176
2012-14 9-12-2012 Land use, development
and zoning amendment
Ch. 176
2012-15 9-12-2012 Land use, development
and zoning amendment
Ch. 176
2012-16 9-26-2012 Street vacation NCM
§ DL-1 SWINE § DL-1
313:927
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-17 9-26-2012 Water and sewer rates
amendment
See Ch. 72, Art. II
2012-18 10-24-2012 Towing repealer Repealed by Ord.
No. 2015-21
2012-19 12-19-2012 Towing Repealed by Ord.
No. 2015-21
2012-20 12-19-2012 Bond NCM
2013-1 3-13-2013 Land use, development
and zoning amendment
Ch. 176
2013-2 3-13-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2013-3 3-13-2013 Salaries amendment See Ch. 61
2013-4 3-13-2013 Dogs amendment Ch. 94, Art. I
2013-5 4-24-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2013-6 5-8-2013 Tax abatements for
commercial and industrial
properties
Ch. 245, Art. II
2013-7 5-22-2013 Salaries See Ch. 61
2013-8 5-22-2013 Administrator
amendment
Ch. 7
2013-9 5-22-2013 Purchasing procedures,
payment of bills and
payroll amendment
Ch. 59
2013-10 5-22-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2013-11 6-12-2013 Bond NCM
2013-12 9-25-2013 Salaries amendment See Ch. 61
2013-13 10-23-2013 Land use, development
and zoning amendment
Ch. 176
2013-14 10-23-2013 Bond amendment NCM
2013-15 11-13-2013 Appropriation NCM
2013-16 12-18-2013 Salaries See Ch. 61
2014-1 2-14-2014 Appropriation NCM
2014-2 2-26-2014 Land use, development
and zoning amendment
Ch. 176
2014-3 2-26-2014 Police Department Rules
and Regulations
amendment
See § 50-29
2014-4 2-26-2014 Tabled
§ DL-1 WATERFORD CODE § DL-1
313:928
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2014-5 4-9-2014 Police Department Rules
and Regulations
amendment
See § 50-29
2014-6 4-23-2014 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2014-7 5-28-2014 Salaries amendment See Ch. 61
2014-8 7-9-2014 Appropriation NCM
2014-9 7-9-2014 Administrator
amendment
Ch. 7
2014-10 7-9-2014 Salaries amendment See Ch. 61
2014-11 8-13-2014 Appropriation NCM
2014-12 8-13-2014 Appropriation NCM
2014-13 9-10-2014 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 124, Art. II
2014-14 Failed
2014-15 Tabled
2014-16 10-8-2014 Appropriation NCM
2014-17 12-17-2014 Street vacation NCM
2015-1 1-28-2015 Salaries amendment See Ch. 61
2015-2 2-25-2015 Land use, development
and zoning amendment
Ch. 176
2015-3 2-25-2015 Fee schedule amendment;
rental properties:
registration and licensing
Ch. 124, Art. II; Ch.
223, Art. I
2015-4 3-25-2015 Yard sales Ch. 284
2015-5 3-25-2015 Taxation: exemption from
assessment for home
improvement repealer;
tax abatements for
commercial and industrial
properties amendment
Ch. 245, Art. I,
reference only; Ch.
245, Art. II
2015-6 4-22-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2015-7 4-22-2015 Economic Development
Commission repealer
Ch. 16, reference
only
2015-8 5-27-2015 Bond NCM
2015-9 5-27-2015 Bond NCM
2015-10 7-8-2015 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 50
§ DL-1 SWINE § DL-1
313:929
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2015-11 7-8-2015 Police Department Rules
and Regulations
amendment
NCM; see § 50-29
2015-12 8-12-2015 Purchasing procedures,
payment of bills and
payroll amendment
Ch. 59
2015-13 8-12-2015 Authorization of
agreement for tax
abatement
NCM
2015-14 8-26-2015 Solid waste: collection
and disposal amendment
Ch. 235, Art. I
2015-15 9-23-2015 Health Services Advisory
Board
Ch. 32
2015-16 10-28-2015 Animals: pet shop sales of
animals from puppy and
kitten mills
Ch. 94, Art. VI
2015-17 11-9-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2015-18 10-28-2015 Fee schedule amendment;
property maintenance:
maintenance and
registration of vacant and
abandoned properties
Ch. 124, Art. II; Ch.
220, Art. II
2015-19 11-23-2015 Fee schedule amendment;
streets and sidewalks:
street openings and
excavations
Ch. 124, Art. II; Ch.
239, Art. I
2015-20 11-23-2015 Street dedication NCM
2015-21 12-9-2015 Fee schedule amendment;
towing
Ch. 124, Art. II; Ch.
257
2016-1 1-27-2016 Salaries See Ch. 61
2016-2 2-24-2016 Bond NCM
2016-3 2-24-2016 Fee schedule amendment;
rental properties:
registration and licensing
amendment
Ch. 124, Art. II; Ch.
223, Art. I
2016-4 3-9-2016 Street vacation NCM
2016-5 3-23-2016 Codification of land use,
development and zoning
Ch. 1, Art. III
2016-6 3-23-2016 Street vacation NCM
2016-7 4-27-2016 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
§ DL-1 WATERFORD CODE § DL-1
313:930
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016-8 4-27-2016 Loan agreement NCM
2016-9 3-23-2016 Tabled
2016-10 5-11-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 2
2016-11 5-25-2016 Streets and sidewalks:
street openings and
excavations amendment
Ch. 239, Art. I
2016-12 6-22-2016 Bond NCM
2016-13 6-22-2016 Reappropriation NCM
2016-14 6-22-2016 Bond NCM
2016-15 6-22-2016 Reappropriation NCM
2016-16 7-13-2016 Sewer and water service
rate schedule amendment
See Ch. 72, Art. II
2016-17 8-10-2016 Salaries See Ch. 61
2016-18 8-10-2016 Bond NCM
2016-19 8-10-2016 Acquisition of real
property
NCM
2016-20 10-12-2016 Division of Emergency
Rescue Services
amendment
Ch. 18
2016-21 10-12-2016 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 26
2016-22 10-12-2016 Volunteer firefighters:
emergency responders
stipend amendment
Ch. 69, Art. I
2016-23 10-12-2016 Fire prevention: Uniform
Fire Code enforcement
amendment
Ch. 137, Art. I
2016-24 12-14-2016 Property maintenance:
maintenance of vacant
and abandoned
properties amendment
See Ch. 220, Art. II
(Editor's Note only)
2016-25 12-14-2016 Redevelopment plan NCM
2016-26 12-14-2016 Salaries See Ch. 61
2017-1 1-19-2017 Tabled
2017-2 2-8-2017 Land use, development
and zoning amendment
Ch. 176
§ DL-1 SWINE § DL-1
313:931
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2017-3 2-8-2017 Authorization of
agreement for tax
abatement
NCM
2017-4 2-8-2017 Public contracting Ch. 212
2017-5 2-22-2017 Dogs amendment Ch. 94, Art. I
2017-6 2-8-2017 Land use, development
and zoning amendment
Ch. 176
2017-7 2-8-2017 Land use, development
and zoning amendment
Ch. 176
2017-8 2-22-2017 Charitable clothing bins Ch. 302
2017-9 2-22-2017 Fire prevention: rapid
entry systems
Ch. 137, Art. III
2017-10 3-8-2017 Property maintenance:
vacant and abandoned
properties amendment;
defaulted mortgage
properties
Ch. 220, Art. II, Art.
III
2017-11 3-22-2017 Vehicles and traffic:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 266, Part 2
2017-12 3-22-2017 Sale of property NCM
2017-13 4-12-2017 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2017-14 4-26-2017 Peddlers, hawkers,
vendors, solicitors,
canvassers and seasonal
sales vendors amendment
Ch. 208, Art. I
2017-15 4-26-2017 Purchase of property NCM
2017-16 6-14-2017 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 50
2017-17 6-14-2017 Property maintenance:
vacant and abandoned
properties amendment
Ch. 220, Art. II
2017-18 6-28-2017 Bond NCM
2017-19 6-28-2017 Bond NCM
2017-20 7-26-2017 Peddling and soliciting:
peddlers, hawkers,
vendors, solicitors,
canvassers and seasonal
sales vendors amendment
Ch. 208, Art. I
§ DL-1 WATERFORD CODE § DL-1
313:932
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2017-21 8-9-2017 Land use, development
and zoning amendment
Ch. 176
2017-21A 10-11-2017 Street vacation NCM
2017-22 10-11-2017 Land use, development
and zoning amendment
Ch. 176
2017-23 9-27-2017 Fees: fee schedule
amendment
Ch. 124, Art. II
2017-24 10-11-2017 Designation of entity for
redevelopment plan
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2017-29
2017-25 10-11-2017 Parks, playgrounds and
recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 201
2017-26 11-20-2017 Fees: fee schedule
amendment
Ch. 124, Art. II
2017-27 11-20-2017 Direct service payment
agreement
NCM
2017-28 12-13-2017 Salaries See Ch. 61
2017-29 12-27-2017 Designation of entity for
redevelopment plan
repealer
NCM
2018-1 2-14-2018 Wildfire Safety Council Ch. 74
2018-2 2-28-2018 Solid Waste Ch. 235
2018-3 2-28-2018 Smoking: Smoking in
Public Buildings and on
Public Property
Amendment
Ch. 230, Art. I
2018-4 2-28-2018 Officers and Employees:
Director of Community
Development Amendment
Ch. 40, Art. IX
2018-5 2-28-2018 Street Vacation NCM
2018-6 2-28-2018 Bond NCM
2018-7 4-12-2018 Exceed Budget and
Establish Cap Bank
NCM
2018-8 4-25-2018 Sanitary Sewer and Water
Services
NCM
§ DL-1 SWINE § DL-1
313:933
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018-9 4-25-2018 Peddling and Soliciting:
Peddlers, Hawkers,
Vendors, Solicitors,
Canvassers, Seasonal
Sales Vendors, Transient
Merchants and Non-
Profit-Making Vendors
Amendment; Outdoor
Sales and Displays
Ch. 208, Art. I; Ch.
208, Art. III
2018-10 4-25-2018 Land Use, Development
and Zoning Amendment
Ch. 176
2018-11 5-9-2018 Parks, playgrounds and
recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 201
2018-12 5-23-2018 Sale of Property NCM
2018-13 6-13-2018 Land Use, Development
and Zoning Amendment
Ch. 176
2018-14 Not adopted
2018-15 7-25-2018 Noise Control Ch. 192
2018-16 Not adopted
2018-17 Pending adoption
2018-18 Not adopted
2018-19 8-8-2018 Property Maintenance:
Standards and
Administration
Amendment
Ch. 220, Art. I
2018-20 8-22-2018 Bond NCM
2018-21 8-8-2018 Grading: Grading and
Drainage of Residential
Lots Amendment
Ch. 155, Art. I
2018-22 8-22-2018 Peddling and Soliciting:
Peddlers, Hawkers,
Vendors, Solicitors,
Canvassers, Seasonal
Sales Vendors, Transient
Merchants and Non-
Profit-Making Vendors
Amendment
Ch. 208, Art. I
2018-23 9-12-2018 Land Use, Development
and Zoning Amendment
Ch. 176
§ DL-1 WATERFORD CODE § DL-1
313:934
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018-24 9-12-2018 Land Use, Development
and Zoning Amendment
Ch. 176
2018-25 9-12-2018 Land Use, Development
and Zoning Amendment
Ch. 176
2018-26 9-12-2018 Acquisition of Land NCM
2018-27 9-26-2018 Bond NCM
2018-28
2018-29 9-26-2018 Animals: Horses Repealer Ch. 94, Art. II,
reference only
2018-30 10-24-2018 Salaries NCM
2018-31 11-19-2018 Sewer and Water Service
Rate Schedule
Amendment
See Ch. 72, Art. II
2018-32 12-12-2018 Salaries NCM
2019-1 4-24-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
§ DL-1 SWINE § DL-1
313:935

TOWNSHIP OF WATERFORD
COUNTY OF CAMDEN
STATE OF NEW JERSEY
ORDINANCE NO. 2018- 13
ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF WATERFORD, COUNTY OF CAMDEN,
STATE OF NEW JERSEY AMENDING CHAPTER 176 OF THE TOWNSHIP CODE
CAPTIONED "LAND USE, DEVELOPMENT AND ZONING"
WHEREAS, on a periodic basis the New Jersey Pinelands Commission adopts
Amendments to the Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan (" CMP"); and
WHEREAS, the New Jersey Pinelands Commission has recently adopted various
Amendments to the " CMP" which must now be adopted by the Township ofWaterford as part of
Chapter 176 of the Township Code captioned " Land Use, Development and Zoning".
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Township Committee ofthe
Township of Waterford, County of Camden, State of New Jersey, as follows:
Section 1.
Purpose: The purpose of this Ordinance is to amend Chapter 176, Land Use, Development
and Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Waterford in response to amendments to the
Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan effective January 3, 2012, September 2, 2014,
and March 5, 2018.
I. Chapter 176, Land Use, Article I, Title, Purpose and Definitions, § 176- 9, Terms
defined, is hereby amended by replacing or adding the following definitions:
ALTERNATE DESIGN PILOT PROGRAM TREATMENT SYSTEM
An individual or community on site waste water treatment system that has the
capability ofproviding a high level oftreatment including a significant reduction in the
level of total nitrogen in the wastewater and that has been approved by the Pinelands
Commission for participation in the alternate design wastewater treatment systems pilot
program pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7: 50- 10.23( b). Detailed plans and specifications for each
authorized technology are available at the principal office of the Pinelands
Commission. 
IMMEDIATE FAMILY
Those persons related by blood or legal relationship in the following manner: spouses,
domestic partners, great-grandparents, grandparents, great-grandchildren,
grandchildren, parents, sons, daughters, brothers and sisters, aunts and uncles,
nephews, nieces and first cousins.
II. Chapter 176, Land Use, Article III, Pinelands Commission Review and
Procedures, § 176- 14, Local development to comply with Pinelands Comprehensive
Management Plan, is hereby amended by revising subsection 176- 14A(2) as follows:
2) For the purpose of this subchapter only, the following shall not be considered
development except for development of any historic resource designated by the
Pinelands Commission pursuant to NJAC 7: 50- 6. 154:
a) - ( f) (No change.)
g) The construction of any addition or accessory structure for any nonresidential use or any multi -family residential structure provided that:
1] If the addition or structure will be located on or below an existing
impervious surface, either the existing use is served by public
sewers or the addition or structure will generate no wastewater
flows, and said addition or structure will cover an area of no more
than 4,999 square feet; and
2] If the addition or structure will not be located on or below an
impervious surface, said addition or structure will generate no
wastewater flows and will cover an area of no more than 1, 000
square feet.
h) - ( j) (No change.)
k) The repaving of existing paved roads and other paved surfaces, provided no
increase in the paved width or area of said roads and surfaces will occur.
1) The clearing of land solely for agricultural or horticultural purposes.
m) - ( r) (No change.)
s} The installation of an accessory solar energy facility on any existing
structure or impervious surface.
t) The installation of a local communications facilities antenna on an existing
communications or other suitable structure, provided such antenna is not
inconsistent with any comprehensive plan for local communications
facilities approved by the Pinelands Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7: 50-
5. 4( c) 6. 
u) The establishment of a home occupation within an existing dwelling unit or
structure accessory thereto, provided that no additional development is
proposed.
v) The change of one nonresidential use to another nonresidential use,
provided that the existing and proposed uses are or will be served by public
sewers and no additional development is proposed.
M. Chapter 176, Land Use, Article 111, Pinelands Commission Review and
Procedures, § 176- 14, Local development to comply with Pinelands Comprehensive
Management Plan, is hereby amended by replacing subsection G in its entirety with the
following:
1)
G. Notices to Pinelands Commission.
Application submission and modifications. Written notification shall be given by
the Township, by email or regular mail, to the Pinelands Commission within seven
days after a determination is made by the Township that an application for
development in the Pinelands Area is complete or if a determination is made by the
approval agency that the application has been modified. Said notice shall contain:
a) The name and address of the applicant;
b) The legal description and street address, if any, of the parcel that the
applicant proposes to develop
c) A brief description of the proposed development, including uses and
intensity of uses proposed;
d) The application number of the Certificate of Filing issued by the Pinelands
Commission and the date on which it was issued:
e)
f)
g)
The date on which the application, or any change thereto, was filed and any
application number or other identifying number assigned to the application
by the approval agency;
The approval agency with which the application or change thereto was filed
The content of any change made to the application since it 'was filed with
the Commission, including a copy of any revised plans or reports; and
h) The nature of the municipal approval or approvals being sought. 
2) Meetings and hearings. Where a meeting, hearing or other formal proceeding on an
application for development approval in the Pinelands Area is required, the
applicant shall provide notice to the Pinelands Commission by email, regular mail
or delivery of the same to the principal office of the Commission at least five days
prior to such meeting, hearing or other formal proceeding. Such notice shall contain
at least the following information:
a) The name and address of the applicant;
3)
b) The application number of the Certificate of Filing issued by the Pinelands
Commission and the date on which it was issued;
c) The date, time and location of the meeting, hearing or other formal
proceeding;
d) The name of the approval agency or representative thereof that will be
conducting the meeting, hearing or other formal proceeding;
e)
1)
Any written reports or comments received by the approval agency on the
application for development that have not been previously submitted to the
Commission; and
The purpose for which the meeting, hearing or other formal proceeding is
to be held.
Notice of approvals and denials. The Pinelands Commission shall be notified of all
approvals and denials of development in the Pinelands Area, whether the approval
occurs by action or inaction of any approval agency or an appeal of any agency's
decision. The applicant shall, within five days ofthe approval or denial, give notice
by email or regular mail to the Pinelands Commission. Such notice shall contain
the following information:
a) The name and address of the applicant;
b) The legal description and street address, if any, of the parcel that the
applicant proposes to develop;
c) The application number ofthe Certificate of Filing issued by the Pinelands
Commission and the date on which it was issued;
d) The date on which the approval or denial was issued by the approval agency;
e) Any written reports or comments received by the approval agency on the
application for development that have not been previously submitted to the
Commission; 
1) Any revisions to the application not previously submitted to the
Commission; and
g) A copy of the resolution, permit or other documentation of the approval or
denial. Ifthe application was approved, a copy of any preliminary or final
plan, plot or similar document that was approved shall also be submitted.
4) Exceptions. Except as provided in § 176- 14C, the requirements ofthis section shall
not apply to the issuance of a preliminary zoning permit or a refusal to issue a
preliminary zoning permit for the development of a single-family dwelling on an
existing lot ofrecord.
IV. Chapter 176, Land Use, Article IV, Pinelands Development Credit Program
and Density Transfer Program, § 176- 15, Pinelands development credit program, is hereby
amended by replacing subsection 176- 15E(2) in its entirety with the following:
2) Such deed restriction shall specify the number of PDCs sold and that the property
may only be used in perpetuity for the following uses:
a) In the Preservation District: Berry agriculture; horticulture of native
Pinelands plants; forestry; beekeeping; fish and wildlife management;
agricultural employee housing as an accessory use; low intensity
recreational uses in which the use of motorized vehicles is not pettuitted
except for necessary transportation, access to water bodies is limited to no
more than 15 feet of frontage per 1, 000 feet of frontage on the water body,
clearing of vegetation does not exceed 5% of the parcel, and no more than
1% ofthe parcel will be covered with impermeable surfaces; and accessory
uses.
b) In the Agricultural District: Agriculture; forestry; agricultural employee
housing as an accessory use; low intensity recreational uses in which the
use of motorized vehicles is not permitted except for necessary
transportation, access to water bodies is limited to no more than 15 feet of
frontage per 1, 000 feet offrontage on the water body, clearing of vegetation
does not exceed 5% of the parcel, and no more than 1% of the parcel will
be covered with impermeable surfaces; fish and wildlife management;
agricultural sales establishments, excluding supermarkets, restaurants and
convenience stores, where the principal goods or products available for sale
were produced in the Pinelands and the sales area does not exceed 5, 000 sq.
ft.; airports and heliports accessory to agricultural uses and which are used
exclusively for the storage, fueling, loading and operation of aircraft as part
of an ongoing agricultural operation; agricultural products processing
facilities; and accessory uses. 
V. Chapter 176, Land Use, Article VIII, General Provisions and Design
Standards, § 176- 101, Water Quality, is hereby amended by revising subsection 176-
101B( 5) as follows:
5) Individual on-site septic waste water treatment systems which are intended to
reduce the level ofnitrate/nitrogen in the wastewater, provided that:
a) ( no change)
b) If the proposed development is nonresidential, it is located:
111 In a Pinelands Regional Growth Area or Pinelands Village; or
121 In the Pinelands Rural Development Area, Agricultural Production
Area, or Forest Area, subject to the standards of N.J.A.C. 7: 50-
6. 84( a)5iii(2)
c) ( no change)
VI. Chapter 176, Land Use, Article VIII, General Provisions and Design
Standards, § 176- 101, Water Quality, is hereby amended by revising subsection 176-
101B(7) as follows:
7. Alternate design pilot program treatment systems, provided that:
a) -(i) (No change.)
j) Each system shall be covered by a five-year warranty and a minimum fiveyear maintenance contract consistent with those approved pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7: 50- 10.22(a)2v that cannot be cancelled and is renewable and
which includes a provision ,requiring that the manufacturer or its agent
inspect the system at least once a year and undertake any maintenance or
repairs determined to be necessary during any such inspection or as a result
of observations made at any other time; and
k) The property owner shall record with the deed to the property a notice
consistent with that approved pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7: 50- 10.22( a)2vi that
identifies the technology, acknowledges the owner's responsibility to
operate and maintain it in accordance with the manual required in
Subsection B( 7)( i) above, and grants access, with reasonable notice, to the
local board of health, the Commission and its agents for inspection and
monitoring purposes. The recorded deed shall run with the property and
shall ensure that the maintenance requirements are binding on any owner of
the property during the life of the system and that the monitoring
requirements are binding on any owner of the property during the time
period the monitoring requirements apply pursuant to the pilot program or
any subsequent regulations adopted by the Commission that apply to said
system. 
Section 2. All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances that are inconsistent with this Ordinance
are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency only.
Section 3. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause
of this Ordinance shall be judged invalid by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such order of
judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph,
subdivision or clause of this Ordinance.
Section 4. This Ordinance shall only take effect after final adoption and publication as
required by law and approval by the New Jerscy Pinelands Commission.
Lori Friddell, RMC, Township Clerk
Introduced: May 23, 2018
Public Hearing: June 13, 2018
Adopted: June 13, 2018
William A. Richardson, Jr., Mayor
UPON INTRODUCTION ON 5- 23- 2018
GIANGIULIO HANNA SURA YEATMAN RICHARDSON
YES X X X X
ABSTAIN
NO
ABSENT X
UPON ADOPTION ON 6- 13- 2018
GIANGIULIO HANNA SURA YEATMAN RICHARDSON
YES XX X
Y
ABSTAIN
NO
ABSENT
CERTIFICATION
Certified to be a true copy of an Ordinance adopted by the Mayor and Township Committee of the
Township of Waterford at a Meeting held on June 13, 2018.
Dated: 1/4. 911?). 11$
2
Lori A. Friddell, RMC, Township Clerk

TOWNSHIP OF WATERFORD
ORDINANCE NO. 2018-23
ORDINANCE AMENDING CHAPTER 176 OF THE CODE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
WATERFORD CAPTIONED " LAND USE, DEVELOPMENT AND ZONING",
SECTION 9 CAPTIONED " DEFINITIONS"
WHEREAS, on a periodic basis the Township of Waterford reviews it Land Use,
Development and Zoning Ordinance for any revisions determined to be appropriate; and
WHEREAS, upon review of Chapter 176, Section 9 captioned " Definitions" it has been
determined that certain Amendments should be made to said Section.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Township Committee of
theTownship of Waterford, County of Camden, State ofNew Jersey, as follows:
Section 1. Chapter 176 of the Code of the Township of Waterford captioned " Land Use,
Development and Zoning", Section 9 captioned " Definitions" is hereby amended as follows:
A. The Definition of " Farm Setting" is hereby
removed in its entirety.
B. The Definition of " Farm Animals" shall be
changed to " Agricultural Animals".
C. The following new Definitions shall be added:
1) Corral — A pen or fence enclosure of
durable construction, permanently affixed to the
ground and used as an enclosure for horses.
2) Horse — Includes horses, ponies or other
such equine quadrupeds as mules, asses and donkeys.
3) Stable — A building or structure built with at
least three ( 3) walls of durable construction,
permanently affixed to the ground and used for
boarding, sheltering or housing of horses. This
Definition shall specifically exclude shipping
containers or crates, truck bodies, vans or other similar
enclosures used for the housing of animals.
4) Structure — A building built with at least
three ( 3) walls of durable construction, permanently
affixed to the ground and used for housing of animals.
This Definition shall specifically exclude shipping
containers or crates, truck bodies, vans or other similar
enclosures used for the housing of animals.
Section 2. All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances that are inconsistent with this
Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency only.
Section 3. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause
of this Ordinance shall be judged invalid by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such order of
judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph,
subdivision or clause of this Ordinance.
Section 4. This Ordinance shall only take effect after final adoption and publication as
required by law and approval by the New Jersey Pinelands Commissi
c
Dawn Liedtka, RMC Deputy Clerk William A. Richardson, Jr., Mayor
Intro: August 8, 2018
Public Hearing: September 12, 2018
Adopted: Seip teml7e"- ( z , Z 8
Ordinance 2018-23
UPON INTRODUCTION ON 8- 8- 2018
GIANGIULIO HANNA SURA YEATMAN RICHARDSON
YES X X X X X
ABSTAIN
NO
ABSENT
UPON ADOPTION ON 9- 12- 2018
GIANGIULIO HANNA SURA YEATMAN RICHARDSON
YES X X y
x
X
ABSTAIN
NO
ABSENT
CERTIFICATION
I, Dawn M. Liedtka, Deputy Clerk of the Township of Waterford, Camden County, New Jersey,
do hereby certify the foregoing to be a true and exact copy of the ordinance which was finally
adopted by the Mayor and Township Committee ofthe Township of Waterford at a meeting held
on the I a+- day of Seet conb , 2018.
Dated: 91 121 I $ i)ci.uz ask.0,4±4c,
Dawn M. Liedtka, RMC, Deputy Clerk

TOWNSHIP OF WATERFORD
ORDINANCE NO. 2018-24
ORDINANCE AMENDING CHAPTER 176 OF THE CODE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
WATERFORD CAPTIONED " LAND USE, DEVELOPMENT AND ZONING",
SECTION 48 CAPTIONED "ANIMALS"
WHEREAS, on a periodic basis the Township of Waterford reviews it Land Use,
Development and Zoning Ordinance for any revisions determined to be appropriate; and
WHEREAS, upon review of Chapter 176, Section 48 captioned " Animals" it has been
determined that amendments should be made to said Chapter to provide clarification as to the
Regulations and conditions for maintaining animals in the Township ofWaterford.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Township Committee of
the Township ofWaterford, County of Camden, State ofNew Jersey, as follows:
Section 1. Chapter 176 of the Code of the Township of Waterford captioned " Land Use,
Development and Zoning", Section 48 captioned " Animals" is hereby amended to read as
follows:
A. Agricultural Animals. Agricultural Animals as
defined in Section 9 of this Chapter, with the exception
of horses, may be kept and maintained only if the
following conditions are met.
1) The lot on which the agricultural animals
are to be located is at least five (5) acres in size.
2) The lot on which the agricultural animals
are to be located is qualified, pursuant to the Farmland
Assessment Act of 1964 ( N.J. S.A. 54:4-23. 1 et seq.) as
land actively devoted to agricultural use.
3) A Farm Management Plan prepared in
accordance with the Guidelines of the U.S. 
Department of Agricultural, Natural Resources
Conservation Service is filed with the Township.
4) The use of the animals directly relates to
the agricultural use for which the Farmland
Assessment has been granted.
5) Appropriate shelter as defined in Section 9
of this Chapter shall be provided for all Agricultural
Animals.
6) No shipping container, crate, truck body,
van or other similar enclosures shall be utilized for
sheltering or housing ofthe agricultural animals.
B. Horses. Horses are permitted on lots in all Zoning
Districts of one ( 1) acre or more, exclusive of buffers,
easements and other specific restrictions if the
following conditions are met:
1) There shall be no more than two (2) horses
located on a minimum of one ( 1) acre of fenced land,
with an additional ten thousand ( 10, 000) square feet of
fenced land area required for each additional horse.
2) No parcel ofless than five (5) acres shall be
used for a commercial boarding stable.
C. General Requirements.
1) All Animals and animal shelters and stables
shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and
maintained to eliminate objectionable odors and
accumulation of flies. Bedding straw and manure shall
be properly disposed on a regular basis. 
2) Fencing shall be provided and maintained
to prevent the animals from leaving the premises in
which they are maintained. All fences shall be
constructed of material as defined in Section 9 of this
Chapter and in such a manner as to prevent the escape
of animals.
3) Shelters and stables for animals shall not be
located closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line.
Shelters and stables for animals shall not be located in
a front yard.
4) Minimum stall, stable or shelter size for
each horse shall be one hundred ( 100) square feet (ten
10) feet by ten ( 10) feet).
5) Manure shall be removed daily from all
interior shelters and stables. Once manure is removed
it should be handled in one ofthe following manners:
a) Used immediately by incorporation
into the soil of a garden or by spreading on
neighboring fields. If manure is to spread on
neighboring fields, application is not to exceed ten
10) tons per acre of the latest recommendations from
the State' s Land Grant College.
b) Incorporated into a composting
procedure so that odors, flies and other vermin do not
create a problem. A manure pile does not qualify as a
composting procedure.
c) Store in rain free, well drained, 
screened and fly and vermin free storage area located
at least fifty ( 50) feet or more from the property line
until the manure can be handled in any of the above
alternatives.
6) All structures and stables shall meet
existing building codes and all fencing shall meet
existing codes.
Section 2. All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances that are inconsistent with this
Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency only.
Section 3. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause
of this Ordinance shall be judged invalid by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such order of
judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph,
subdivision or clause ofthis Ordinance.
Section 4. This Ordinance shall only take effect after final adoption and publication as
required by law and approval by the New Jersey Pinelands Commission.
Dawn Liedtka, RMC Deputy Clerk
Intro: August 8, 2018
Public Hearing: seeve-^ 6c,
Adopted: S` p{.
11. 2v id
William A. Richardson, Jr., Mayor
UPON INTRODUCTION ON 8- 8- 2018
GIANGIULIO HANNA SURA YEATMAN RICHARDSON
YES X X X X X
ABSTAIN
NO
ABSENT
UPON ADOPTION ON 9- 12- 2018
GIANGIULIO HANNA . SURA YEATMAN RICHARDSON
YES X k x X
ABSTAIN
NO
ABSENT
Ordinance #2018-24
CERTIFICATION
I, Dawn M. Liedtka, Deputy Clerk of the Township of Waterford, Camden County, New Jersey,
do hereby certify the foregoing to be a true and exact copy of the ordinance which was finally
adopted by the Mayor and Township Committee ofthe Township of Waterford at a meeting held
on the (
at` day of Sephc.mlxr , 2018.
Dated: 91 tal Zoe 8 Qom
Dawn M. Liedtka, RMC, Deputy Clerk

TOWNSHIP OF WATERFORD
ORDINANCE NO. 2018-25
ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF WATERFORD AMENDING CHAPTER 176 OF
THE CODE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF WATERFORD CAPTIONED " LAND USE,
DEVELOPMENT AND ZONING", SECTION 74 CAPTIONED
LOT CONFIGURATION"
WHEREAS, on a periodic basis, the Township of Waterford reviews various Ordinances
in regard to Amendments or clarifications that should be made to same; and
WHEREAS, as a result, it has been determined that Chapter 176 captioned " Land Use,
Development and Zoning", Section 74 captioned " Lot Configuration", Paragraph D captioned
Yards" should be amended as set forth hereinbelow. -
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Township Committee of
the Township ofWaterford, County of Camden, State ofNew Jersey, as follows:
Section 1. Chapter 176 of the Code of the Township of Waterford captioned " Land Use,
Development and Zoning" Section 74 captioned " Lot Configuration", Paragraph D captioned
Yards", Subparagraph ( 6) is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with a new Paragraph ( 6)
to read as follows:
D(6)
A. No person, firm or corporation shall install any
type of permanent sporting or recreational equipment,
including basketball poles and nets, between the curb
and sidewalk of any street. Permanent sporting
equipment is equipment that is affixed into the ground
by means of solid construction materials including
concrete and is not removable from the ground after
use. -
B. Portable sporting equipment is permitted to be
placed in the right-of-way grass area between the
sidewalk and curb of any street. Portable sporting
equipment is equipment that is movable and is not
permanent sports equipment. All portable sporting
equipment shall comply with the following conditions:
1) The grass area between the
sidewalk and curb of any street shall be at least thirty- 
six ( 36") inches wide measured between the sidewalk
and the curb.
2) The portable sporting equipment
shall not overhang the grass area onto the sidewalk or
curb as to interfere with pedestrian traffic on the
sidewalk or vehicular traffic on the street.
3) The portable sporting equipment
shall be placed in a stable position and as prescribed in
the Manufacturer' s Specification so as not to cause
damage created by weather conditions or man-made
causes.
4) The portable sporting equipment
shall not be located within the permitted area between
January 1st and March 31st.
C. In the absence of curb and/or sidewalk
along the street, portable sporting equipment may be
permitted on the grass area along the side of the
roadway and set back at least one ( 1') foot from the
roadway provided the portable sporting equipment
does not interfere with vehicular traffic on the
roadway.
D. No sporting equipment, permanent or
portable shall be located within the paved area of any
street within the Township.
E. Enforcement. This provision shall be
enforced by the Zoning Official and Police Officers of
the Township ofWaterford.
F. Violations and Penalties. Any person who
violates any provision of this Chapter shall upon
conviction thereof be subject on a first offense to a fine
not to exceed $ 50.00 and on a subsequent offense by a
fine not to exceed $500.00."
Section 2. All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances that are inconsistent with this
Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency only.
Section 3. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause
of this Ordinance shall be judged invalid by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such order of
judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph,
subdivision or clause ofthis Ordinance. 
Section 4. This Ordinance shall only take effect after final adoption and publication as
required by law and approval by the New Jersey Pinelands Commission.
0.01 j ,
Dawn Liedtka, RMC Deputy Clerk
Intro: August 8, 2018
Public Hearing: Sep* ew.bt. 1L zoie,
Adopted: Sep+embc. 12 , 2
William . Richardson, Jr., Mayor
UPON INTRODUCTION ON 8- 8- 2018
GIANGIULIO HANNA SURA YEATMAN RICHARDSON
YES X X X X X
ABSTAIN
NO
ABSENT
UPON ADOPTION ON 9- 12- 2018
GIANGIULIO HANNA SURA YEATMAN RICHARDSON
YES X X X X
ABSTAIN
NO
ABSENT
CERTIFICATION
I, Dawn M. Liedtka, Deputy Clerk of the Township of Waterford, Camden County, New Jersey,
do hereby certify the foregoing to be a true and exact copy of the ordinance which was finally
adopted by the Mayor and Township Committee ofthe Township of Waterford at a meeting held
on the
Ic344.'
day of SQ_ 4embe- , 2018.
Dated: Q_ Iz _ 2o18
Dawn M. Liedtka, RMC, Deputy Clerk

TOWNSHIP OF WATERFORD
ORDINANCE NO. 2018- 10
ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF WATERFORD, COUNTY OF CAMDEN,
STATE OF NEW JERSEY AMENDING CHAPTER 176 OF THE CODE OF THE
TOWNSHIP OF WATERFORD CAPTIONED
LAND USE, DEVELOPMENT AND ZONING LEGISLATION"
WHEREAS, due to recent Amendments adopted by the New Jersey Legislature to N. J. S. A.
40: 55D- 1 et seq. (" The Municipal Land Use Law"), it is necessary for the Township of Waterford
to amend Chapter 176 of the Code of the Township of Waterford captioned " Land Use,
Development and Zoning Legislation".
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Township Committee ofthe
Township of Waterford, County of Camden, State of New Jersey, as follows:
Section 1. Chapter 176 of the Code of the Township of Waterford captioned " Land Use
Development and Zoning" is amended as follows:
Section 22 captioned " Guarantees and Inspections" is hereby revised to read as
follows:
The Introductory Paragraph is to read as follow:
For the purposes ofthis Section, the term ' public improvements' shall
mean only those improvements required by Board approval or
Developer' s Agreement, Ordinance or Regulation of the Township
which are to be dedicated to the Township or any other public entity
and that have not yet been installed which are improvements as shown
on approved Plans or Plot Plans for streets, pavements, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, street lighting, street trees, Surveyors Monuments as shown
on the final Map and required by the ' Map Filing Law,' watermains,
sanitary sewers, community septic systems, drainage structures, public
improvements for open space. and any grading necessitated by the
preceding improvements. If required within an approved Phase of a
Project, the Performance Guarantees shall also include Perimeter
Buffer landscaping as required by Local Ordinance or as a condition of
Board Approval." 
Section 22A( 1)( d) shall be revised to read as follows:
All remaining required improvements shall not be subject to a
Performance Guarantee but are still subject to inspection by the
Township Engineer as set forth hereinafter to ensure installation of said
improvements as required on or before an agreed date and as
hereinafter provided."
Section 22A(2) shall be revised to read as follows:
Except as hereafter provided, the remaining required private
improvements shall be at least fifty percent (50%) complete within one
1) year from the date of final approval or by such time as fifty percent
50%) of the Lots in the section in question have been conveyed in any
manner by the Applicant, whichever shall occur first. At least seventyfive percent ( 75%) of the remaining required private improvements
shall be complete within eighteen ( 18) months from the date of final
approval, or at such time as seventy-five percent ( 75%) of the Lots in
the section in question have been conveyed in any manner by the
Applicant, whichever occurs first. Said private improvements shall be
one hundred percent ( 100%) complete and accepted by the Township
within two (2) years from the date of final approval or at such time as
all of the Lots in the section in question have been conveyed in any
manner by the Applicant, whichever occurs first. It is the intention of
the Township Committee that this requirement will provide to those
living in each new section of the subdivision, a Lot that is as cornplete
as possible with respect to tract and individual Lot improvements."
Section 22C shall be revised to read as follows:
A period shall be placed after the words ' Certificate ofOccupancy.' The
following words shall be deleted . . . or within one hundred twenty
120) days of a temporary Certificate of Occupancy if the Performance
Guarantee covering the balance of the uncompleted improvements has
been posted.
Section 22D( 1) shall be revised to read as follows:
A Performance Guarantee for only those improvements to be dedicated
to the Township, or ifapplicable for Perimeter Buffer landscaping, shall
be prepared by the Township Engineer for review and approval, setting
forth all required improvements as determined by the Board and their
estimated cost, No Performance Guarantee shall be required for the
installation of utilities and they will be installed by the applicable utility
company. Any adjustment in the amount of the Guarantee shall be
approved by Resolution of the Township Committee. At the
Developer' s option a separate Performance Guarantee may he posted
for the privately owned Perimeter Buffer landscaping."
Section 176- 25 captioned " Inspections and Tests," the first Paragraph,
shall be revised to read as follows:
All site improvements and utility installations for Site Plans,
Subdivisions, Plot Plans and other realty improvements shall be
inspected during the time of their installation under the supervision of
the 'fownship Engineer to ensure satisfactory completion. The costs of
said inspections shall be the responsibility of the Developer who shall
deposit with the Township Chief Financial Officer inspection fees in an
amount not to exceed, except for extraordinary circumstances, the
greater of Five Hundred ($ 500.00) Dollars or five percent ( 5%) of the
cost of the public improvements as determined by the Township
Engineer in accordance with § 176-22D(2) and not to exceed five
percent ( 5%) of the cost of the remaining improvements that are not
subject to the Performance Guarantee, provided.
Section 25A( 1) shall be revised to read as follows:
For those Developments for which the inspection fees total less than Ten
Thousand ($ 10, 000.00) Dollars, fees may at the option of the Developer be
paid in two ( 2) installments. The initial amount deposited in escrow by a
Developer shall be fifty percent ( 50%) of the inspection fee. When the
balance on deposit drops to ten percent ( 10%) ofthe inspection fees because
the amount deposited by the Developer has been reduced by the amount
paid to the Township Engineer for inspections, the Developer shall deposit
the remaining fifty percent ( 50%) of the inspection fees."
Section 25A( 2) shall be revised to read as follows:
For those Developments for which the inspection fees total Ten Thousand
10, 000.00) Dollars or greater, fees may at the option of the Developer be
paid in four (4) installments. The initial amount deposited in escrow by a
Developer shall be twenty-five percent (25%) of the inspection fee. When
the balance on deposit drops to ten percent ( 10%) of the inspection fees
because the amount deposited by the Developer has been reduced by the
amount paid to the Township Engineer for inspections, the Developer shall
make an additional deposit of twenty-five percent (25%) of the inspection
fees, which shall continue to apply to the third and fourth deposits of
twenty-five percent (25%) of the inspection fees." 
A new Section 25A( 3) is added to read as follows:
If the Township determines that the amount in escrow for the payment of
inspection fees as calculated pursuant to Paragraphs A( 1) and ( 2) above is
insufficient to cover the cost of additional required inspections, the
Township shall require the Developer to deposit additional funds in escrow
provided that the Township delivers to the Developer a written Inspection
Escrow Deposit Request, signed by the Township Engineer which informs
the Developer of the need for additional inspections, details the items of
undertaking that require inspection, estimates the time required for those
inspections, and estimates the costs of performing those inspections."
Section 176- 27, Paragraph B shall be revised to read as follows:
The Owner/Developer shall have posted with the Township Committee,
prior to the release of the Performance Guarantee, a Maintenance Guarantee
in an amount equal to not more than fifteen percent ( 15%) of the cost of
installation of the public improvements which are being released. The
Owner/Developer shall also post with the Township Committee, upon the
inspection and issuance of the final approval of the following private site
irnprovements by the Township Engineer, a Maintenance Guarantee in an
amount not to exceed fifteen percent ( 15%) of the cost of the installation of
the following private site improvements: stormwater management basins,
in -flow and water quality structures within the basins and the out -flow pipes
and structures of the stormwater management system, if any, the cost of the
Maintenance Guarantee to be determined by the Township Engineer in
accordance with Section 176-22D( 2). The Maintenance Guarantee shall run
for a period of two (2) years. The procedures and requirements governing
such Maintenance Guarantee shall be identical with the procedures and
requirements for a Performance Guarantee set forth in this Chapter. The
requirements for a Maintenance Guarantee may be waived by the Township
Committee only if the Township Engineer has certified that the
improvements have been in continuous use for not less than two ( 2) years
from the date the Township Committee certified completion of such
improvements and that during this time period the Owner/Developer has
maintained the improvements in a satisfactory manner."
Section 2. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of
this Ordinance shall be judged invalid by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such order ofjudgment
shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or
clause of this Ordinance. 
Section 3. All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances inconsistent with this Ordinance, are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency only.
Section 4. This Ordinance shall take effect immediately after final adoption and publication
as required by law and approval by the New Jersey Pinelands Commission.
I
C
Lori A. Friddell, RMC, Township Clerk
Introduced: April 11, 2018
Public Hearing: April 25, 2018
Adopted: April 25, 2018
William A. Richardson, Jr., Mayor
ORDINANCE NO. 2018- 10
UPON INTRODUCTION ON 4- 11- 2018
GIANGIULIO HANNA SURA YEATMAN RICHARDSON
YES X X X X
ABSTAIN
NO
ABSENT X
UPON ADOPTION ON 4-25-2018
GIANGIULIO HANNA SURA YEATMAN RICHARDSON
YES 1.-- Y.
ABSTAIN
NO
ABSENT
Certified to be a true copy of an Ordinance adopted by the Mayor and Township Committee of the
Township of Waterford at a Meeting held on April 25, 2018.
Dated: April 25, 2018
CO LifidtW
Lori A. Friddell, RMC, Township Clerk