Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of Code by Board of Health — See
Ch. 221, Art. I.
1:1

ARTICLE I
Definitions; General Penalty
[Adopted 12-20-1971 as Ch. I of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 1-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Code, and in the interpretation and application
of all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the
context may otherwise require, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLERK or TOWNSHIP CLERK — The Municipal Clerk duly elected pursuant
to law.
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit of the township government
established or designated by ordinance or this Code as a department,
together with any agency or instrumentality of the township government
assigned to such organizational unit by the township committee.
LICENSED — Licensed in accordance with the appropriate section or
chapter of this Code.
MONTH — A calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
ORDINANCE — Any act of local legislation heretofore or hereafter adopted,
and including this Code, so long as it shall have been adopted by the
procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it shall
remain in force and effect pursuant to law.
PERSON — Any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint ventures,
societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
STREET — Includes a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk and crosswalk, and every class of
road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general public.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Washington in the County of Morris and
State of New Jersey.
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE or COMMITTEE — The duly elected
committeemen of the township.
YEAR — A calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-2. Construction.
For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
A. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future,
the present.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:3
§ 1-3. General penalty. [Added 5-1-1979 by Ord. No. 50-79]
B. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
C. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular.
D. "Shall" is mandatory, and "may" is permissive.
E. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first and including the last day and if the last day be a
Sunday, a legal holiday or a day on which the offices of the borough are
closed, that day shall be excluded.
F. "Writing" and "written" shall include printing, typewriting and any
other mode of communication using paper or similar material which is
in general use, as well as legible handwriting.
G. Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the
prevailing and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey
during any day in any year.
A. Maximum penalty. Whenever, under this Code or any rule, regulation or
order duly promulgated by an officer or agency of the Township by
authority of this Code, any act is prohibited or declared to be unlawful,
or the doing of any act is required and no specific penalty is provided
with respect thereto, the violation of any such provision of the
ordinance, rules, regulation or order shall be punishable by one or more
of the following: a) imprisonment in the county jail or in any place
provided by the Township for the detention of prisoners for any term
not exceeding 90 days; b) a period of community service not exceeding
90 days; or c) by a fine not exceeding $2,000. [Amended 10-15-1984
by Ord. No. 25-84; 4-16-2007 by Ord. No. 9-07]
B. Separate violations. Except as otherwise provided, each and every day
in which a violation of any such provision of the ordinance, rule or
regulation exists shall constitute a separate violation.
C. Application. The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended
to state an appropriate penalty for each and every violation. Any lesser
penalty, including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be
appropriate for a particular case or a particular violation.
D. Amendments. In case of any amendment of or addition to any section or
chapter of this Code, the penalty provided for the violation of such
section or chapter shall also relate to the amendment or addition,
whether reenacted in the amendatory ordinance or not, unless such
penalty is specifically repealed or amended therein.
E. Revocation of license. The imposition of any penalty for a violation of
this Code or any ordinance of the township or of the Board of Health
shall not preclude the suspension or revocation of any license or permit
issued by the township.
§ 1-2 WASHINGTON CODE § 1-3
1:4
F. Where a fine in an amount greater than $1,250 is imposed upon an
owner for violations of housing or zoning codes, owner shall be
provided a thirty-day period in which the owner shall be afforded the
opportunity to cure or abate the condition and shall also be afforded an
opportunity for a hearing before a competent jurisdiction for an
independent determination concerning the violation. Subsequent to the
expiration of the thirty-day period, a fine greater than $1,250 may be
imposed if a court has not determined otherwise or, upon reinspection
of the property, it is determined that the abatement has not been
substantially completed. [Added 4-16-2007 by Ord. No. 9-07]
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:5

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code of the Township of Washington Township
Committee
[Adopted 2-15-1999 by Ord. No. 1-99]
Be it ordained and enacted by the Township Committee of the Township of
Washington, County of Morris, State of New Jersey, as follows:
§ 1-4. Adoption of renumbering.
The ordinances of the Township of Washington of a general and permanent
nature adopted by the Township Committee of the Township of Washington
12-20-1971, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles
and sections by General Code Publishers Corp. as set forth below, and
as renumbered to consist of Chapters 1 through 218, together with an
Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the
"Code of the Township of Washington," hereafter known and referred to as
the "Code."
Distribution Table
Chapter in 1971 Code Chapter in 1998 Code
1. General Ch. 1
2. Administration Ch. 3
3. General Fire Regulation
Sec. 3-1 Fire Department Ch. 13
Sec. 3-2 Fire Prevention Ch. 87
Sec. 3-3 (Reserved)
Sec. 3-4 Hazardous Materials
Cleanup
Ch. 101
4. Police Department Ch. 27
5. Personnel Ch. 24
Sec. 5-9 Defense and
Indemnification of Employees and
Officers
Ch. 21
6. General Police Regulations
Sec. 6-1 Littering Ch. 114
Sec. 6-2 Noise Ch. 125
Sec. 6-3 Loitering Ch. 117
Sec. 6-4 Removal of Grass, Weeds,
Brush and Other Debris
Ch. 53
Sec. 6-5 Abandoned Motor
Vehicles
Ch. 200
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:7
Distribution Table
Chapter in 1971 Code Chapter in 1998 Code
Sec. 6-6 Removal of Snow and Ice Ch. 172, Art. IV
Sec. 6-7 Certain Acts Prohibited
Secs. 6-7.1 - 6-7.25 Ch. 140
Sec. 6-7.26 Ch. 172, Art. VIII
Sec. 6-9 Games of Chance Ch. 96
Sec. 6-10 Use and Operation of
Certain Motor-Driven Vehicles
Ch. 207
Sec. 6-11 Public Parks and
Recreational Areas
Ch. 137
Sec. 6-12 Open Pits and Trenches Ch. 132
Sec. 6-13 Halloween Curfew Ch. 74, Art. I
Sec. 6-14 Alarm Systems Ch. 39
Sec. 6-15 Traffic Control
Regulations
Ch. 172, Art. IX
Sec. 6-16 Drug-Free School Zones Ch. 79
Sec. 6-17 Sale of Tobacco Ch. 189
7. Licensing
Sec. 7-1 Peddlers, Hawkers and
Solicitors
Ch. 143
Sec. 7-2 (Reserved)
Sec. 7-3 Carnivals and Circuses Ch. 66
Sec. 7-4 Licensing of Taxicabs and
Limousines
Ch. 185
Sec. 7-5 Mobile Home Parks Ch. 121
8. Alcoholic Beverage Control Ch. 42
9. Licensing of Dogs Ch. 46, Art. I
10. Traffic Ch. 203
11. Fire Prevention (Reserved)
12. Buildings and Housing
Sec. 12-1 Building Subcode Ch. 56, Art. I
Sec. 12-2 Moving of Buildings Ch. 60
Sec. 12-3 Housing Code Ch. 240
Sec. 12-4 Property Maintenance Ch. 148
Sec. 12-5 Occupancy Permits Ch. 129
Sec. 12-6 Housing Rehabilitation
Program
Ch. 105, Art. I
§ 1-4 WASHINGTON CODE § 1-4
1:8
Distribution Table
Chapter in 1971 Code Chapter in 1998 Code
12A. Uniform Construction Code Ch. 56, Art. II
13. Streets, Sidewalks and Driveway
Sec. 13-1 Street Openings Ch. 172, Art. V
Sec. 13-2 Requirements and
Specifications for Acceptance of
Streets
Ch. 172, Art. I
Sec. 13-3 Construction of
Sidewalks
Ch. 172, Art. II
Sec. 13-4 Construction of
Driveways
Ch. 172, Art. III
Sec. 13-5 Existing Streets Ch. 172, Art. VI
Sec. 13-6 Water Entering Onto
Township Roads
Ch. 172, Art. VII
14. Public Water Supply Ch. 213
14A. Sewers Ch. 155
15. Environment
Sec. 15-1 Soil Removal Ch. 164
Sec. 15-2 Trees and Shrubs Ch. 196
Sec. 15-3 Enforcement Ch. 196
Sec. 15-4 Floodplain Management Ch. 92
16. Land Subdivision Ch. 175
17. Zoning Ch. 217
18. CATV Ch. A258
19. Swimming Pools Ch. 179
20. Land Use Procedures Ch. 111
21. Site Plan Review Ch. 159
22. Fire Insurance Claims Ch. 108, Art. I
23. (Reserved)
24. Mandatory Recycling Ch. 168, Art. I
25. Home Improvements Tax
Exemption
Ch. 182, Art. I
26. Cats Ch. 46, Art. II
27. Animals
Sec. 27-1 Livestock Nuisances Ch. 46, Art. III
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:9
§ 1-5. Additional changes.
The following changes are hereby adopted as part of the process of
republication:
A. References to N.J.R.S. are hereby revised to cite N.J.S.A.
B. References to "this revision" are hereby revised to "this Code."
C. Section 6-8, Penalty, is deleted.
§ 1-5 WASHINGTON CODE § 1-5
1:10
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 13.
Police Department — See Ch. 27.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 111.
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:11

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 3-1. Title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Administrative Code of the Township of
Washington" and is referred to herein as the "code."
§ 3-2. Elective officers. [Amended 5-21-79 by Ord. No. 43-79]
§ 3-3. Appointive officers.
A. Enumerated. The elective officers of the Township shall be the five
members of the Township Committee. [Amended 4-17-2000 by Ord.
No. 9-00]
B. Residence; terms. All officers shall be residents of the Township, except
where otherwise provided by law.
C. Vacancies. Any person appointed by the Township Committee to fill a
vacancy in any elective office, other than a position on the Township
Committee, shall hold office until January 1 after the general election
next succeeding his or her appointment, and at that election some fit
person shall be elected to fill the unexpired term. If a vacancy occurs at
so short a period of time before the next general election that the office
cannot be filled at that election, the Township Committee may fill the
vacancy in the same manner as though it had occurred immediately
after the election, and the vacancy shall then be filled at the next
subsequent general election for the unexpired term. Vacancies on the
Township Committee shall be filled in accordance with the Municipal
Governing Body Vacancy Law.1
A. Enumeration. The Township Committee shall appoint and employ a
Township Clerk, Tax Collector, Township Attorney, Township Engineer,
Township Construction Official and Chief Financial Officer who shall
also hold the title of "Township Treasurer." The Township Committee
may also appoint other officers as it may deem necessary from time to
time. [Amended 5-21-79 by Ord. No. 43-79; 2-20-89 by Ord. No.
3-89; 4-17-2000 by Ord. No. 9-00]
B. Commencement of term. All appointive officers, except where
otherwise provided by law, shall hold office until January 1 next
following their appointment.
C. Vacancies. Where a vacancy occurs in any appointive office, the
Township Committee shall fill the vacancy for the unexpired term;
except in the case where the Township Committee grants a leave of
absence to join any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States. No
1. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:45B-1 et seq.
§ 3-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-3
1:13
officer shall hold over in his office after the expiration of the term for
which he has been appointed.
§ 3-3 WASHINGTON CODE § 3-3
1:14
ARTICLE II
Township Committee
§ 3-4. Legislative power.
All legislative power of the Township shall be exercised by the Township
Committee pursuant to law.
§ 3-5. Organization of Township Committee.
The Township Committee shall organize annually on the first day of January,
or during the first seven days of January, at which time it shall elect a Mayor
and a Vice Mayor from among its members. The Mayor shall preside at
meetings of the Township Committee and perform such other duties as the
Township Committee may prescribe. During the absence or disability of the
Mayor, the Vice Mayor shall preside over the Township Committee.
§ 3-6. Powers of the Mayor.
The Mayor shall have the power to make proclamations concerning holidays
and events of interest to the Township. He may from time to time appoint
citizens' committees to inquire into matters that are of interest to the
Township, and he shall have such other appointment powers as are
conferred upon him by law; all appointments shall be subject to
confirmation except where otherwise provided by law. He shall have and
exercise the ceremonial power of the Township, and he shall exercise every
other power usually exercised by Township mayors and conferred upon him
by law.
§ 3-7. Meetings of the Township Committee.
A. Regular meetings. The Township Committee shall meet annually on the
first day or during the first seven days of January in any year. At the
aforesaid meeting, the Township Committee shall fix the time and place
for holding regular meetings during the ensuing year. The Township
Committee shall post and maintain posted throughout the year a
schedule of such regular meetings in a public place reserved for such or
similar announcements. In addition, such schedule shall be mailed to at
least two newspapers designated by the Township Committee to receive
such notices, one of which shall be the official newspaper, and filed with
the Township Clerk for the purpose of public inspection. Such schedule
shall contain the location of each meeting, to the extent that is known,
and the time and date of each meeting. In the event that such schedule
is thereafter revised, the Township Committee, within seven days
following such revision, shall post, mail and submit such revisions in the
manner described above, in strict compliance with the provisions of the
Open Public Meetings Act.2 [Amended 5-21-1979 by Ord. No. 43-79]
2. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-1 et seq.
§ 3-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-7
1:15
§ 3-8. Meetings; rules of Township Committee.
All regular and special meetings of the Township Committee shall be open
to the public. The rules of procedure to be followed for the conduct of
business of the Committee shall be provided by resolution. Where not
otherwise provided, Robert's Rules of Order, revised, shall govern, and the
Township Attorney shall be parliamentarian ex officio.3
§ 3-9. Quorum. [Amended 5-21-1979 by Ord. No. 43-79]
A majority of the whole number of members of the Township Committee
shall constitute a quorum, and no ordinance shall be adopted by the
Township Committee without the affirmative vote of a majority of the
quorum of the Committee. If a quorum is not present one hour after the
appointed time for any meeting, those members present may declare the
meeting adjourned.
§ 3-10. Voting; ordinances.
The vote upon every resolution or ordinance shall be taken by roll call, and
the yeas and nays shall be entered on the minutes. All ordinances shall be
introduced, considered, published, reconsidered and enacted in the manner
provided by general law.
§ 3-11. Consent agenda. [Added 7-18-1994 by Ord. No. 14-94]
B. Other meetings. The Township Committee may call special meetings
from time to time, as required. In all cases of special or rescheduled
meetings, written advance notice of at least 48 hours, giving the time,
date, location and, to the extent known, the agenda of said meeting,
including a statement on whether formal action may or may not be
taken, shall be posted, mailed, telegrammed or hand-delivered, and
filed as provided in Subsection A of this section. [Amended 5-21-1979
by Ord. No. 43-79]
A. There is hereby authorized a consent agenda for inclusion as a part of
the agenda of every regularly scheduled meeting of the Township
Committee.
B. Items which may be included in the consent agenda include, but are not
limited to, the following:
(1) Approval of minutes; approval of payment of bills.
(2) Conveyances, easements, leases and agreements previously
approved in principle.
(3) Acceptance of recreation facility contributions.
3. Editor's Note: Former Subsection 2-4.6, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 5-21-1979 by Ord. No. 43-79.
§ 3-7 WASHINGTON CODE § 3-11
1:16
(4) Routine reports of receipt and awards of bids.
(5) Payroll.
(6) Bingo and raffle applications.
(7) Refund of tax payments of less than $1,500 for the year in question.
(8) Cancellation of tax sale certificates.
(9) Honorary and memorial resolutions when the individual or
members of the family are not present at the Township Committee
meeting.
(10) Resolutions for permits to hold parades, sidewalk sales,
solicitations and other similar matters.
(11) Payment of outside attorney fees in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:14-155.
(12) Placing of liens on property for demolition thereof or removal of a
health or safety hazard.
(13) Developer's agreements, including extensions and addendums.
(14) Other routine matters not requiring further discussion.
C. The consent agenda shall consist of any item so designated by the
Township Committee and marked on the agenda with an asterisk.
D. No item shall be designated on the consent agenda unless an accurate
copy of the resolution, proclamation, report or other matter which is the
subject of the consent item is filled with the Township Clerk at least 24
hours prior to the meeting at which the item is to be considered.
E. Prior to voting upon any item on the consent agenda, the Mayor shall
open the meeting to members of the public for the sole purpose of
hearing requests for removal of items from the consent agenda. There
will be no separate discussion of items on the consent agenda unless
the Mayor, a member of the Township Committee or citizen so requests,
in which event the item will be removed from the consent agenda and
considered in its normal sequence on the regular agenda.
F. Those items which appear on the consent agenda are not required to be
read at the meeting in their entirety.
G. Once a matter is placed on the consent agenda and no member of the
Township Committee or public requests its removal, there will be no
separate discussion of that item.
H. All items on the consent agenda shall be listed separately on the
agenda, but shall be approved by one motion and one vote at the time of
consideration of the consent agenda as a whole by the Committee.
§ 3-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-11
1:17
I. All items approved on the consent agenda will appear on the Committee
minutes in their complete and proper form.
§ 3-11 WASHINGTON CODE § 3-11
1:18
ARTICLE III
Township Clerk
§ 3-12. Clerk of Township Committee.
The Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the Township Committee. He shall attend
and keep the minutes of all meetings of the Committee. The minutes shall
be signed by the Clerk and approved by motion of the Committee.
§ 3-13. Ordinances and resolutions.
§ 3-14. Custodian of records.
The Clerk shall have custody of and safely keep all records, books and
documents of the Township, except those committed by ordinance to any
other office or transferred thereto by the Township Committee. He shall,
on request and the payment of the fees prescribed by law, furnish certified
copies of any papers in his custody under the Corporate Seal of the
Township.
§ 3-15. Corporate Seal.
The Clerk shall cause the Corporate Seal of the Township to be affixed to
instruments and writings when authorized by ordinance or resolution of
the Township Committee or when necessary to exemplify any document on
record in his office or to certify any act or paper which from the records
in his office appears to have been a public act of the Township or a public
document. He shall not affix the seal or cause or permit it to be affixed
to any other instrument, writing or other paper unless required by law or
ordinance.
§ 3-16. Insurance; surety bonds; contracts.
The Clerk, subject to the suspension of the Township Committee, shall:
A. The Clerk shall record all ordinances of a permanent character in books
to be provided for that purpose. After each ordinance he shall record
and certify the proof of publication thereof as required by law. Each
ordinance so recorded shall be signed by the Mayor and the Clerk, who
shall attest that it was duly adopted upon a date stated, and when so
signed the recorded copy shall be deemed to be a public record of the
ordinance. Any omission by the Clerk or the Mayor to sign or certify
shall not impair or affect the validity of any ordinance which has been
duly adopted.
B. At the close of each year, the Clerk, with the advice and assistance of
the Township Attorney, shall bind, compile or codify all the ordinances
or true copies thereof which then remain in force and effect. He shall
also properly index the record books, compilation or codification of
ordinances. The Township Committee may authorize such services to be
performed by outside consultants.
§ 3-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-16
1:19
§ 3-17. Administrative rules and regulations; filing and publication.
The Clerk shall maintain a current compilation of all rules and regulations
which shall be available for public inspection in his office during business
hours. No rule or general regulation made by any department, officer,
agency or authority of the Township, except such as relates to the
organization or internal management of the municipal government or a part
thereof, shall take effect until it is filed with the Clerk.
§ 3-18. Oaths.
The Clerk shall have the power to administer oaths in all matters
concerning Township business.
§ 3-19. Notice to officers.
The Township Clerk, within five days after the Township Committee has
appointed or elected any officer, whether to fill a vacancy or otherwise, shall
cause to be delivered to or left at the place of abode of the person so elected
or appointed, a written notice of his election or appointment, and within
the same time he shall file a certified copy of the record of the election or
appointment with the Clerk of the county.
§ 3-20. Other laws and ordinances.
In addition to such other functions, powers and duties as may be prescribed
by ordinance, and subject to the supervision and direction of the Township
Committee, the Clerk shall:
A. Be the depository for and custodian of all official surety bonds furnished
by or on account of any officer or employee, except his own bond which
shall be placed in the custody of the Treasurer; of all insurance policies
upon or with respect to risks insured for the benefit of the Township or
to protect it against any claim, demand or liability whatsoever; and all
formal contracts for work, labor, services, supplies, equipment and
materials to which the Township may be a party.
B. Be the depository for and custodian of all performance bonds running to
the Township as obligee, or any other form of security or indemnity
given by any contractor, subdivision developer or other person on
account of work done or to be done in or for the Township.
C. Have custody of all leases of property owned by the Township.
D. Report to the Township Committee annually, at such time as it may
require, on the coverage, expiration date and premium of each surety
bond and contract of insurance; and report on the nature and terms of
outstanding leases, the rent reserved by each and their respective
expiration dates.
§ 3-16 WASHINGTON CODE § 3-20
1:20
§ 3-21. Deputy Township Clerk.
The Township Committee may appoint a Deputy Township Clerk. The
Deputy Clerk shall have all the powers and perform all the duties of the
Clerk during such times and specific periods as the Clerk shall be absent,
on vacation or on a leave of absence granted by the Township Committee.
He shall assist the Clerk in the performance of his duties as the Township
Committee may from time to time prescribe. The Deputy Township Clerk
shall serve at the pleasure of the Township Committee.
A. Perform all the functions required of municipal clerks by the General
Election Law (Title 19 of the Revised Statutes) and any other law or
ordinance.
B. Administer the provisions of Township ordinances with reference to the
licensing of occupations and activities for which licenses are required
by law or ordinance to be obtained from the Clerk.
C. Have such other different and additional functions, powers and duties
as may be prescribed by law or ordinance or delegated to him by the
Township Committee.
§ 3-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-21
1:21

ARTICLE IV
Township Administrator
[Added 10-16-1972]
§ 3-22. Establishment. [Amended 12-20-76]
The office of Administrator is hereby created in and for the Township of
Washington pursuant to the provisions of this article.
§ 3-23. Appointment. [Amended 12-20-1976]
The Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the governing body and the term of office of the Administrator
shall be at the pleasure of the Township Committee.
§ 3-24. Qualifications and requirements.
A. Any vacancy in the office shall be filled by appointment by the Township
Committee.
B. No elected member of the governing body may receive such
appointment during his normal term of office or within three years after
the normal expiration of his normal term of office, except for the
possibility of interim appointment not to exceed 90 days.
C. During the absence or disability of the duly appointed Administrator,
the Township Committee of the Township may, by resolution, appoint an
officer or regular employee of the municipality to perform the duties of
the Administrator during such absence or disability. Such absence or
disability shall be limited to a continuous three months after which time
further continuous absence or disability shall be deemed to create a
vacancy.
D. The Administrator may be removed by a two-thirds vote of the
governing body. The resolution of removal shall become effective three
months after its adoption by the governing body. The governing body
may provide that the resolution shall have immediate effect; provided,
however, that the governing body shall cause to be paid to the
Administrator forthwith any unpaid balance of his salary and his salary
for the next three calendar months following adoption of the resolution.
A. The Administrator shall be appointed on the basis of his executive and
administrative abilities and qualifications with special regard to
education, training and experience in governmental affairs.
B. He shall be a resident of the State of New Jersey and reside either
within the community or outside the community but within a reasonable
distance, as determined by the Township Committee. [Amended
4-18-1977]
§ 3-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-25
1:23
§ 3-25. Compensation.
The Administrator shall receive as compensation such sums as may be fixed
and adopted by the Township Committee in the annual Salary Ordinance of
the Township.
§ 3-26. Powers and duties.
The Administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the Township
and he shall be responsible to the Township Committee as a whole for the
proper and efficient administration of the business affairs of the Township.
His duties and responsibilities shall relate to the management of all
Township business, except those nondelegable duties and responsibilities
conferred by statute, other applicable laws and rules and regulations
promulgated by state and county agencies, or such as the Township
Committee may reserve to itself. He shall:
A. Represent the Township and assert its proper interests in relation to the
state and other political subdivisions and with respect to Township
contracts and franchises.
B. Attend all public meetings of the Committee, with the right to take part
in the discussions but without the right to vote, and other such
meetings as the Township Committee may direct.
C. Keep the Township Committee advised of the financial condition of the
Township, make reports to the Township Committee as requested by it
and, at least once a year, make an annual report on the administration
of the Township government for the benefit of the Township Committee
and the public.
D. Study the governmental and administrative operations and needs of the
Township and prepare and recommend to the Township Committee
necessary and desirable plans and programs to meet present and
foreseeable needs.
E. Inspect, at the request of the Township Committee, the duties and
responsibilities of any elected or appointed official and department of
the Township, submitting his report relating thereto to the Township
Committee for such further action as the Township Committee may
deem advisable in such instance.
F. Keep the public fully informed regarding the operations of the Township
government.
G. Keep the Township Committee informed as to the federal aid projects
and state aid projects and any other aid programs for which the
Township may qualify.
H. Perform such other duties as may be required by the Township
Committee.
§ 3-25 WASHINGTON CODE § 3-27
1:24
§ 3-27. Administrative supervision and direction.
The Administrator shall supervise all paid personnel of the Township
through the respective department heads and direct the business activities
of all municipal departments, including the direction of central purchasing
and the employment and replacement of personnel as may be required
in the departments within the limits prescribed from time to time by the
Township Committee.
§ 3-28. Personnel and appointments. [Amended 11-20-2006 by Ord.
No. 20-06]
The Administrator shall serve as the personnel officer of the Township
and recommend to the Township Committee the appointment, removal or
suspension of any Township employee other than Police, Fire Department
and First Aid Squad personnel.
§ 3-29. Full-time service; interest in contracts.
The Administrator shall devote his entire vocational time to the duties of his
office, and he shall have no interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract
job for work or materials, or the profits thereof, to be furnished to or
performed for the Township.
§ 3-30. Purchasing. [Amended 4-15-2019 by Ord. No. 06-19]
The Administrator shall be the purchasing officer of the Township and shall
purchase, in accordance with the provisions of the governing statutes and
sound purchasing practices, all materials, supplies and equipment for the
various agencies, boards, departments and other offices of the Township.
The Administrator shall also issue rules and regulations governing the
requisition and purchase of all municipal supplies and equipment,
consistent with the provisions of this article.
§ 3-31. Budget preparation.
The municipal budget shall be prepared by the Administrator. No later
than the first of November in each year, the Administrator shall require
all department heads to submit requests for appropriations for the ensuing
budget year. The request of department heads shall include such costs,
studies and analyses as are required by the Administrator.
§ 3-32. Budget document. [Amended 12-19-1977]
Upon the basis of the departmental requests, the budget hearings, the
Administrator's analysis of the needs and resources of the Township and
such policy guides as may be prescribed by resolution of the Committee, the
Administrator shall prepare his recommended budget in the form required
by general law for municipal budgets. On or before February 1, the
Administrator shall present to the Committee his budget document
consisting of:
§ 3-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-32
1:25
§ 3-33. Finance function.
The Administrator shall study, recommend, implement and enforce the
financial procedures and policies of the Township and its departments
after consultation with department heads with approval of the Township
Committee.
§ 3-34. Assistant Township Administrator. [Added 4-21-2003 by Ord.
No. 11-03]4
The office of Assistant Township Administrator is hereby created in and for
the Township of Washington. The Assistant Township Administrator shall
be appointed by the Township Committee, and the term of office of the
Assistant Township Administrator shall be at the pleasure of the Township
Committee. The Assistant Township Administrator shall have all the powers
and perform all of the duties of the Township Administrator during such
times and specific periods as the Township Administrator shall be absent,
on vacation or on a leave of absence granted by the Township Committee.
The Assistant Township Administrator shall assist the Administrator in the
performance of his/her duties as the Township Committee may from time to
time prescribe.
A. The recommended budget, including the departmental estimates and
the appropriations and expenditures for each account during the
previous year.
B. A budget message.
4. Editor's Note: Former § 3-34, Assistant Township Administrator, added 12-20-1982 by Ord.
No. 27-82, was repealed 4-17-2000 by Ord. No. 9-00.
§ 3-32 WASHINGTON CODE § 3-34
1:26
ARTICLE V
Administrative Organization
§ 3-35. Departments, boards and commissions. [Amended
5-21-1979 by Ord. No. 43-79]
There shall be the following departments, officers, boards and commissions
in the Township of Washington:
§ 3-36. Powers and duties of department heads.
The head of a department, subject to the code and the approval or direction
of the Township Committee or the responsible subcommittee thereof, shall:
A. Departments.
(1) Department of Finance.
(2) Department of Public Works.
(3) Police Department.
(4) Fire Department.
(5) Construction Code Enforcement Agency.
B. Separate offices not under departments.
(1) Township Attorney.
(2) Township Engineer.
C. Boards and commission; agencies.
(1) Municipal Court.
(2) Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(3) Planning Board.
(4) Public Assistance.
(5) Board of Health.
(6) Environmental Commission.
(7) Shade Tree Committee.
(8) Civil Defense and Disaster Control.
A. Prescribe the internal organization of the work of his department.
B. Direct and supervise subordinate officers and employees of the
department and make, alter and enforce individual work assignments.
§ 3-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-36
1:27
C. Approve or disapprove payrolls, bills and claims chargeable to
department appropriations.
D. Maintain records of work performance and unit costs thereof as may be
approved or required by the Township Committee.
E. Provide information and reports on the work of the department as may
from time to time be required by the Township Committee.
F. Exercise other or different powers of administrative supervision and
direction which the Township Committee delegates to him.
§ 3-36 WASHINGTON CODE § 3-36
1:28
ARTICLE VI
Department of Finance
§ 3-37. Establishment. [Amended 2-20-1989 by Ord. No. 3-89]
The financial business of the Township shall be committed to a Department
of Finance, the head of which shall be the Township Chief Financial Officer.
§ 3-38. Division of the Treasury. [Amended 2-20-1989 by Ord. No.
3-89]
§ 3-39. Division of Tax Collection. [Amended 2-20-1984 by Ord. No.
1-84]
A. Township Treasurer. Within the Department of Finance there shall be a
Division of the Treasury, the head of which shall be the Township
Treasurer, who shall serve for a term of one year unless otherwise
provided law.
B. Powers and duties of the Treasurer. The Treasurer shall have, perform
and exercise all the functions, powers and duties provided by general
law and Township ordinances. He shall keep and maintain books and
records of all financial transactions of the Township in accordance with
the standards and requirements of the Division of Local Finance in the
Department of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey. He shall
have custody of all public moneys of the Township and shall make
monthly reports to the Township Committee of all receipts,
expenditures, commitments and unexpended appropriations. Within 60
days after the end of each fiscal year, he shall, under penalties
prescribed by law, make to the Township Committee and file with the
Township Clerk a detailed statement of the amount of bonds issued and
outstanding and a full and detailed account of his receipts and
disbursements for the preceding fiscal year. The statement shall be in
writing and verified by his oath and may be prepared with the advice,
assistance and consultation of the Township Auditor. All moneys
received from any source by or on behalf of the Township or any
department, office or agency thereof, except as otherwise provided by
Township ordinance, shall be paid to the Treasurer, who shall within 48
hours after their receipt, deposit them in the authorized public
depository of the Township to the credit of the proper account.
A. Within the Department of Finance there shall be a Division of Tax
Collection, the head of which shall be the Tax Collector. Commencing
January 1, 1982, no Tax Collector shall be appointed or reappointed or
acquire tenure unless she possesses a valid Tax Collector's certification
issued pursuant to P.L. 1979, c. 384.5
B. The Tax Collector shall possess all the powers and duties established by
law. She shall enter in suitable books to be kept for that purpose the
5. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:9-145.7.
§ 3-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-39
1:29
§ 3-40. Division of Tax Assessments. [Amended 5-21-79 by Ord. No.
43-79]
Within the Department of Finance there shall be a Division of Tax
Assessments, the head of which shall be the Tax Assessor. On and after
July 1, 1971, no person may be an Assessor unless he or she holds a Tax
Assessor's certificate.
§ 3-41. Tax Search Officer.
The Tax Search Officer shall be appointed by the Township Committee.
He shall furnish reports and certificates relating to property taxes and
assessments in the Township.
§ 3-42. Payment of claims and demands. [Added 8-20-1973]
sums received by her each day for taxes, with the names of the persons
on whose account the same have been paid, shall keep a record and
account of the finances of the Township and shall, within 60 days after
the end of the fiscal year or when otherwise required by the Township
Committee, make and furnish a report thereof, with a detailed and
true statement of all moneys received by her and disbursed therefrom
and for what purposes, from the commencement of her official year to
the date of her report or for such period as the Township Committee
may require, and a list of delinquent taxpayers for the previous year.
She shall file the report, together with two copies of the statement
and list of delinquents, with the Clerk within the time hereinabove
specified or when otherwise required by the Township Committee. She
shall, as necessary and as directed, arrange for sales of real estate for
delinquent taxes.
A. Any person claiming payment from the Township shall present a
detailed bill of demand to the administrator, duly certified or in the
alternative supported by an affidavit of the claimant.
B. The Administrator shall be the officer responsible for the placing of any
order for any services, equipment, materials or other items necessary
to conduct Township business, and it shall also be the duty of the
Administrator to see to it that the signature of an officer, employee or
Chairman of the committee responsible for the acceptance of the
materials acknowledges the receipt of such materials or services by the
Township.
C. Every approved claim shall be filed with the Chief Financial Officer, who
shall then present the claims to the Township Committee for formal
approval at a regular meeting. [Amended 4-15-2019 by Ord. No.
06-19]
D. Claims shall be considered by the Administrator, as purchasing officer,
who shall approve, endorse and recommend payment to the Committee
at the next regular meeting. The Mayor and the Committee, or, in the
§ 3-39 WASHINGTON CODE § 3-42
1:30
§ 3-43. (Reserved)6
absence of the Mayor, the Deputy Mayor and the Committee, shall
approve the same, except that they may reject any claim presented
stating the reason for rejection. Disapproved claims shall be referred
back to the Administrator with any instructions the Township
Committee may give at the time of disapproval.
E. It shall be the duty of the Clerk to record all claims in the official
minutes indicating that the Township Committee has by formal action
approved the claim, with appropriate record as to any claims
disapproved or rejected.
F. If shall be the duty of the Administrator or other officer designated by
resolution of the Committee to indicate on the claims that they have
been approved for payment, with the date of approval noted thereon.
G. After the Clerk has certified that the claims have been approved, they
shall be turned over to the Treasurer, who shall forthwith prepare the
necessary checks for payment. Checks shall be signed by the Mayor and
the Clerk and thereafter countersigned by the Treasurer or
Administrator. After preparing checks for the payment of claims, they
shall be recorded in proper books of account and mailed or otherwise
distributed to the claimants. [Amended 4-15-2019 by Ord. No.
06-19]
H. The payroll shall be approved by the department head and presented to
the Administrator for approval. The Administrator shall present the
payroll to the Township Committee for approval, and after approval
shall be paid in due course.
I. The Chief Financial Officer shall keep an accounting of all purchases,
and shall, from time to time or when so directed by the Township
Committee, make a full report. [Added 4-15-2019 by Ord. No. 06-19]
6. Editor's Note: Former § 3-43, Joint Municipal Tax Assessor, added 8-21-1972, was repealed
3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 2-99.
§ 3-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-43
1:31

ARTICLE VII
Department of Public Works
§ 3-44. Superintendent of Public Works.
There may be an office of the Superintendent of Public Works. The
Superintendent of Public Works shall be appointed by the Township
Committee.
§ 3-45. Duties of Department.
The Department of Public Works, through the Superintendent of Public
Works, shall take charge of and be responsible for the construction,
operation and maintenance of all public buildings, grounds, streets, roads,
parks, storm sewers and other public facilities, except sanitary sewers; the
cutting of brush, mowing of grass and removal of snow; the cleaning of
ditches; and the care of all other public works in the Township.
§ 3-46. Duties of Superintendent of Public Works.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall:
A. Qualifications. The Superintendent of Public Works shall be a person
qualified by education, training and experience to perform the duties of
his office. He shall have secured and be the holder of all necessary and
required licenses, certificates and permits. He shall devote full-time
hours to the duties of his office but shall not be precluded from holding
any other office or engaging in any other employment, provided that
such office or employment does not interfere in any way with his
responsibility to provide immediate emergency response to the
Township. [Amended 2-21-2000 by Ord. No. 1-00]
B. Supervision. He shall be under the direct supervision of the Township
Administrator subject to the superior authority of the Township
Committee and the Public Works Committee thereof. [Amended
3-17-1980 by Ord. No. 13-80]
A. Set up and maintain adequate inventory and control thereof of all
materials and supplies needed for the maintenance and repair of all
public works under his supervision.
B. Submit to the Township Committee a monthly report of all work
performed, services furnished and inspections made during the
previous month.
C. Submit to the Township Committee and Administrator his
recommendations for budget appropriations for the ensuing year.
[Amended 3-17-1980 by Ord. No. 13-80]
D. Recommend for approval the expenditure of all funds by voucher
chargeable against the public works' budget.
§ 3-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-46
1:33
§ 3-47. Rules and regulations.
The Township may by resolution make rules and regulations necessary for
the proper regulation of the Department of Public Works, and these shall
be known as the rules and regulations governing the Department of Public
Works and shall be binding on each member of the department.
E. Inspect or be responsible for the inspection of all storm sewer lines in
the Township, individually or in conjunction with other designated
officials.
F. Receive and investigate all complaints from residents and taxpayers of
the Township relating to the operations under his jurisdiction, take
appropriate action thereon and report results to the Township
Committee.
G. Attend all Township Committee meetings and meetings of the Public
Works Committee.
H. Supervise the operation, maintenance and repair of Township-owned
equipment used in the performance of the work assigned to him.
I. Set up, keep and maintain all the necessary books, records, field notes,
maps, surveys and similar material necessary to perform the duties of
his office and turn over all such records to his successor or to the
Township Committee on the termination of his employment by the
Township.
J. Recommend the need for repairs and replacements to Township-owned
equipment, structures, buildings and grounds.
K. Supervise the performance of the work of personnel assigned to his
jurisdiction.
§ 3-46 WASHINGTON CODE § 3-47
1:34
ARTICLE VIII
Police Department
§ 3-48. Established.
There shall be a Police Department of the Township established in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 27 of this Code.
§ 3-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-48
1:35

ARTICLE IX
Fire Department
[Amended 5-21-1979 by Ord. No. 43-79; 6-24-1980 by Ord. No.
3080; 6-18-1984 by Ord. No. 12-84]
§ 3-49. Establishment.
There shall be a Fire Department of the Township established in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 13 of this Code.
§ 3-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-49
1:37

ARTICLE X
Department of Inspections
[Amended 5-21-1979 by Ord. No. 43-79]
§ 3-50. Establishment.
There shall be a Construction Code Enforcement Agency of the Township
established in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 56, Article II, of
this Code.
§ 3-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-50
1:39

ARTICLE XI
Department of Recreation7
[Added 11-21-1988 by Ord. No. 32-88]
§ 3-51. Recreation Director.
There shall be an Office of Recreation Director. The Recreation Director
shall be appointed by the Township Committee. The Township Committee
shall further appoint such other aides or employees as the Township
Committee deems necessary for the proper supervision and administration
of the recreation programs.
§ 3-52. Duties of Department.
The Department of Recreation, through the Recreation Director, shall be
charged with the responsibility to plan, promote and organize various
recreational programs within the Township. This power shall be exercised
in conjunction with recommendations and programs developed the Advisory
Recreation Committee.
§ 3-53. Duties of Recreation Director.
The Recreation Director shall:
A. Recommend to the governing body fee schedules which shall defray the
costs of such recreation programs among the users. Such schedules
need not defray 100% of all operating costs.
B. Recommend to the governing body the purchase of equipment and/or
facilities necessary for the proper functioning of its programs.
C. Upon request, submit a proposed recreation budget for each calendar
year. The governing body shall annually appropriate, in its budget,
funds to be utilized for such recreation programs as it deems necessary.
Funds may only be expended or obligated by the Recreation Director
with proper authorization by the Township Purchasing Agent.
D. Control and administer recreational facilities, playground facilities and
any other facilities related to leisure time activities of the residents of
the Township of Washington in a safe and wholesome condition for use.
7. Editor's Note: Former Section 2-12, Department of Water Pollution Control, was repealed
5-21-79 by Ord. No. 43-79.
§ 3-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-53
1:41

ARTICLE XII
Township Attorney
§ 3-54. Appointment.
The Township Attorney shall be appointed by the Township Committee. He
shall be an attorney at law of New Jersey. The Attorney shall receive a
retainer and, in addition, shall be paid his reasonable fees and charges.
§ 3-55. Powers and duties.
The Attorney shall give all legal counsel and advice required by the
Township Committee or any member thereof, and in general shall serve as
the legal advisor to the Township Committee on all matters of Township
business. He shall represent the Township in all judicial and administrative
proceedings in which the Township or any of its officers or agencies not
separately represented may be a party or have an interest. In furtherance
of his general powers and duties, but without limiting them, the Attorney
shall:
A. Draft or approve as to form and sufficiency all legal documents,
contracts, deeds, ordinances and resolutions made, executed or
adopted by or on behalf of the Township.
B. Conduct appeals from orders, decisions or judgments affecting any
interest of the Township.
C. With the approval of the Township Committee, compromise or settle
litigation in which the Township is involved.
D. Render written opinions upon questions of law submitted to him by the
Township Committee or any member thereof with respect to his official
powers and duties.
E. Supervise and direct the work of any additional attorneys and technical
and professional assistants the Township Committee may authorize for
special or regular employment in or for the Township in connection with
a legal matter.
§ 3-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-55
1:43

ARTICLE XIII
Municipal Prosecutor
[Added 12-15-1997 by Ord. No. 25-97]
§ 3-56. Appointment.
A Municipal Prosecutor shall be appointed by the Township Committee.
§ 3-57. Qualifications.
He shall be qualified as an attorney-at-law of the State of New Jersey in
good standing.
§ 3-58. Term.
The Municipal Prosecutor shall be appointed for a term of one year from
the date of appointment and may continue to serve in office pending
reappointment or appointment of a successor.
§ 3-59. Compensation.
The Municipal Prosecutor shall be paid his reasonable fee and charges.
§ 3-60. Duties.
The Municipal Prosecutor shall represent the Township in matters tried
in the local Municipal Court involving violations of the ordinances of the
Township and in matters where, in the discretion of the Judge of said Court,
the services of a Prosecutor are required. The Prosecutor shall also appear
in the local Municipal Court on behalf of the Township in matters where
his services are requested by the Chief of Police or the Township Attorney.
The Prosecutor shall also appear on behalf of the Township in any court of
competent jurisdiction of this state where such appearance is required by
the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey.
§ 3-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-60
1:45

ARTICLE XIV
Municipal Public Defender
[Added 12-15-1997 by Ord. No. 25-97]
§ 3-61. Appointment.
A Municipal Public Defender shall be appointed by the Township
Committee. The Township Committee may appoint a Chief Municipal Public
Defender and such Deputy Municipal Public Defenders as may be
determined by the Township Committee to be necessary.
§ 3-62. Qualifications.
In accordance with the provisions of P.L. 1997, c.256,8 the Municipal Public
Defender, the Chief Municipal Public Defender and any Deputy Municipal
Public Defenders shall be qualified as an attorney at law of the State of New
Jersey in good standing and shall represent those defendants appearing in
Municipal Court who are determined by the Court to be indigent and whose
representation is assigned to the Municipal Public Defender by the Court.
§ 3-63. Term.
The Municipal Public Defender, Chief Municipal Public Defender or Deputy
Municipal Public Defender shall be appointed for a term of one year from
the date of appointment and may continue to serve in office pending
reappointment or appointment of a successor.
§ 3-64. Compensation.
The Municipal Public Defender, Chief Municipal Public Defender or Deputy
Municipal Public Defender shall be paid his reasonable fees and charges.
§ 3-65. Chief Municipal Public Defender.
The Chief Municipal Public Defender or Municipal Public Defender, as the
case may be, shall have all of the duties provided by P.L. 1997, c.256,
in the representation of indigent defendants in proceedings over which
the Township of Washington Municipal Court has jurisdiction and shall
have authority over any Deputy Municipal Public Defenders that may be
appointed by the Township Committee with respect to the performance of
their duties.
§ 3-66. Deputy Municipal Public Defender.
The Deputy Municipal Public Defender, if one or more shall be appointed,
shall serve in the absence or disqualification of the Chief Municipal Public
Defender or when assigned by the Chief Municipal Public Defender.
8. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2B:24-1 et seq.
§ 3-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-67
1:47
§ 3-67. Representation of private clients.
The Municipal Public Defenders may represent private clients in the
Municipal Court and before Township agencies, subject to the Rules of
Court Governing the Conduct of Lawyers, Judges and Court Personnel.
§ 3-68. Application for representation by the Public Defender.
A person applying for representation by the Municipal Public Defender shall
pay an application fee of $200. In accordance with P.L. 1997, c.256, and
guidelines promulgated by the Supreme Court, the Municipal Court may
waive any required application fee, in whole or in part, only if the Court
determines, in its discretion, upon a clear and convincing showing by the
applicant that the application fee represents an unreasonable burden on the
person seeking representation. The Municipal Court may permit a person
to pay the application fee over a specific period of time not to exceed four
months.
§ 3-69. Eligibility for services.
Eligibility for services of the Municipal Public Defender shall be determined
by the Municipal Court on the basis of the need of the defendant, except
as provided in § 3-70. Need shall be measured as provided by law and in
accordance with guidelines promulgated by the New Jersey Supreme Court.
In the event that a determination of eligibility cannot be made before the
time when the first services are to be rendered or if an initial determination
is found to be erroneous, the Municipal Court shall refer the defendant
to the Municipal Public Defender provisionally, and if subsequently it is
determined that the defendant is ineligible, the Municipal Court shall
inform the defendant, and the defendant shall be obliged to engage his
own counsel and to reimburse the municipality for the cost of the services
rendered to that time.
§ 3-70. Investigation of financial status.
The Municipal Court shall make an investigation of the financial status
of each defendant seeking representation and shall have the authority
to require a defendant to execute and deliver written requests or
authorizations required under applicable law to provide the Court with
access to records of public or private sources, otherwise confidential, as
may be of aid in evaluating eligibility.
§ 3-71. Financial obligations of parents or guardians.
As provided by P.L. 1997, c.256, whenever a person entitled to
representation by a Municipal Public Defender pursuant to this act is under
the age of 18 years, the eligibility for services shall be determined on
the basis of the financial circumstances of the individual and the financial
circumstances of the individual's parents or legal guardians.
§ 3-67 WASHINGTON CODE § 3-72
1:48
§ 3-72. Reimbursement to the Township.
As provided by P.L. 1997, c.256, if the defendant has or reasonably expects
to have means to meet some part, though not all, of the cost of the services
rendered, the defendant shall be required to reimburse the Township, and
the Township shall have a lien on any property to which the defendant shall
have or acquire an interest for an amount equal to the reasonable value of
the services rendered to a defendant pursuant to this act as calculated at
the same rate as the Office of the Public Defender bills clients at that time.
§ 3-73. Collection and settlement of claims.
The Township Attorney may do all things necessary to collect any money
due to the Township by way of reimbursement for services rendered by
a Municipal Public Defender. The Township Attorney may enter into
arrangements with any state or county agency to handle collections on
a cost basis. The Township Attorney shall have all the remedies and
proceedings available for collection which are available for or upon the
recovery of a judgment in a civil action and shall also be permitted to
collect counsel fees and costs from the defendant. The Township Attorney
is authorized to compromise and settle any claim for services performed
whenever the financial circumstances of the person receiving the services
are such that, in the judgment of the Township Attorney, the best interest of
the Township will be served by compromise and settlement.
§ 3-74. Establishment of fund.
Funds collected from the application fee shall be deposited in a dedicated
fund administered by the chief financial officer of the Township. The funds
shall be used exclusively to meet the costs incurred in providing the services
of a Municipal Public Defender, including, when required, expert and lay
investigation and testimony.
§ 3-75. Effective dates.
The Township Committee shall appoint a Municipal Public Defender, as
required by P.L. 1997, c.256, not later than March 22, 1998. The application
fee set forth in § 3-68 shall take effect as of December 22, 1997. In
accordance with the provisions of P.L. 1997, c.256, Section 6c, the Township
shall not be required to pay for expert and lay investigation or testimony
prior to March 22, 1999.
§ 3-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-75
1:49

ARTICLE XV
Township Engineer
§ 3-76. Appointment.
There shall be a Township Engineer who shall be appointed by the Township
Committee. The Township Engineer shall receive such compensation as may
be agreed upon and determined by the Township Committee. He shall be a
licensed professional engineer of the State of New Jersey.
§ 3-77. Duties.
The Township Engineer shall perform the duties prescribed by general law
and ordinance. He shall:
A. Prepare or cause to be prepared plans, designs and specifications for
public works and improvements undertaken by the Township, either on
force account or by public contract.
B. Provide and maintain surveys, maps, plans, specifications and control
records with respect to public works and facilities owned or operated
by the Township.
C. Provide technical supervision with respect to operation, maintenance
and repair of the Township storm sewer system.
D. Provide technical and engineering advice and assistance to other
Township departments as needed.
E. Upon the termination of his service with the Township, surrender all
papers, documents, memoranda, reports and other materials relating to
the administration of his engineering duties.
§ 3-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-77
1:51

ARTICLE XVI
Municipal Court
§ 3-78. Establishment; powers.
There shall be a Municipal Court in the Township pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1 et seq., to be known as the "Municipal Court of the
Township of Washington, Morris County." The Municipal Court shall have a
seal bearing the impress of the name of the Court. The Court shall be held
in the Township Hall or such other place as the Township Committee shall
designate from time to time, and it shall exercise all the functions, powers,
duties and jurisdiction conferred upon Municipal Courts by law.
§ 3-79. Municipal Judge; powers and duties; qualifications.
§ 3-80. Municipal Court Clerk.
There shall be a Clerk of the Municipal Court who shall be appointed by the
Township Committee and shall perform the functions and duties prescribed
for him by law, the rules of court applicable to Municipal Courts and by the
Municipal Judge. His duties shall include, but not be limited to:
A. There shall be a Municipal Judge of the Municipal Court who shall be
appointed by the Township Committee. The Municipal Judge shall serve
for a term of three years from the date of appointment and until a
successor is appointed and qualifies.
B. The Municipal Judge shall have and possess the qualifications and shall
have, possess and exercise all the functions, duties, powers and
jurisdiction conferred by law or ordinance. He shall be an attorney at
law of the State of New Jersey. Whenever the Municipal Judge is unable
to sit as such, he may designate any other Judge or any Municipal Court
(except a nonattorney Judge) or an attorney at law to sit for him
temporarily and hold the Municipal Court. Any such designation shall
be made, in writing, and be filed in the court, and any person so
designated, while sitting temporarily, shall possess all the powers of the
Municipal Judge.
A. Carrying out the rules, regulations, policies and procedures relating to
the operation of the Court.
B. Interviewing and speaking to persons wishing to file criminal
complaints or wishing information in that regard, receiving complaints
and dispensing information relative to Court matters.
C. Maintaining the financial records of the Court.
D. Attending Court; recording pleas, judgments and dispositions;
arranging trial calendars; signing Court documents; preparing and
issuing warrants and commitments.
§ 3-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-80
1:53
§ 3-81. Deputy Municipal Court Clerk.
The Township Committee may appoint a Deputy Clerk of the Municipal
Court who shall perform the functions assigned to him by the Municipal
Judge and by the Municipal Court Clerk.
E. Taking and preparing bail bonds, recognizances and security in lieu
thereof, making inquiry concerning their sufficiency and equity, and
receiving and accounting for fines and costs.
F. Interviewing persons on informal police court matters to determine if
there is a basis for formal action, issuing summonses requiring Court
appearances, if necessary, and maintaining and classifying records and
files.
G. Maintaining, forwarding, receiving and reporting such records, reports
and files as are required by the State Director of Motor Vehicles.
§ 3-80 WASHINGTON CODE § 3-81
1:54
ARTICLE XVII
Zoning Board of Adjustment
[Amended 5-21-1979 by Ord. No. 43-79]
§ 3-82. Establishment.
There shall be a Zoning Board of Adjustment established pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and in accordance with Chapter 111, Article II, of
this Code.
§ 3-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-82
1:55

ARTICLE XVIII
Planning Board
[Amended 5-21-1979 by Ord. No. 43-79]
§ 3-83. Establishment.
There shall be a Planning Board established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. and in accordance with Chapter 111, Article I, of this Code.
§ 3-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-83
1:57

ARTICLE XIX
Public Assistance
[Amended 5-21-1979 by Ord. No. 43-79]
§ 3-84. Establishment.
There is hereby created a Local Assistance Board to provide public
assistance to eligible persons.
§ 3-85. Membership.
Said Board shall consist of three persons, at least one of whom shall be
a woman. They shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the
Township Committee and shall serve without compensation, but shall be
allowed necessary and actual expenses.
§ 3-86. Term of office; vacancies.
The term of one member of the Board shall be for one year, and such
member may be a member of the Township Committee, and the terms of the
other members shall be for two years, expiring in alternate years. The term
of each member shall begin on the first day of January, and each member
shall continue in office until his or her successor shall be appointed and
shall qualify. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms only.
§ 3-87. Organization of Board; Director of Welfare.
§ 3-88. Duties of Director of Welfare.
The Director of Welfare shall:
A. The Board shall organize and select a Chairman and Secretary. It shall
appoint a Director of Welfare who shall be the executive and
administrative officer of the Board. The person shall hold office for a
term of five years from the date of appointment and shall be paid such
salary as may be fixed by the Board, subject to approval by the
Township Committee. In the event of vacancy in the office, one
temporary or Acting Director may be appointed to serve for up to 90
days.
B. Other employees, including assistants, clerks, investigators and nurses,
in such number as may be necessary to properly administer public
assistance, shall be appointed in the manner as other employees.
C. No employee whose compensation is paid from public assistance funds
shall hold any office in any political party.
A. Supervise by periodic investigation every person receiving public
assistance, such investigation to be made by visitation at least once a
month.
§ 3-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-88
1:59
B. Reconsider from month to month the amount and nature of public
assistance given and alter, amend or suspend the same when the
circumstances so require.
C. Devise ways and means for bringing persons unable to maintain
themselves to self-support or to the support of any other person or
agency able and willing to do so.
D. Keep full and complete records of such investigation, supervision,
assistance and rehabilitation and of all certifications of persons for
employment or benefits and cancellations thereof in such manner and
form as required by the Commissioner.
E. Bring about appropriate action for commitment to any state or county
institution when the best interests of the needy persons would be so
served.
§ 3-88 WASHINGTON CODE § 3-88
1:60
ARTICLE XX
Board of Health
[Amended 8-17-1974]
§ 3-89. Established.
There shall be a Board of Health of the Township pursuant to state statute.
§ 3-90. Appointment; term; vacancies.
A. Members and alternates. [Amended 12-20-2004 by Ord. No. 27-04]
(1) The local Board of Health shall consist of five members who shall
be appointed by the Township Committee. Of the first members of
the Board appointed, one member so appointed shall be appointed
for the term of one year, two for the term of two years and two for
the term of three years; and thereafter members of the Board of
Health shall hold office for terms of three years. If any vacancy
occurs in the Board by the death, resignation or inability of any
member to serve or from any other cause, the appointment to fill
that vacancy shall be made in the same manner in which the
original appointments are to be made, but for the unexpired term
only.
(2) The local Board of Health may also have not more than two
alternate members appointed by the Township Committee.
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment
as "Alternate 1" and "Alternate 2" and shall serve during the
absence or disqualification of any regular member or members.
The terms of the alternate members shall be two years, except that
the terms of the two alternate members first appointed, shall be
two years for Alternate No. 1 and one year for Alternate No. 2, so
that the term of not more than one alternate member shall expire in
any one year. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of
term shall be filled by the appointing authority for the unexpired
term only. An alternate member shall not be permitted to act on any
matter in which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or
financial interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if
he requests one, be removed by the governing body for cause. An
alternate member may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in
order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote first.
B. The local Board of Health shall elect a President from among its
members and shall adopt rules and regulations for its government.
C. The local Board of Health shall appoint such officers as required by
statute and may appoint such other officers or assistants as it may deem
§ 3-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-90
1:61
§ 3-91. Powers and duties.
necessary. All appointees of the Board shall be governed by the rules
of the Board and shall be subject to all laws, rules and regulations
governing such officers, and they may be removed for cause by the
Board.
A. The Board of Health shall adopt bylaws governing its procedural
operation. It shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from among its
members and shall appoint a Secretary who shall keep an accurate
record of all official actions of the Board and perform such other duties
as may be assigned. The Board may create and fill such other offices as
it shall determine. It shall have the power and authority to employ
experts and a staff for enforcement and carrying out its purposes,
including a health officer and other persons provided by law, and to pay
for their services and such other expenses as may be necessary and
proper, not exceeding in all the amount appropriated by the Township
for the use of the Board of Health.
B. The Board of Health shall have the powers and perform the duties
prescribed by law and by municipal ordinance. It shall be the duty of the
Board of Health to enforce all ordinances of the Township which relate
to public health or nuisances.
C. The Board of Health shall make all necessary rules and regulations for
the protection of the health of the inhabitants of the Township and to
guard against the spread of contagious diseases and to prevent by
necessary rules the induction of disease, contagious or otherwise,
within the boundaries of the Township.
§ 3-90 WASHINGTON CODE § 3-91
1:62
ARTICLE XXI
Environmental Commission
[Amended 5-21-1979 by Ord. No. 43-79]
§ 3-92. Establishment.
There shall be an Environmental Commission established pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.
§ 3-93. Composition. [Amended 4-16-1990 by Ord. No. 10-90;
3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 02-17]
§ 3-94. Powers and duties.
The Environmental Commission shall have the power to conduct research
into the use and possible use of the open land areas of the Township
and may coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar
purposes. It may advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps,
charts, plans and pamphlets which, in its judgment, is necessary for its
purposes. It shall keep an index of all open space areas, publicly- or
privately-owned, including open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands,
in order to obtain information on the proper use of such areas, and may
A. The Environmental Commission shall consist of seven members
appointed by the Mayor, one of whom shall be a member of the Planning
Board. The Mayor shall designate one of the members to serve as
Chairman and presiding officer of the Commission. Appointments of
members, except to fill vacancies, shall be for three-year terms
beginning January 1 of the first year of the term. Terms shall be
staggered by reason of initial appointments. Members of the
Commission shall be residents of Washington Township and shall serve
without compensation. A vacancy on the Commission occurring
otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired
term in the same manner as an original appointment.
B. There shall be two alternate members, appointed by the Mayor and
designated at the time of appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and
"Alternate No. 2". The terms for alternate members shall be for two
years, except that the terms of the alternate members first appointed
shall be two years for Alternate No. 1 and one year for Alternate No. 2
so that the term of not more than one alternate member shall expire in
any one year. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term
shall be filled by the appointing authority for the unexpired term only.
C. An alternate member may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote first.
§ 3-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-94
1:63
from time to time recommend to the Planning Board plans and programs for
inclusion in a Township Master Plan and the development and use for such
areas.
§ 3-95. Acquisitions by Commission.
The Environmental Commission may, subject to the approval of the
Township Committee, acquire property, both real and personal, in the name
of the Township by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease for any
of its purposes and shall administer the same for such purposes subject to
the terms of the conveyance or gift. Acquisitions may be to acquire the fee
or any lesser interest, development right, easement, including conservation
easements, covenant or other contractual right, including a conveyance on
conditions or with limitations or reversions, as may be necessary to acquire,
maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use of, or otherwise conserve
and properly utilize open spaces and other land and water areas in the
Township.
§ 3-96. Records and annual report.
The Environmental Commission shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and shall make an annual report to the Township Committee.
§ 3-94 WASHINGTON CODE § 3-96
1:64
ARTICLE XXII
Shade Tree Committee
[Added 2-21-1983 by Ord. No. 3-839]
§ 3-97. Established.
A Shade Tree Committee is established for the purpose of regulating,
planting, care and control of shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery
upon and in the streets, highways, public places, parks and parkways of
the Township, except state highways unless the State Highway Department
assents thereto and except county highways, parks and parkways unless a
county shade tree commission is operative and gives assent thereto. The
Committee members shall be residents of the Township and shall serve
without compensation.
§ 3-98. Appointment of members; terms; vacancies.
The Shade Tree Committee shall consist of five members appointed by
the Township Committee for terms of five years, except that those first
appointed shall be on a staggered basis. All appointments except those
to fill vacancies shall be effective January 1. Any vacancy occurring by
reason of death, resignation or removal of any member shall be filled for the
unexpired term by the Township Committee.
§ 3-99. Organization.
The Committee shall organize annually by the election of one of its members
as Chairman and another as Secretary.
§ 3-100. Responsibilities and duties.
The Shade Tree Committee shall:
A. Recommend to the Township Committee any ordinances or
amendments to existing ordinances which would affect the regulation,
planting and care of shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery now
located, or which may hereafter be planted, in any public highway, park
or parkway, except such as are excluded pursuant to § 3-97, including
the planting, trimming, spraying, care and protection thereof.
B. Act in an advisory capacity to the Washington Township Planning Board
in the areas of regulation, planting and care of shade and ornamental
trees and shrubbery.
C. Recommend to the Township Committee the removal of any tree, or
part thereof, which may pose a potential hazard to the public safety.
D. Recommend the treatment or removal of any tree situated upon private
property which is believed to harbor a disease or insects readily
9. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Section 2-21, Shade Tree Commission,
as amended 10-15-79 by Ord. No. 68-79.
§ 3-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-100
1:65
§ 3-101. Annual budget.
The Shade Tree Committee shall, upon request, submit a proposed Shade
Tree Committee budget for each calendar year. The governing body shall
annually appropriate, in its budget, such funds as it deems necessary for
regulating, planting, trimming and care of shade and ornamental trees and
shrubbery in the Township of Washington, Morris County, New Jersey.
communicable to the neighboring health trees in the care of the
Township and, with the consent of the owner, enter upon private
property for that purpose, provided that the suspected condition is first
confirmed by a certificate issued by or on behalf of the New Jersey
Department of Agriculture.
E. Recommend the waiving, in whole or in part, of requirements for shade
trees where the Committee deems that an adequate natural growth of
shade trees exists on a building lot.
§ 3-100 WASHINGTON CODE § 3-101
1:66
ARTICLE XXIII
Washington Township Municipal Utilities Authority
[Added 2-16-1972]
§ 3-102. Established.
Pursuant to the Municipal Utilities Authorities Law, constituting Chapter
183 of the Laws of New Jersey of 1957 (Chapter 14B of Title 40 of the
Revised Statutes of New Jersey), there is hereby created and established
a public body corporate and politic, as an agency and instrumentality of
the Township of Washington, under the corporate name and title of the
"Washington Township Municipal Utilities Authority." The Washington
Township Municipal Utilities Authority shall, within the territorial
boundaries of the Township of Washington, in the County of Morris, have
and may exercise all of the powers provided for in the Municipal Utilities
Authorities Law, together with any other powers which may hereafter be
conferred upon Municipal Utilities Authorities by law.
§ 3-103. Appointment of members; terms. [Amended 10-18-1982 by
Ord. No. 20-82]
The Washington Township Municipal Utilities Authority shall be comprised
of five regular members and up to two alternate members appointed by the
governing body.
§ 3-104. Violations of rules and regulations. [Added 6-8-1984 by
Ord. No. 11-84]
A. Regular members. The regular members first appointed to the
Authority shall be designated to serve for terms respectively expiring
on the last day of the first, second, third, fourth and fifth January next
ensuing after the date of their appointments. Thereafter, all members of
the Washington Township Municipal Utilities Authority shall be
appointed for a term of five years, commencing on February 1 of the
year of appointment.
B. Alternate members. The governing body may appoint not more than two
alternate members to the Washington Township Municipal Utilities
Authority. Alternate members shall be designated by the governing
body as "Alternate 1" and "Alternate 2" and shall serve during the
absence or disqualification of any regular member or members. The
term of each alternate member shall be five years commencing on
February 1 of the year of appointment; provided, however, that in the
event that two alternate members are appointed, their initial terms
shall be four and five years, respectively. Alternate members may
participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in
the absence or disqualification of a regular member.
A. Prosecution. Any violation of the rules and regulations of the
Washington Township Municipal Utilities Authority shall be prosecuted
§ 3-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-104
1:67
in Municipal Court in accordance with the penalty provisions contained
in said rules and regulations.
B. Fines. Any fines imposed upon conviction of violation of the rules and
regulations of the Washington Township Municipal Utilities Authority
shall be paid over to and collected by the Township Treasurer.
§ 3-104 WASHINGTON CODE § 3-104
1:68
ARTICLE XXIV
Civil Defense
§ 3-105. Civil Defense and Disaster Control Council.
There shall be a Civil Defense and Disaster Control Council pursuant to
N.J.S.A. App. A:9-41, and a Director thereof. The Police Department and all
departments of the Township government shall cooperate with and assist
the Civil Defense and Disaster Control Council, as required.
§ 3-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-105
1:69

ARTICLE XXV
Fees
[Amended 5-21-1979 by Ord. No. 43-79; 9-21-1981 by Ord. No.
31-81; 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 29-89; 2-21-1994 by Ord. No. 2-94;
4-19-2004 by Ord. No. 11-04]
§ 3-106. Inspection and copies of public documents.
§ 3-107. Fees for copies.
A. All persons seeking to inspect, examine or copy a public record of the
Township shall make application in writing to the Township Clerk
during regular business hours. The request shall be hand-delivered,
mailed, transmitted electronically or otherwise conveyed to the
Township Clerk. All requests for public records shall be as specific as
possible, including the type of record and date created, if known.
B. Copies of records may be obtained for the fee prescribed by law or
regulation. If a fee is not prescribed by law or regulation, the fee shall
be the fee set forth herein; provided, however, that where the actual
cost for duplication of a record exceeds the rates below, the actual cost
shall be imposed.
A. Duplication of printed records.
(1) Photocopied documents (general records, e-mail, and press proofs,
if available). [Amended 7-19-2010 by Ord. No. 16-10;
10-18-2010 by Ord. No. 23-10]
(a) All records in printed form, letter size: $0.05 per page.
(b) All records in printed form, legal size: $0.07 per page.
(c) Certification of a copy: $0.50 per copy.
(2) Maps.
(a) Zoning Map: $5 per sheet.
(b) Street Map, 24 inches by 36 inches: $5 per sheet.
(c) Tax Maps, 24 inches by 36 inches: $5 per sheet.
(d) Other maps, 24 inches by 36 inches: $5 per sheet.
(e) Topographic map: $5 per sheet.
(f) Other maps, larger than 24 inches by 36 inches: cost to
Township.
(g) Floodplain map, 54 inches by 27 inches: cost to Township.
(h) Full set of Tax Maps: $125.
§ 3-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-107
1:71
(3) Tax records.
(a) Duplicate tax, water and sewer bills, first: $5.
[1] Each subsequent duplicate bill: $25.
(b) Duplicate tax sale certificate: $100.
(4) Police records. [Amended 2-21-2005 by Ord. No. 3-05;
12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 27-10]
(a) Copies of motor vehicle accident reports (obtained in person):
as set forth in Subsection A(1) above.
(b) Copies of motor vehicle accident reports (other than in person,
when not part of a discovery request): the fee set forth in
Subsection A(1) above plus $5.
(c) Copies of motor vehicle accident reports (when part of
discovery request) and discovery requests other than in
person: as set forth in Subsection A(1) above, plus actual
postage and $0.25 per envelope.
(d) Incident verification letter: $5.
(e) Duplicate photographs: actual cost of duplicating.
(5) Pamphlets/reports.
(a) Master Plan: $50.
(b) Master Plan reexamination report: $15.
(c) Land Use/Zoning Ordinance: $40.
(d) Supplement to Land Use Ordinance: $15 per year.10
B. Electronic records. [Amended 2-21-2005 by Ord. No. 3-05;
10-18-2010 by Ord. No. 23-10]
(1) Audiotape reproduction of public meeting: actual cost to Township.
(2) Conversion of paper record to electronic form or conversion of
electronic files from one software product to another: actual cost to
Township.
(3) Audiotape of police communications, tape, disk or CD: actual cost
to Township.
(4) Copies of video tapes associated with court discovery: actual cost
to Township.
10.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(6), concerning the fee for certified copies of vital
records, as amended, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 7-20-2009
by Ord. No. 18-09.
§ 3-107 WASHINGTON CODE § 3-107
1:72
(5) Computer-generated records: actual cost to Township.
(6) Records on disk or CD; CD-to-CD or disk-to-disk reproduction:
actual cost to Township.
(7) Digital photographs: actual cost to Township.
C. Special service charges.
(1) Where the nature, format, manner of collation or volume of printed
matter is such that it cannot be reproduced by ordinary documentcopying
equipment in ordinary business size or where such record
requires an extraordinary expenditure of time and effort to
accommodate a request for inspection or copying of documents, a
special service charge shall be imposed in addition to the actual
costs of duplicating the record. A special service charge will also be
applied when the custodian must change the medium in which the
record is normally kept in order to comply with the request.
(2) The special service charge shall be paid to the Township of
Washington at the following rates:
(a) For all services performed by employees of the Township, the
actual hourly rate of compensation for each clerical and
supervisory employee performing the service, plus the copying
or reproduction cost and actual mailing cost, when applicable.
(b) For all services performed by the Township's paid professional
consultants, the rate paid by the Township for said services.
(c) The requestor shall have the opportunity to review and object
to the special service charge prior to the production of
documents.
D. Postage will be added to the fee for records requested by mail.
E. All fees must be paid prior to the release of any copies. The custodian of
the records may require a deposit of all or part of the fee prior to
copying or producing any documents for inspection where it is
estimated that the records requested will cost in excess of $5 to
reproduce.
F. For reasons of security, the use of a floppy disk, CD, videotape or
audiotape provided by the requestor is prohibited. All electronic
reproduction materials shall be supplied by the Township of
Washington.
G. If the request for access to a government record would substantially
disrupt municipal operations, the custodian of the records may deny
access to the record after attempting to reach a reasonable solution
with the requestor that accommodates the interests of the requestor
and the municipality.
§ 3-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-107
1:73
§ 3-108. Other fees.
For the services or materials hereinafter mentioned, the Township of
Washington shall be entitled to demand and receive the following fees:
H. In the event that the requestor of the documents objects to any charges
permitted by this article and no resolution of the objection may be
reasonably accomplished, the custodian of records shall not incur any
charges on behalf of the Township to fulfill the document request.
I. Nothing in this section or any other ordinance of the Township shall be
construed as requiring the Township of Washington to furnish copies of
any privileged documents or other documents which have been
determined to be exempt from the requirements of the Open Public
Records Act or otherwise nondisclosable in accordance with any
provision of law.
A. Issuance of floodplain certifications based upon an examination of
current flood hazard area maps published by the Federal Insurance
Administration: $10 for each certification.
B. Municipal lien search pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-11: $10.
C. List of property owners pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12, Subdivision c:
$0.25 per name or $10, whichever is greater.
D. Returned check fee: $25. [Added 2-19-2007 by Ord. No. 2-07]
E. Recalculation of the amount required to redeem a tax sale certificate
for a specific parcel of property pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-58: [Added
5-19-2008 by Ord. No. 08-08]
(1) First such request: no fee.
(2) Each request after first: $25.
F. Fee for on-site inspection of property pursuant to application for
farmland assessment, payable every three years: $25. Note: Contiguous
and noncontiguous parcels of land under the same ownership are
subject to a single fee only. [Added 2-15-2010 by Ord. No. 06-10]
§ 3-107 WASHINGTON CODE § 3-108
1:74
ARTICLE XXVI
Advisory Recreation Committee
[Added 5-15-1978]
§ 3-109. Established. [Amended 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 16-05]
There is hereby established an Advisory Recreation Committee. The mission
of the Advisory Recreation Committee and Department is to offer Township
residents diversified programs for leisure pursuits while providing safe
parks and athletic fields for passive and active recreation.
§ 3-110. Appointment of members; terms; vacancies. [Amended
2-15-1982 by Ord. No. 2-82; 10-21-1985 by Ord. No. 36-85;
2-17-1986 by Ord. No. 3-86]
The Advisory Recreation Committee shall be comprised of seven voting
members and four alternate members. All members shall be appointed by
the governing body. All regular members shall be residents of the Township
of Washington. Of the first members to be appointed to the Committee, the
first two members shall serve a one-year term. The second two members
shall serve a two-year term and the remaining three members shall serve a
three-year term. Thereafter, all regular members of the Advisory Recreation
Committee shall serve for a term of three years. First and second alternate
members shall be appointed annually as voting alternate members and
will assume full voting privileges when regular voting members are not
present. One member of the governing body shall be appointed by the
Mayor, annually, as the Township Committee's liaison to the Advisory
Recreation Committee and, as such, shall serve as the third alternate
member. As an alternate member, the Township Committee's liaison shall
have voting privileges only when a quorum cannot be formed by regular
members and/or the first and second alternate members. The Recreation
Director shall also be appointed as the fourth alternate member. The
Recreation Director shall have voting privileges only when a quorum cannot
be reached by regular members and/or the first through third alternate
members. A vacancy shall be deemed to exist either through the death,
resignation or inability of any member to serve or removal by the governing
body for cause. Any member of the Advisory Recreation Committee shall
have been deemed to have submitted his resignation if he does not attend at
least 50% of the regularly scheduled meetings in any calendar year or does
not attend three consecutive regularly scheduled meetings
§ 3-111. Organization. [Amended 2-15-1982 by Ord. No. 2-82]
The Advisory Recreation Committee shall elect a Chairman from among its
voting members, such election requiring the affirmative vote of a majority of
the total voting membership. The Committee may elect other such officers
as it may deem advisable, adopt necessary rules and bylaws governing the
proper administration of its functions and formulate subcommittees for its
purposes. Such rules and regulations shall be filed with the governing body.
§ 3-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-112
1:75
§ 3-112. Powers and duties. [Amended 10-21-1985 by Ord. No.
36-85; 11-21-1988 by Ord. No. 32-88; 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 16-05]
§ 3-113. Annual budget. [Amended 11-21-1988 by Ord. No. 32-88;
4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 16-05]
The governing body shall annually appropriate in its budget such funds
as it deems necessary for recreation programs, which budget shall be
administered by the Recreation Director. Neither the Recreation Director,
the Advisory Recreation Committee, nor any member thereof shall have
any power or right, expressed or implied, to obligate the Township of
Washington or the Advisory Recreation Committee for the expenditure of
any funds for the execution of any contract.
§ 3-114. Gifts and donations.
The Township may accept gifts, donations and other such funds from
nongovernment sources on behalf of the Advisory Recreation Committee.
A. The Advisory Recreation Committee shall be charged with the
responsibility of developing various recreation programs in conjunction
with the Recreation Director, which programs shall be administered by
the Recreation Director.
B. The Director of Recreation, in conjunction with the Advisory Recreation
Committee, shall be the first point of contact for recreational-related
activities.
C. The Advisory Recreation Committee shall advise the Recreation
Director on the management of ongoing or proposed sports programs,
ongoing or proposed non-sports recreational programs, and implement
changes as needed based on objective historical usage and/or proposed
program growth.
D. The Advisory Recreation Committee shall make recommendations to
the governing body when it is considering the acquisition, construction
or enhancement of recreational properties or facilities.
E. The Advisory Recreation Committee shall consider any proposals in the
area of recreation which shall be submitted to the governing body and
shall report its findings and conclusions, in writing, to the governing
body as soon as may be reasonably possible.
F. The Advisory Recreation Committee shall conduct studies of the
present and future recreation needs of the Township and develop
immediate and long-range plans in conjunction with the Recreation
Director for submission to the governing body.
G. The Advisory Recreation Committee may deem additional information
necessary and may request information from the governing body upon
which to base recommendations and conclusions for recreationalrelated
activities.
§ 3-112 WASHINGTON CODE § 3-114
1:76
Such moneys shall be accepted for either general recreation purposes or for
such expressed purposes as the donor may request.
§ 3-115. Compensation.
Voting members of the Advisory Recreation Committee shall receive no
compensation.
§ 3-116. Annual report.
The Advisory Recreation Committee shall submit an annual report to the
governing body setting forth in detail its operations, activities and
accomplishments for the preceding year. The annual report shall be
submitted to the governing body no later than February 15.
§ 3-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-116
1:77

ARTICLE XXVII
Historic Preservation Commission
[Added 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 16-80; amended 4-16-1984 by Ord.
No. 7-84; 4-15-1985 by Ord. No. 9-85; 12-15-1986 by Ord. No.
46-86]
§ 3-117. Establishment.
There is hereby established in the Township of Washington an Historic
Preservation Commission, as defined and set forth in Chapter 217, Zoning,
§ 217-133.
§ 3-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-117
1:79

ARTICLE XXVIII
Housing and Community Development Advisory Committee
[Added 9-19-1983 by Ord. No. 22-83]
§ 3-118. Establishment.
There is hereby created in the Township of Washington a Housing and
Community Development Advisory Committee for the purposes of reviewing
community housing and living environment and for the further purpose of
increasing the diversity and vitality of the community by expanding the
range of housing types available and for the further purpose of assessing
the needs of the community relevant to housing and community
development programs, with particular attention to providing least-cost
housing for the indigenous poor of the Township.
§ 3-119. Membership.
The Housing and Community Development Advisory Committee shall
consist of seven members, consisting of the following two classes, all of
whom shall serve without pay:
§ 3-120. Terms of office.
The term of the member composing Class 1 shall be for a period of one
year. The terms of Class 2 members initially appointed pursuant to this
article shall be so determined that, to the greatest practicable extent,
the expiration of such terms shall be distributed evenly over the first
three years after their appointments. Upon the termination of initial
appointments, all Class 2 members shall be appointed for terms of three
years.
§ 3-121. Vacancies.
If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term.
§ 3-122. Organization.
The Housing and Community Development Advisory Committee shall elect
a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the members of Class 2.
A. Class 1: a member of the governing body, to be appointed by the
Township Committee.
B. Class 2: six other citizens of the Township, whose membership will
include, where possible, persons of low or moderate income, members
of minority groups, senior citizens, the handicapped and other persons
affected by community development activities, all to be appointed by
the Township Committee.
§ 3-118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-123
1:81
§ 3-123. Powers and duties.
The Housing and Community Development Advisory Committee is
authorized to adopt bylaws governing its procedural operation. It shall also
have the following power and duties.
§ 3-124. Rules and regulations.
The Housing and Community Development Advisory Committee is
authorized to adopt such guidelines as are necessary to fulfill the purposes
of the Committee.
A. To hold public hearings to solicit the views of the citizens regarding
housing and community development programs.
B. To recommend housing and community development programs, such as
but not limited to senior citizens' housing, housing rehabilitation and
indigenous poor housing.
C. To assess community development and housing needs and priorities.
D. To meet on a regular monthly basis to review and act upon any matters
regarding housing and community development.
E. To explore financial sources for funding of community and housing
development programs.
F. To report and make recommendations on community and housing
development to the Township Committee on a regular quarterly basis.
§ 3-123 WASHINGTON CODE § 3-124
1:82
ARTICLE XXIX
Keep America Beautiful Committee
[Added 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 17-92]
§ 3-125. Establishment.
§ 3-126. Purposes.
The purpose of the Committee is to review and recommend changes
regarding the handling of solid waste; to review and recommend rules
and regulations related to Township ordinances; to conduct a continuous
education program; to encourage stricter Code enforcement; to introduce
new forms of technology; to develop programs within the Township
government and the community which will aid in the sustained reduction of
litter; to periodically measure litter accumulation in Washington Township;
to organize periodic litter cleanup events; and to make an annual report to
the Township Committee showing the activities of the Committee for the
current year.
§ 3-127. Membership; terms.
The Committee shall consist of three to seven members, who shall serve
for one-year terms and who shall be appointed by the Township Committee,
with one Township Committee representative appointed as a liaison. The
members of the Committee shall regularly attend meetings and public
hearings of the Committee and shall serve without compensation except
for reimbursement for authorized expenses attendant to the performance of
their duties.
§ 3-128. Officers; duties, selection and term.
A. The Township Committee hereby endorses the Keep America Beautiful
System and supports the participation of Washington Township in the
system.
B. There is hereby created in the Township of Washington a Keep America
Beautiful Committee. Said Committee shall be an official committee of
the Township and shall be accountable to the Township Committee.
A. The officers of the Committee shall include a Chairperson, Treasurer
and Secretary.
B. The Chairperson or other officer in his/her absence shall preside at all
meetings and hearings of the Committee, decide all points of order and
procedure at such meetings, unless otherwise directed by a majority of
the members of the Committee, and perform any duties customary to
the office. The Treasurer shall keep all financial records for the
Committee and be responsible for maintaining the Committee budget
and overseeing requests for and management of all grants, including
the New Jersey Communities Grant. The Secretary shall be the
§ 3-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-128
1:83
§ 3-129. Standing subcommittees.
The Committee shall establish all standing subcommittees.
§ 3-130. Meetings.
§ 3-131. Subcommittees.
Various subcommittees may be established each year, including but not
limited to Education, Finance and Program. Responsibilities will be
determined at the time of appointment and establishment of the
subcommittee.
§ 3-132. Amendments to bylaws, rules and regulations.
Bylaws, rules and regulations may be established and/or amended by the
Committee during regular or special meetings and may be submitted by any
member of the Committee.
custodian of the books, papers and records of the Committee and keep
the minutes of the meetings of the Committee.
C. Selection of officers and terms of office. The officers shall be elected
annually by the Committee members.
A. Regular meetings. Regular meetings shall be held each month.
B. Special meetings. Special meetings may be called by the Chairperson
when necessary to act upon matters, provided that adequate notice is
given to each member of the Committee and to the public. Adequate
notice is defined as that notice required under the provisions of the
Open Public Meetings Act.11
C. Emergency matters. When any officer determines that an emergency
exists which does not permit sufficient time in which to convene a
special meeting, an emergency meeting may be held, subject to
compliance with the requirements of the emergency meeting provisions
of the Open Public Meetings Act.
D. Quorum. A quorum shall consist of one more than half of the appointed
Committee.
11.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 3-128 WASHINGTON CODE § 3-132
1:84
ARTICLE XXX
Cable Television Advisory Committee
[Added 6-21-1993 by Ord. No. 13-93]
§ 3-133. Establishment; membership.
There shall be a Cable Television Advisory Committee, consisting of three
members, who shall be residents of the Township appointed by the
Township Committee. The Cable Television Advisory Committee shall be
under the direction and control of the Township Clerk who was appointed
Municipal Complaint Officer pursuant to the Cable Television Franchise
Ordinance.
§ 3-134. Terms.
Each member of the Committee shall hold office for a term of three years,
except for the first appointments, which shall be staggered as follows:
§ 3-135. Officers.
The Committee shall select its own Chairperson who shall convene meetings
as needed in accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6
et seq.
§ 3-136. Powers and duties.
The Cable Television Advisory Committee shall, under the direction and
control of the Municipal Complaint Officer:
A. One member shall be appointed for a term to expire December 31,
1993.
B. One member shall be appointed to serve for a term to expire December
31, 1994.
C. One member shall be appointed to serve for a term to expire December
31, 1995.
A. Oversee programming on the public, education and government access
channel.
B. Arbitrate disputes among persons requesting the use of public,
education and/or government access channel for initiation of
programming.
C. Confer and consult with the cable television franchisee with respect to
public, education and government access channel programming.
D. Serve as liaison between the Township government and schools and
liaison between the Township government and the cable television
franchisee.
§ 3-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-136
1:85
E. Receive, investigate and process subscriber complaints, resolve and
settle complaints and disputes between such subscribers and the cable
television franchisee and enforce decisions made by the Municipal
Complaint Officer in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26 and N.J.A.C.
14:17-7.1. In carrying out this mandate, the Committee shall have the
power per the approval and under the direction of the Township Clerk
and legislative authority of the Township Committee to establish
procedures and methods by which such complaints shall be received,
processed and acted upon pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26 and which are
necessary to effectuate the charge to promote and protect the public
interest in cable television. All rules shall be issued by the Committee in
accordance with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Rules
and Regulations, Section 76.1 et seq.; 47 CFR 419 et seq. (1972), as
amended; the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984; the
Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.; the New Jersey
Administrative Code, Chapter 14, Subchapters 17 and 18, and shall be
approved by the Township Committee.
F. Monitor cable television franchise compliance with the provisions of
local, state and federal law and any cable television franchise
ordinance.
G. Meet with the cable television franchisee to address customer service
and all matters relative to cable television in the Township.
H. Conduct periodic evaluations, including subscriber surveys, of the cable
system with the cooperation of the franchisee and, pursuant thereto,
make recommendations through the Township Clerk to the Township
Committee for amendments to this article or to the franchise
ordinance.12
I. Submit an annual report to the Township Clerk which shall include, but
need not be limited to, the following:
(1) An account of franchise fees received and distributed.
(2) A report on the cable television franchisee's compliance with this
article and any ordinance or agreement with the Township.
(3) A summary of the cable television franchisee's responsiveness to
customer service problems and inquiries and their resolution. A
data log shall be maintained by the Committee listing every
subscriber complaint and the disposition thereof. Said log shall be
documented in a monthly summary report and available for
inspection in the Township Clerk's office.
(4) A summary of the cable television franchisee's annual report.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. A258, Cable Television Franchise.
§ 3-136 WASHINGTON CODE § 3-136
1:86
J. Furnish such information and advice to the Township Committee as may
be required by this article or a the Township Committee may from time
to time request.
K. Provide such other oversight of any cable television franchise
agreement as best assures continued compliance by all parties to the
agreement.
§ 3-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-136
1:87

ARTICLE XXXI
Open Space, Recreation and Farmland Preservation Committee
[Added 3-21-1994 by Ord. No. 4-94; amended 5-19-1997 by Ord. No.
15-97; 9-21-1998 by Ord. No. 31-98; 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 6-04]
§ 3-137. Establishment.
There is hereby established an Open Space, Recreation and Farmland
Preservation Committee which shall consist of five members whose terms
and powers are hereinafter set forth.
§ 3-138. Membership.
The Open Space, Recreation and Farmland Preservation Committee shall be
comprised of the following persons:
§ 3-139. Terms of office.
§ 3-140. Powers and duties.
A. One member of the Township Committee of the Township of Washington
appointed by the Township Committee.
B. Four citizens of the Township appointed by the Township Committee.
A. The member of the Township Committee appointed to the Open Space,
Recreation and Farmland Preservation Committee shall have a term of
one year.
B. The terms of the citizen members shall be for three years, except that
the terms of not more than two citizen members shall expire in any one
year; provided, however, that the terms of two citizen members first
appointed shall not exceed one and two years, respectively.
A. The Open Space, Recreation and Farmland Preservation Committee
shall from time to time submit written recommendations to the
Township Committee as to:
(1) Which parcels of land should be acquired for recreation and
conservation purposes and whether such parcels should be
acquired in fee or only by acquisition of development rights.
(2) Which of the lands acquired for those purposes should be
developed and/or maintained.
(3) Which farmland should be acquired for farmland preservation
purposes and whether such farmland should be acquired in fee or
only by acquisition of development rights.
B. The Open Space, Recreation and Farmland Preservation Committee
shall submit to the Township Committee a prioritized list of properties:
§ 3-137 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-140
1:89
§ 3-141. Public meetings.
The Open Space, Recreation and Farmland Preservation Committee shall
hold public meetings, which public meetings shall be held in accordance
with the Open Public Meetings Act, and the Committee shall give
appropriate notification of said meetings.
§ 3-142. Officers.
The Open Space, Recreation and Farmland Preservation Committee shall
select from among its members a Chairman and a Vice Chairman to serve as
the presiding officer in the absence of the Chairman. The Committee shall
also select a Secretary whose function shall be to maintain minutes of the
Committee’s meetings and records of the proceedings of the Committee.
§ 3-143. Initial organization meeting.
The Open Space, Recreation and Farmland Preservation Committee shall
hold its initial organization meeting shortly after this ordinance takes effect.
§ 3-144. Funding.
(1) Which it recommends that the Township acquire; and/or
(2) From which it recommends that development rights should be
acquired; and/or
(3) Which the Township has acquired and which the Committee
recommends be developed and/or maintained for recreation and
conservation purposes.
C. After selection of the properties to be acquired, developed, maintained
or preserved referred to in Subsections A and B above, the Township
may proceed to acquire by gift, purchase or by eminent domain
proceedings, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 20:3-1 et seq., or to develop, maintain
or preserve the identified parcels within the financial constraints
established by the Township Committee.
A. There is hereby established a reserve in the general capital fund, which
shall be known and designated as the “Open Space, Recreation and
Farmland Preservation Trust Fund” (hereinafter the "trust fund"). A
separate bank account shall be opened and maintained for this purpose.
B. Funds from the trust fund may, as directed by the Township Committee,
be utilized to acquire vacant land, as well as land which has
improvements upon it at the time of acquisition where the purpose of
the acquisition is for recreation and conservation purposes, or for
farmland preservation purposes. In the event that the Township
Committee shall find it appropriate to apportion the cost of acquisition
between land and improvements, it may do so and charge the trust fund
for the approximate value that it deems appropriate relative to land and
the Township’s capital account for the value that it determines shall be
§ 3-140 WASHINGTON CODE § 3-144
1:90
§ 3-145. Sale of property.
No property acquired with funds from the trust fund shall be leased or sold
until the sale or lease of the same has been authorized by an ordinance
adopted by the Township Committee and provided that the Township
Committee shall replace any land conveyed under this section with land of
at least equal fair market value and of reasonably equivalent usefulness,
size, quality and location to the land conveyed. Any monies derived from the
conveyance shall be deposited into the trust fund and used for the purposes
authorized by this article. Any such conveyance shall be made in the manner
prescribed by law.
§ 3-146. (Reserved)
attributed to improvements. Trust funds may also, as directed by the
Township Committee, be used for the development and/or maintenance
of lands acquired for recreation or conservation purposes and/or for
the payment of debt service on indebtedness issued or incurred by the
Township for any of the above purposes except for the maintenance of
lands acquired for recreation and conservation purposes.
C. The trust fund shall be funded through the dedication to the fund of an
amount not to exceed $0.02 per $100 of assessed valuation of each
annual tax levy. The trust fund shall also be permitted to accept
donations and testamentary bequests. The funds accumulated within
the trust fund may be utilized for the acquisition of land or development
rights in land or as a down payment for the issuance of bonds for the
same purpose or for any other purpose established herein at the
discretion of the Township Committee. Any and all interest accruing
shall remain in the trust fund and may be utilized for the abovedescribed
purposes.
§ 3-144 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-146
1:91

ARTICLE XXXII
Agricultural Advisory Committee
[Added 3-20-2000 by Ord. No. 6-00]
§ 3-147. Establishment.
There is hereby established in the Township of Washington an Agricultural
Advisory Committee.
§ 3-148. Membership; terms.
§ 3-149. Officers; report to Planning Board.
§ 3-150. Powers.
The Agricultural Advisory Committee shall have the following powers and
responsibilities:
A. The Agricultural Advisory Committee shall consist of at least three but
not more than five members, appointed by the Township Committee, all
of whom shall be residents of the Township with a majority of the
members actively engaged in farming and owning a portion of the land
that they farm, all of whom shall serve without pay.
B. The terms of the members first appointed shall be as follows: one-third
of the appointees for a year term to end December 31, 2000; one-third
of the appointees for a term to end December 31, 2001, and one-third of
the appointees for a term to end December 31, 2002, provided that in
the case of a five member Committee, only one appointee shall be
appointed for a term to end December 31, 2002. Thereafter, all
appointments shall be effective on January 1 of the year of appointment
and shall be for terms of three years, and vacancies shall be filled for
the unexpired term only. Members shall serve until the appointment
and qualification of their successors.
A. The Agricultural Advisory Committee shall annually select from its
members a Chairperson, who shall ensure that minutes of each meeting
are properly kept, and such other officers as it may deem necessary.
The Agricultural Advisory Committee may establish rules of order and
shall meet at least quarterly and from time to time as necessary to fulfill
its responsibilities.
B. The Agricultural Advisory Committee shall report to the Township of
Washington Planning Board.
A. To identify project areas of multiple farms that are reasonably
contiguous and located in an agriculture development area authorized
pursuant to the Agriculture Retention and Development Act, P.L. 1983,
c. 32 (N.J.S.A. 4:1C-11, et seq.) and to compile and submit to the
Township of Washington Planning Board an annual report and
§ 3-147 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-150
1:93
recommendation by December 1 of each calendar year or more often as
may be required by the Planning Board.
B. To compile and maintain and inventory of agricultural lands within the
Township.
C. To render advice and assistance to the Township of Washington
Planning Board with regard to preparation of a farmland preservation
plan element pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law specifically,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28b(13).
§ 3-150 WASHINGTON CODE § 3-150
1:94
ARTICLE XXXIII
Library Board of Trustees
[Added 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 28-05]
§ 3-151. Establishment.
The Board of Trustees of the Free Public Library of Washington Township
heretofore established shall continue and the present members thereof
shall continue until their respective terms expire.
§ 3-152. Appointment; term; vacancies.
§ 3-153. Powers of the Board of Trustees.
The Board of Trustees of the Free Public Library shall:
A. The Board of Trustees shall consist of nine members, one of whom shall
be the Mayor, and one of whom shall be the local Superintendent of
Schools. The other seven members shall be citizens appointed by the
Township Committee. At least four of the citizen members shall be
residents of the Township. The Mayor and the Superintendent of
Schools, respectively, may appoint an alternate to act in his or her place
and stead with authority to attend all meetings of the Board and, in his
or her absence, to vote on all questions before the Board.
B. Each member shall serve terms of five years.
C. Vacancies occurring in the Board of Trustees shall be filled for the
unexpired term only.
A. Hold in trust and manage all property of the library.
B. Rent rooms, or, when proper, construct buildings for the use of the
library.
C. Purchase books, pamphlets, documents, papers, CD's, DVD's, tapes,
multimedia and other reading matter;
D. Hire librarians and other necessary and proper personnel and fix their
compensation.
E. Make proper rules and regulations for the government of the library.
F. Generally do all things necessary and proper for the establishment and
maintenance of the Free Public Library within the Township.
G. The Board may also transfer to and receive from other libraries books,
magazines, prints, maps and other related library materials for the
purpose of augmenting the interlibrary loan service.
§ 3-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-154
1:95
§ 3-154. Annual report.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:54-15, the Board of Trustees shall annually
make a report of its transactions and accounts to the Chief Financial Officer
of the Township. The report shall also include an analysis of the state and
condition of the library and shall be sent to the Township Committee and to
the State Librarian.13
13.Editor's Note: Former Article XXXIV, Economic Development Advisory Committee, adopted
6-18-2007 by Ord. No. 16-07, as amended, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 2-21-2011 by Ord. No. 01-11.
§ 3-154 WASHINGTON CODE § 3-154
1:96
Chapter 7
CONTRACTS
§ 3-154 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-154
1:97

ARTICLE I
Awarding of Public Contracts
[Adopted 3-18-2013 by Ord. No. 04-13]
§ 7-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS ENTITY — Any natural or legal person, business corporation,
professional services corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
limited partnership, business trust, association or any other legal
commercial entity organized under the laws of this state or of any other
state or foreign jurisdiction.
CANDIDATE —
CANDIDATE COMMITTEE — A committee established by a candidate
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 19:44A-9(a) for the purpose of receiving contributions
and making expenditures.
CONTRIBUTION — Includes every loan, gift, subscription, advance or
transfer of money or other thing of value, including any in-kind contribution,
made to or on behalf of any candidate committee, joint candidates
committee, political committee, continuing political committee, political
party committee or legislative leadership committee and any pledge or
other commitment or assumption of liability to make such transfer. For
purposes of this article, any such commitment or assumption shall be
deemed to have been a contribution upon the date when such commitment
is made or liability assumed. Funds or other benefits received solely for the
purpose of determining whether an individual should become a candidate
are contributions.
ELECTION — Any election in which a public question is to be voted upon by
the voters of the state or any political subdivision thereof; and any election
for any public office of the state or any political subdivision thereof. It does
not include federal elective office, or state, county or municipal political
party office.
An individual seeking election to a public office of this state or of a
county, municipality or school or fire district at any election;
A.
An individual who shall have been elected or failed of election to an
office, other than a party office, for which he or she sought election
and who receives contributions and makes expenditures for any of the
purposes authorized by N.J.S.A. 19:44A-11.2; and
B.
An individual who has received funds or other benefits or has made
payments solely for the purpose of determining whether the individual
should become a candidate as defined in Subsections A and B above.
C.
This definition does not include an individual seeking federal elective
office, or state, county or municipal political party office.
D.
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-1
1:99
FAIR AND OPEN PROCESS — At a minimum, that the contract shall be
publicly advertised in newspapers or on the Internet website maintained by
the Township in sufficient time to give notice in advance of the contract;
awarded under a process that provides for public solicitation of proposals
or qualifications and awarded and disclosed under criteria established in
writing by the Township prior to the solicitation of proposals or
qualifications; and publicly opened and announced when awarded. The
decision of the Township as to what constitutes a fair and open process shall
be final.
INTEREST — The ownership or control of more than 10% of the profits or
assets of a business entity or 10% of the stock in the case of a business
entity that is a corporation for profit, as appropriate.
§ 7-2. Awarding public contracts to certain contributors prohibited.
§ 7-3. Contributions made prior to effective date.
No contribution made prior to the effective date of this article shall be
deemed to give rise to a violation of this article.
§ 7-4. List of reportable contributions.
Prior to awarding any contract, except a contract that is awarded pursuant
to a fair and open process, the Township shall require the business entity
to which the contract is to be awarded to provide a written certification
that it has not made a contribution that would bar the award of a contract
A. The Township shall not enter into a contract having an anticipated value
in excess of $17,500, as determined in advance and certified in writing
by the Township, with a business entity, except a contract that is
awarded pursuant to a fair and open process, if, during the preceding
one-year period, that business entity has made a contribution that is
reportable by the recipient under N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq. to any
municipal committee of a political party in the Township if a member of
that political party is serving in an elective public office of the Township
when the contract is awarded or to any candidate committee of any
person serving in an elective public office of the Township when the
contract is awarded.
B. A business entity that has entered into a contract having an anticipated
value in excess of $17,500 with the Township, except a contract that is
awarded pursuant to a fair and open process, shall not make a
contribution reportable by the recipient under N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq.,
to any municipal committee of a political party in the Township if a
member of that political party is serving in an elective public office of
the Township when the contract is awarded or to any candidate
committee of any person serving in an elective public office of the
Township when the contract is awarded, during the term of the
contract.
§ 7-1 WASHINGTON CODE § 7-4
1:100
pursuant to the New Jersey Campaign Contributions and Expenditures
Reporting Act, N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq.
§ 7-5. Return of excess contributions.
A business entity that is a party to a contract with the Township may
cure a violation of § 7-2 of this article, if, within 60 days after the date on
which the applicable Election Law Enforcement Commission (ELEC) report
is published, said business entity notifies the Township in writing and seeks
and receives reimbursement of the contribution from the recipient of such
contribution.
§ 7-6. Compliance with statutes and regulations.
Compliance with this article shall not relieve a business entity of its
obligations to comply with the provisions of the New Jersey Campaign
Contributions and Expenditures Reporting Act, N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq. and
any other related statutory or regulatory provisions.
§ 7-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-6
1:101
Chapter 9
CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 13.
First Aid Squad — See Ch. 14.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 21.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 24.
Police Department — See Ch. 27.
§ 7-6 WASHINGTON CODE § 7-6
1:102
ARTICLE I
Fire Department and First Aid Squad
[Adopted 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 28-07]
§ 9-1. Criminal history checks required for volunteer positions.
Pre-service criminal history checks will be required for all applicants for
volunteer positions with the Fire Department and First Aid Squad.
§ 9-2. Process for obtaining background checks. [Amended
5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 09-09]
§ 9-3. Criteria for evaluation and recommendation.
The Chief of Police of the Township of Washington shall receive and review
the results of the criminal history checks for the volunteer positions set
forth above. The Chief of Police shall recommend either approval or
disapproval of each applicant for a volunteer position to the applicable
Fire Company's Admissions and Suspensions Committee or the First Aid
Squad's Membership Committee within 30 days. Except in the case of
an applicant under the age of 18 years, the Chief of Police shall provide
a written explanation for each recommendation of disapproval in writing
to the applicable Admissions and Suspensions Committee or Membership
A. Applicants 18 years of age or older for the volunteer positions set forth
above, who apply for volunteer positions after the effective date of this
article, must consent to a criminal history check to be conducted
through the State Bureau of Investigation. The Township shall cover the
cost of the criminal history check. Such applicants shall fully complete
“Form D” (available at the New Jersey State Police Internet website,
www.njsp.org, or the Police Department) and follow the instructions for
obtaining a criminal history background check, which includes making
an appointment to be fingerprinted by the state contract vendor.
Applicants who fail to obtain a criminal history background check or
otherwise refuse to consent to or cooperate in securing a criminal
history check shall not be considered for appointment.
B. Applicants less than 18 years of age must complete “Form C” available
at the New Jersey State Police Internet website, www.njsp.org, or from
the Washington Township Police Department and follow the instructions
for obtaining a criminal history background check, which includes
making an appointment to be fingerprinted by the state contract
vendor. The applicant shall pay the fee required by the Division of State
Police (which will be refunded by the Township if the applicant is
appointed). Upon receipt of the report, the applicant must make a copy
available to the Chief of Police, who will evaluate the report in
accordance with the criteria set forth in § 9-3. Applicants who fail to
submit the required report to the Chief of Police or otherwise refuse to
secure a criminal history check shall not be considered for
appointment.
§ 9-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-3
1:103
Committee and shall forward a copy to the applicant. For applicants under
the age of 18 years, the Chief shall not provide an explanation for a
recommendation of disapproval to the applicable Admissions and
Suspensions Committee or Membership Committee but shall notify the
applicant of the recommendation. When reviewing a record with one or
more convictions, the Chief of Police shall consider the following:
§ 9-4. Appeal.
An applicant 18 years of age or older receiving a recommendation of
disapproval from the Chief of Police may appeal by submitting a letter
explaining the basis for his or her appeal to the applicable Fire Company's
Admissions and Suspensions Committee or the First Aid Squad's
Membership Committee. An applicant less than 18 years of age receiving
a recommendation of disapproval from the Chief of Police may appeal by
submitting a letter explaining the basis for his or her appeal to the Chief
of Police. Such an appeal must be made within 20 days of the applicant's
receipt of written notice of the recommendation of disapproval. If the
applicant challenges the accuracy of the conviction information obtained by
the criminal history check, he or she shall be afforded a reasonable period
of time to attempt to correct the record. If the applicant merely challenges
the propriety of the Chief of Police's recommendation, the applicable
Admissions and Suspensions Committee or Membership Committee, or the
Chief of Police in the case of an applicant less than 18 years of age, shall
promptly review the appeal and shall notify the applicant within 30 days of
its determination. If no action is taken by the applicable Committee or the
Chief within 30 days of such an appeal, the recommendation of disapproval
from the Chief of Police shall be deemed affirmed.
A. The nature and responsibility of the applicant's prospective position;
B. The nature and seriousness of the offense;
C. The circumstances under which the offense occurred;
D. The date of the offense;
E. The age of the applicant when the offense was committed;
F. Whether the offense was repeated;
G. Social conditions which may have contributed to the offense; and
H. Any evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in prison or in
the community, counseling or psychiatric treatment received,
acquisition of additional academic or vocational education, successful
participation in correctional work-release programs, or the
recommendation of persons who have supervised the applicant.
§ 9-3 WASHINGTON CODE § 9-4
1:104
Chapter 13
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 87.
§ 9-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-4
1:105

ARTICLE I
Establishment, Organization and Administration
[Adopted 6-18-1984 by Ord. No. 12-84 (Sec. 3-1 of the Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 13-1. Establishment.
The Fire Department of the Township of Washington shall be composed of
the following:
§ 13-2. Membership. [Amended 3-17-2003 by Ord. No. 6-03]
§ 13-3. Reports.
A monthly operations report shall be submitted to the Township Committee
by each Company.
A. The Long Valley Fire Company No. 1.
B. The Schooley's Mountain Fire Protection Association.
C. The Fairmount Fire Company No. 1.
A. All applicants for membership in the Fire Department of the Township
of Washington, including the Long Valley Fire Company, the Schooley's
Mountain Fire Protection Association, the Fairmount Fire Company and
any additional fire companies which may hereafter be established, shall
be required to submit to criminal history checks prior to commencing
service in accordance with § 24-9 of the Code of the Township of
Washington.14
B. All such members must be approved by the Township Committee, upon
recommendation of the appropriate Fire Company prior to commencing
service.
C. Members of the Fire Department shall serve as volunteers and shall
serve without compensation.
D. Members of the Fire Department are required to comply with the
Department’s constitution and bylaws. Failure to comply may result in
disciplinary action by the membership of the Fire Department
consistent with the Department’s bylaws. Members of the Fire
Department may be disciplined or discharged by the Township
Committee after notice, a hearing and consultation with the Fire
Department line officers, for violation of the rules and regulations
promulgated and adopted by the Department or for a violation of the
bylaws of the Fire Department. [Added 2-19-2007 by Ord. No. 1-07]
14.Editor's Note: Section 24-9, Criminal history checks, was repealed 11-20-2006 by Ord. No.
21-06. See now Ch. 9, Criminal History Background Checks, Art. I, Fire Department and
First Aid Squad.
§ 13-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-4
1:107
§ 13-4. Budget.
The Township Committee shall, in its annual budget, appropriate a sum
of money to assist in the efficient and effective operation of the Fire
Department.
§ 13-4 WASHINGTON CODE § 13-4
1:108
ARTICLE II
Mutual Fire Aid
[Adopted 9-16-2002 by Ord. No. 34-02]
§ 13-5. Agreement established.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1, there is hereby established a mutual fire
aid agreement between the Township of Washington and the Township of
Mansfield.
§ 13-6. Authorization to request assistance.
The Fire Chief of the Township of Washington, or his designee, is authorized
to request assistance from the Fire Chief or other head of the Fire
Department of the Township of Mansfield provided that the Township of
Mansfield adopts a reciprocal ordinance to provide fire aid during and after
any emergency in order to protect life and property.
§ 13-7. Assistance to be provided; powers, rights and immunities.
The Fire Chief of the Township of Washington, or his designee, shall provide
assistance to the Township of Mansfield provided that it accepts the terms
of this agreement and makes a valid request to supply such personnel and
equipment to the extent possible without endangering persons or property
within the Township of Washington. The members of the Washington
Township Fire Department supplying such aid shall have the same powers,
authority, sights and immunities as the members of the fire department of
the municipality to which assistance is rendered.
§ 13-8. Costs and expenses.
The Township of Washington shall, upon providing assistance to the
Township of Mansfield, assume the cost and expense of providing its
personnel and equipment to the requesting municipality, except in such
instances where the requesting municipality receives state or federal aid
by way of reimbursement. Under those circumstances, the costs incurred
by the Township of Washington shall be submitted to the municipality
requesting assistance for reimbursement out of the funds received by way
of state or federal aid.
§ 13-9. Benefits upon injury or death.
Members of the Washington Township Fire Department suffering injury, or
their legal representatives if death results, while rendering assistance in
another municipality shall be entitled to all such benefits they would have
realized if injury or death had occurred in the performance of normal duties
within the Township of Washington.
§ 13-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-10
1:109
§ 13-10. Standard operating procedures.
The Fire Chief of the Township of Washington or his designee and the Chief
of the Township of Mansfield or his designees shall jointly prepare written
standard operating procedures which shall address the implementation of
this mutual fire aid agreement. A copy of the SOP, and all amendments and
revisions thereto, shall be filed with each participating fire department and
the Clerk of the Township of Mansfield and with the dispatcher for each
such municipality.
§ 13-11. Duration of agreement.
This mutual fire aid agreement shall have an initial term of one year
and shall be automatically renewed for additional and successive one-year
terms, unless and until one of the parties hereto elects to terminate the
agreement by providing prior written notice to the other party to the
agreement
§ 13-12. Copies of article on file in each municipality.
A copy of this ordinance shall be transmitted to the municipal clerk of each
municipality named herein no later than five business days following final
adoption.
§ 13-10 WASHINGTON CODE § 13-12
1:110
ARTICLE III
Junior Firemen's Auxiliary
[Adopted 8-20-2007 by Ord. No. 21-07]
§ 13-13. Junior Firemen's Auxiliary created.
There is hereby established an auxiliary to the Washington Township Fire
Department to be known as the Junior Firemen's Auxiliary, which shall
operate under and pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-95 et seq.
§ 13-14. Eligibility for membership.
Any person who is a resident of the Township of Washington and is between
16 years and 18 years of age shall be eligible for membership in the
Junior Firemen's Auxiliary. No individual shall become a member of the
Junior Firemen's Auxiliary unless written permission is obtained from such
individual's parents or legal guardian. Said written permission shall be in
a form approved by the Township Committee and shall be acknowledged
or approved in the manner required by law for deeds to real estate to be
recorded. Members of the Junior Firemen's Auxiliary shall also be required
to obtain working papers from the New Jersey Department of Labor. The
original written permission and working papers shall be retained by the
Township Clerk, who shall forward a copy to the Department Chief.
§ 13-15. Insurance coverage for junior members.
Members of the Junior Firemen's Auxiliary shall be provided with the same
insurance coverage as provided for the regular volunteer firemen of the
Township of Washington.
§ 13-16. Junior Firemen's Auxiliary Committee.
The Junior Firemen's Auxiliary program shall be under the guidance of a
standing committee within the Washington Township Fire Department. The
standing committee shall be appointed annually by the Board of Fire Chiefs
and shall consist of three regular Fire Department members, at least one
of whom shall presently hold or have previously held a firematic officer's
position within the Department.
§ 13-17. Rules and regulations governing Junior Firemen's Auxiliary
activities.
The Township Committee hereinafter establishes the following rules and
regulations designed to govern the activities of the Auxiliary and to provide
for the training of its members with a view toward their eventual
membership in the Washington Township Fire Department:
A. No junior fireman shall be required to perform duties which would
expose the junior fireman to the same degree of hazard as a regular
member of the Fire Department.
§ 13-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-17
1:111
B. No junior fireman shall be permitted to engage in firefighting or be in
the immediate vicinity of a hazardous condition involving the handling
of dangerous or poisonous acids or dyes or injurious quantities of toxic
or noxious dust, gases, vapors or fumes.
C. A junior fireman shall be on probation until the age of 18 years and may
be expelled from the Auxiliary for just cause.
D. A junior fireman shall comply with the constitution and bylaws of the
Washington Township Fire Department, as well as any bylaws that may
be established by the Auxiliary itself.
E. A junior fireman shall obey the commands of the Fire Chief or any other
officer of the Washington Township Fire Department.
F. It is important for the junior firemen to understand that they are not
privileged in any way while responding to an emergency or
nonemergency call for the Fire Department.
G. The junior fireman will obey all New Jersey Department of Motor
Vehicle laws while responding, including, but not limited to, those
prohibiting exceeding the posted speed limit, passing in a nonpassing
zone, tailgating, not stopping at red traffic signals, not stopping
completely at stop signs, not yielding to right-of-way as necessary,
making a right turn on red when a "No Turn on Red" sign is posted, etc.
H. The junior fireman should realize that when responding to an
emergency call, a fire truck may be granted privileges by other drivers
under certain circumstances (involving the use of lights and sirens) but
that these privileges are not rights and that they do not apply to junior
firemen.
I. The following rules should be observed at all times:
(1) No external identification lights i.e., "blue" lights, are to be used.
(2) Junior firemen should not use their headlights to alert other
motorists that they are seeking to pass.
(3) Junior firemen should not use the horn to signal their desire to pass
or to be yielded a right-of-way.
(4) Junior firemen should not use their hazard lights while responding
to signal other drivers their desire to pass or to be yielded a rightof-
way.
(5) Junior firemen should not point, glare, or in any other way signal a
driver who did not yield right-of-way to them. Other drivers are not
obligated in any way to do so.
J. Training shall include, but not be limited to, instruction concerning
industrial fire systems; breathing apparatus; municipal water systems;
hydrants and alternate water sources; care, testing and handling of fire
§ 13-17 WASHINGTON CODE § 13-17
1:112
hoses; types and uses of hand-held fire extinguishers; procedures for
handling alarms; radio procedures; care, cleaning and basic
maintenance of apparatus; preparation of knots for hoisting equipment;
safety measures for riding on apparatus; use of personal safety
equipment and hand tools; theory of pumps and hydraulic fire systems
and the use of ladders, including their care and testing. Actual use
of the equipment shall be encouraged whenever it shall be deemed
advisable by the Washington Township Fire Department, provided that
a junior fireman shall not be exposed to any danger. Adequate
supervision shall be provided, and all possible safety precautions shall
be taken.
K. Junior firemen may apply for an adult class of membership in the
Washington Township Fire Department upon achieving the age of 18
years by completing the appropriate application forms in accordance
with the Fire Department's procedures.
L. Subject to the approval of the Township Committee, these rules and
regulations may be supplemented by the Washington Township Fire
Department.
§ 13-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-17
1:113
Chapter 14
FIRST AID SQUAD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3.
Fire Department — See Ch. 13.
Length of service awards program — See Ch.
17.
Police Department — See Ch. 17.
§ 14-1. Recognition of Long Valley First Aid Squad, Inc.
The Long Valley First Aid Squad, Inc. (LVFAS) is hereby recognized as the
organization providing vehicle rescue and medical services to the citizens
of, and visitors to, the Township of Washington, County of Morris, which
organization is eligible to receive funding and other support as permitted
by law from the Township of Washington.
§ 14-2. Rescue, emergency medical, and other service.
The Long Valley First Aid Squad, Inc. shall provide twenty-four-hour rescue
and emergency medical services to the residents of, and visitors to, the
Township of Washington, and such service to other individuals pursuant
to mutual aid agreements as may be in effect from time to time between
the LVFAS and other emergency medical services and rescue squads or as
directed by the Chief Officer of the LVFAS at his/her direction.
§ 14-3. Criminal history checks required.
All applicants for membership in the LVFAS shall be required to submit to
criminal history checks prior to commencing service in accordance with
§ 24-9 of the Code of the Township of Washington.15
§ 14-4. Applicants.
Applicants to the LVFAS shall be admitted in accordance with the
regulations set forth at N.J.A.C. 13:12-1.1. All such members must be
approved by the Township Committee, upon recommendation of the LVFAS,
prior to commencing service.
§ 14-5. Officers.
The officers of the LVFAS shall be elected by the membership in accordance
with the terms of the Squad's bylaws. Each officer shall serve a term
consistent with the Squad's Constitution and bylaws. The Chief Officer shall
15.Editor's Note: Section 24-9, Criminal history checks, was repealed 11-20-2006 by Ord. No.
21-06. See now Ch. 9, Criminal History Background Checks, Art. I, Fire Department and
First Aid Squad.
§ 13-17 WASHINGTON CODE § 14-5
1:114
take an oath of public office at the annual reorganization meeting of the
Township Committee and shall serve for a term of one year from January 1
or the expiration of a year in the event the election is made after January 1.
§ 14-6. Constitution and bylaws.
Members of the LVFAS are required to comply with the Squad's Constitution
and bylaws. Failure to comply may result in disciplinary action by the
membership of the LVFAS consistent with the Squad's bylaws. Members of
the LVFAS may be disciplined or discharged by the Township Committee
after notice, a hearing and consultation with the LVFAS Line Officers, for
violation of the rules and regulations promulgated and adopted by the
Squad or for a violation of the bylaws of the LVFAS.
§ 14-7. Voluntary membership; compensation.
Members of the LVFAS shall serve as volunteers and shall serve without
compensation.
§ 14-8. Appropriation of funds.
The Township Committee shall, in its annual budget, appropriate a sum of
money to assist in the efficient and effective operation of the LVFAS.
§ 14-9. Cadet membership. [Added 9-17-2007 by Ord. No. 23-07]
A. Eligibility for membership.
(1) Any person who is a resident of the Township of Washington and is
at least 16 years of age, and enrolled in or a graduate of high school
or an equivalent accredited program, shall be eligible for cadet
membership in the Long Valley First Aid Squad. No individual shall
become a cadet member of the Long Valley First Aid Squad unless
written permission is obtained from such individual's parents or
legal guardian. Said written permission shall be in a form approved
by the Township Committee and shall be acknowledged or
approved in the manner required by law for deeds to real estate to
be recorded.
(2) Applicants for cadet membership shall provide three letters of
recommendation from persons who are not members of the Long
Valley First Aid Squad.
(3) Successful applicants for cadet membership shall be required to
obtain working papers from the New Jersey Department of Labor.
The original written permission and working papers shall be
retained by the Township Clerk, who shall forward a copy to the
Chief of the squad.
(4) To be considered for cadet membership, an applicant must possess
an American Heart Association Healthcare Provider CPR
certification (or equivalent as approved by the New Jersey
§ 14-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-9
1:115
Department of Health Office of Emergency Medical Services) and,
at a minimum, provisional EMT-Basic status in the State of New
Jersey.
B. Insurance coverage for cadet members. Cadet members shall be
provided with the same insurance coverage as provided for the regular
members of the Long Valley First Aid Squad.
C. Rules and regulations governing cadet member activities. The
Township Committee hereinafter establishes the following rules and
regulations designed to govern the activities of the cadet members and
to provide for the training of the cadet members with a view toward
their eventual membership in the Long Valley First Aid Squad:
(1) No cadet member shall be required to perform duties which would
expose the cadet member to the same degree of hazard as a regular
member of the Long Valley First Aid Squad.
(2) No cadet member shall be permitted to be in the immediate vicinity
of a hazardous condition.
(3) A cadet member shall be required to abide by the membership
standards of the Long Valley First Aid Squad and may be
disciplined or expelled from the squad for just cause.
(4) A cadet member shall comply with the constitution, bylaws and
policies of the Long Valley First Aid Squad, as well as any bylaws or
policies that may be established for the cadet members.
(5) A cadet member shall obey the commands of the Chief or any other
officer of the Long Valley First Aid Squad and shall perform
services only in the physical presence and under the direct
supervision of an EMT-Basic.
(6) It is important for the cadet members to understand that they are
not privileged in any way while responding to an emergency or
nonemergency call for the squad.
(7) The cadet member will obey all New Jersey Department of Motor
vehicle laws while responding, including, but not limited to, those
prohibiting exceeding the posted speed limit, passing in a
nonpassing zone, tailgating, not stopping at red traffic signals, not
stopping completely at stop signs, not yielding to right-of-way as
necessary, making a right turn on red when a "no turn on red" sign
is posted, etc.
(8) The cadet member shall realize that when responding to an
emergency call, an ambulance may be granted privileges by other
drivers under certain circumstances (involving the use of lights and
sirens) but that these privileges are not rights and that they do not
apply to cadet members.
(9) The following rules should be observed at all times:
§ 14-9 WASHINGTON CODE § 14-9
1:116
Chapter 17
LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 13.
§ 17-1. Program created.
A Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) is herewith created in
accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997,16 to reward active
volunteer members of the Township of Washington Fire Department and
Long Valley First Aid Squad for their loyal, diligent and devoted services to
the residents of the Township of Washington.
§ 17-2. Annual contributions.
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferredincome
account for each volunteer member that meets the criteria set forth
(a) No external identification lights, i.e., "blue" lights, are to be
used.
(b) Cadet members should not use their headlights to alert other
motorists that they are seeking to pass.
(c) Cadet members should not use their horn to signal their desire
to pass or to be yielded a right-of-way.
(d) Cadet members should not use their hazard lights while
responding to signal other drivers their desire to pass or to be
yielded a right-of-way.
(e) Cadet members should not point, glare, or in any other way
signal a driver who did not yield the right-of-way to them.
Other drivers are not obligated in any way to do so.
(10) Cadet members may apply for general membership in the Long
Valley First Aid Squad upon achieving the age of 18 years, having
graduated from high school, having a valid New Jersey driver's
license and upon being recommended by a majority of the line
officers for probationary membership in accordance with the
squad's procedures.
(11) Subject to the approval of the Township Committee, these rules and
regulations may be supplemented by the Long Valley First Aid
Squad.
16.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:14-183 et seq.
§ 14-9 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 17-2
17:117
below; that such contributions shall be made in accordance with a plan that
shall be established by the Township of Washington pursuant to P.L. 1997,
c.388: and that such plan shall be administered in accordance with the laws
of the State of New Jersey, the United States Internal Revenue Code and
this chapter.
§ 17-3. Criteria for eligibility.
The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions to each eligible member
that meets the following criteria each calendar year January 1 through
December 31:
Points Amount
64 or greater $1,150*
50 to 64 $575**
0 to 49 points $0
NOTES:
*As a threshold qualification, in the case of a member of the Fire
Department, a minimum of 25 points must be earned in the "Participation
in Fire Company Responses" category, while in the case of a First Aid
Squad member, a minimum of 10 points must be earned in the "Incident
Response" category. [Amended 7-18-2005 by Ord. No. 25-05]
**As a threshold qualification, in the case of a member of the Fire
Department, a minimum of 15 points must be earned in the "Participation
in Fire Company Responses" category, while in the case of a First Aid
Squad member, a minimum of 10 points must be earned in the "Incident
Responses" category.
§ 17-4. One year prior service included.
The LOSAP shall provide for contributions as credit for no more than one
year of prior (calendar year 2000) service for each eligible volunteer in
accordance with the schedule set forth in § 17-3.
§ 17-5. Estimated cost.
The estimated cost of the program has been calculated as follows:
§ 17-6. Schedule of points for Fire Department.
Each volunteer member certified by the fire officers to be an active member
of the fire company for the applicable calendar year shall be credited
annually, on December 31, with points for volunteer services provided to the
Township of Washington Fire Department in accordance with the following
schedule:
A. For regular annual services: $60,950 per year.
B. For contributions for prior year service: $60,950 per year for one year.
§ 17-2 WASHINGTON CODE § 17-6
17:118
§ 17-7. Schedule of points for Long Valley First Aid Squad.
Each volunteer member certified by the line officers as an active member
of the Long Valley First Aid Squad for the applicable calendar year shall
be credited annually, on December 31, with points for volunteer services
provided to the Long Valley First Aid Squad in accordance with the
following schedule:
A. Training courses: 25 points maximum.
(1) Less than 20 hours' duration: two points per hour, with a maximum
of 10 points.
(2) Courses of 20 to 45 hours' duration: 10 points per course.
(3) Courses over 45 hours' duration: 15 points per course.
B. Drills: 36 points maximum.
(1) Two points per drill, minimum two hours per drill.
C. Elected or appointed positions: 15 points maximum.
(1) Completion of one-year term as a company line officer: 10 points.
(2) Completion of one-year term as a company executive officer
(Company President, Vice President, Treasurer and Secretary): five
points.
(3) Completion of one-year term as a Department officer: five points.
D. Attendance at meetings: 12 points maximum.
(1) Attendance at any official meeting of the fire company: one point
each meeting.
E. Participation in fire company responses: 35 points maximum for
responding annually (physical response to incident required for credit)
to the following number of fire-related incidents that occurred in the
calendar year for the applicable fire company:
(1) At least 15% but less than 25% of fire calls: 15 points.
(2) At least 25% but less than 35% of fire calls: 25 points.
(3) At least 35% or greater: 35 points.
F. Miscellaneous: 10 points maximum.
(1) Participation in inspections, formal fund-raising and other activities
not otherwise listed: one point per activity.
A. Training courses: 24 points maximum.
§ 17-6 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 17-7
17:119
(1) Less than 20 hours' duration: one point per hour, with a maximum
of five points.
(2) Courses of 20 to 45 hours' duration: one point per hour for each
hour over initial 20 hours, with a maximum of 10 points.
(3) Courses over 45 hours' duration: 15 points per course.
B. Drills: 36 points maximum.
(1) Two points per drill, minimum two-hour drill.
C. Standbys and nonemergency transportations: 10 points maximum.
(1) Standby approved by the Captain, lasting two or more hours, not
falling under one of the other categories: one point each.
(2) A prearranged nonemergency transportation, lasting a minimum of
one hour: one point each.
D. Elected or appointed positions: 15 points maximum.
(1) Completion of one-year term as a squad line officer: 10 points.
(2) Completion of one-year term as a squad executive officer (Squad
President, Vice President, Treasurer and Secretary): five points.
(3) Completion of one-year term as the Squad Vehicle Maintenance
Coordinator or Rescue Coordinator: five points.
E. Attendance at meetings: 12 points maximum.
(1) Attendance at any official meetings of the First Aid Squad: one
point per meeting.
F. Incident responses: 35 points maximum. [Amended 11-19-2001 by
Ord. No. 34-01]
(1) Points.
(a) At least 10%, but less than 15%, of emergency calls per
calendar year: 10 points.
(b) At least 15%, but less than 20%, of emergency calls per
calendar year: 20 points.
(c) At least 20%, but less than 25%, of emergency calls per
calendar year: 30 points.
(d) At least 25% or greater of emergency calls per calendar year:
35 points.
(2) For the purposes of this Subsection F only, a period of duty time
(that period of time from 9:00 p.m. until 5:00 a.m. when a member
is on call) shall be the equivalent of a response to 1/2 of an
§ 17-7 WASHINGTON CODE § 17-7
17:120
§ 17-8. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication as required by law and upon approval by the voters as a public
question at the next general election.17
Chapter 21
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
emergency call if, during the duty time, a member is not required
to respond to an emergency call.
G. Miscellaneous: 10 points maximum.
(1) Participation in other activities not otherwise listed: one point per
activity.
17.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 21-00 was approved at the general election held November 7,
2000.
§ 17-7 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 17-8
17:121

ARTICLE I
Defense and Indemnification
[Adopted 10-19-1981 by Ord. No. 37-81 (Sec. 5-9 of the Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 21-1. Civil actions.
Subject to the limitations set forth in the subsequent subsections of this
article, whenever any civil action has been or shall be brought against any
person (hereinafter referred to as "employee") holding or formerly holding
any office, position or employment with the Township of Washington for
any action or omission arising out of or in the course of the performance
of the duties of such office, position or employment, the township shall
defray all costs of defending such action, including reasonable counsel
fees and expenses, together with costs of appeal, if any, and shall save
harmless and protect such persons from any financial loss resulting from
the litigation. The Township Attorney, or other attorney selected by the
Mayor with advice and consent of the Township Committee, shall represent
the township official or employee.
§ 21-2. Criminal actions.
The township shall not defray the costs of defending any criminal action
against any municipal employee, except as may be authorized by state
statute or other municipal ordinance or resolution of the Township of
Washington, and, in those circumstances, the responsibility for defraying
the costs of defending such employee shall be applicable only when such
criminal proceedings shall have been dismissed or result in a final
disposition in favor of the employee. However, should the township
determine that there is good cause to dismiss the employee, arising out of
the incident or related incidents of the criminal prosecution, the township
will not reimburse the employee or official for legal defense and costs of
defending the suit, even though criminal proceedings against the employee
may be dismissed or the employee found not guilty.
§ 21-3. Exceptions.
A. The obligation of the Township of Washington to defend and indemnify
its employees for acts or omissions arising out of or in the course of the
performance of the duties of that person shall be limited to those
circumstances under which the township itself would be liable for the
acts of its employees under the doctrine of respondent superior, except
that the township shall defend any such officer or employee sued under
the Federal Civil Rights Act, provided that the Mayor and Committee
shall not have concluded that such act or omission was outside the
scope of the responsibilities of said officer or employee.
B. Furthermore, the township shall not defend and save harmless any
employee committing an intentional or willful act or willful omission
§ 21-1 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 21-3
17:123
arising out of or in the course of the performance of the duties of such
office, position or employment.
C. Also specifically excluded from the provisions of this article are the
following classes of employees or former employees:
(1) Any municipal employee or official providing any form of
professional medical services, such as doctors and nurses, insofar
as said civil action arises out of or concerns those professional
medical services.
(2) Any part-time professional municipal employee or official providing
contractual services for the township, such as the Township
Attorney, Assistant Attorney and Auditor, insofar as said civil action
arises out of or concerns those professional services. This exclusion
does not pertain to full-time professional employees.
D. Nothing in this article shall authorize the township to pay for punitive
or exemplary damages resulting from the commission of a crime.
§ 21-3 WASHINGTON CODE § 21-3
17:124
ARTICLE II
Defined Contributions Retirement Program
[Adopted 8-18-2008 by Ord. No. 15-08]
§ 21-4. Positions eligible to participate.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 21-5. Exempt individuals.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
§ 21-6. When appointed individual not required to join.
If an individual is appointed to one of the positions listed in § 21-4 and
the individual is not serving in a position as described in § 21-5 above, the
Pension Certifying Officer may determine that the individual is not required
to join the Defined Contribution Retirement Program if that individual:
A. Business Administrator.
B. Municipal Court Judge.
A. Certified Health Officer.
B. Tax Collector.
C. Chief Financial Officer.
D. Construction Code Official.
E. Qualified Purchasing Agent.
F. Tax Assessor.
G. Municipal Planner.
H. Registered Municipal Clerk.
I. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector.
J. Principal Public Works Manager.
A. Was an active participant in the Public Employee Retirement System on
July 1, 2007, and continuously since that time;
B. Has been appointed pursuant to a valid promotional process;
§ 21-4 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 21-6
17:125
§ 21-7. Construal of provisions.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.) as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
C. Is appointed on a temporary, interim, or "acting" basis to a position
requiring state certification as set forth in § 21-5 herein and is in
pursuit of the required certification; or
D. Meets such other exceptions that may be approved by the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 21-6 WASHINGTON CODE § 21-7
17:126
ARTICLE III
Post-Retirement Health Benefits
[Adopted 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 07-11]
§ 21-8. Benefits entitlement for nonmembers of bargaining units.
The entitlement to post-retirement health benefits for nonmembers of
bargaining units shall be fixed as follows: The Township of Washington
shall continue insurance coverage for employees who are not members
of bargaining units organized pursuant to N.J.S.A. 34:13A-1 et seq. who
retire with at least 25 years of service in the New Jersey State Pension
System and 20 years with Washington Township at the rate for family,
husband/wife or single coverage, depending on the employee's marital
status. Coverage ends at the year Medicare coverage commences or 65
years of age, whichever is sooner.
§ 21-9. Benefits entitlement for members of bargaining units.
The entitlement to post-retirement health benefits for members of
bargaining units shall be fixed as follows: All full-time employees with the
Township of Washington who are members of bargaining units organized
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 34:13A-1 et seq. shall be entitled, upon regular
retirement from employment with the Township, to such termination
benefits as may be provided and under such conditions as may be provided
in the labor agreement then effective pursuant to their position, which
agreement has been adopted by the Township Committee in accordance
with law.
§ 21-8 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 21-9
17:127
Chapter 24
(RESERVED)
Chapter 27
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 21-9 WASHINGTON CODE § 21-9
24:128
ARTICLE I
Establishment
[Adopted 12-20-1971 as Ch. IV of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 27-1. Department established; composition. [Amended 4-16-1973;
8-18-1975; 12-21-1981 by Ord. No. 47-81; 5-19-1986 by Ord. No.
17-86; 7-15-1991 by Ord. No. 21-91; 9-21-1998 by Ord. No. 29-98;
6-19-2000 by Ord. No. 16-00; 7-16-2001 by Ord. No. 21-01;
12-21-2015 by Ord. No. 14-15; 5-15-2017 by Ord. No. 08-17;
7-16-2018 by Ord. No. 10-18]
The Police Department of the Township of Washington is hereby established
and shall consist of a Chief of Police, not more than two Captains, not
more than four Lieutenants, not more than three Sergeants First Class, not
more than 10 Sergeants, not more than eight Corporals, not more than 25
patrolmen and not more than 21 special officers.
§ 27-2. Appointment.
The officers and members of the Police Department shall be appointed by
the Township Committee to hold office as provided by law and shall receive
such salary as the Township Committee may determine.
§ 27-3. Designation of appropriate authority. [Amended 8-18-1997
by Ord. No. 20-97]
The Township Committee shall serve as the appropriate authority, as the
same is defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, to whom the Police Chief shall be
directly responsible for the efficiency and routine day-to-day operations of
the Police Department.
§ 27-4. Police Committee, Police Commissioner and Deputy Police
Commissioner. [Amended 8-18-1997 by Ord. No. 20-97]
The Mayor shall, each year as soon after the reorganization of the Township
Committee as may be possible, select and designate two members of the
Township Committee who shall constitute the Police Committee. The Mayor
shall designate one of the members as Chairman of the Committee, who
shall be known as the "Police Commissioner," and the second member as
Vice Chairman, who shall be known as the "Deputy Police Commissioner."
Subject to the direction of the Police Committee and further subject to
the authority vested in the Township Committee, the Police Commissioner
or, in the case of his/her absence from the Township for more than three
days, the Deputy Commissioner shall oversee the operations of the Police
Department.
§ 27-5. Rules and regulations.
The Township Committee shall establish by resolution and may from time
to time amend and repeal by resolution such rules and regulations as it
§ 27-1 (RESERVED) § 27-5
24:129
may deem necessary for the government and efficient working of the entire
Department. When adopted, these rules and regulations shall be posted
at police headquarters by the Police Commissioner within five days after
their adoption, and a copy thereof shall be delivered to each member of the
Department within five days after adoption.
§ 27-6. Qualifications. [Amended 5-19-1986 by Ord. No. 17-86;
9-20-1993 by Ord. No. 26-93; 7-17-1995 by Ord. No. 23-95;
6-15-1998 by Ord. No. 21-98; 12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 40-98]
A. Each applicant for membership in the Police Department shall be a
United States citizen and shall comply with all of the laws of the State of
New Jersey pertaining thereto. On or after December 1, 2013, each
applicant must have either an associate degree from an accredited
college or university, have earned at least 60 college credits from an
accredited college or university or have completed three years' active
military service concluding with an honorable discharge. [Amended
5-15-2000 by Ord. No. 12-00; 7-15-2002 by Ord. No. 26-02;
11-18-2013 by Ord. No. 19-13]
B. No person shall be given nor shall he/she accept a permanent
appointment in the Township as a police officer unless such person has
successfully completed a police training course at a school approved
and authorized by the Police Training Commission in the Department of
Law and Public Safety, pursuant to the Police Training Act, N.J.S.A.
52:17B-66 et seq.
C. A qualified person for the Township Police Department shall be given a
probationary or temporary appointment as a police officer in the
Township for a total period not exceeding one year for the purpose of
enabling the person seeking permanent appointment to take a police
training course as prescribed in the Police Training Act, N.J.S.A.
52:17B-66. et seq. However, the time period set forth above may exceed
one year for those persons enrolled prior to the one-year limit in a
police training course scheduled to end subsequent to the one-year
limit, and for those persons who, prior to the one-year limit have been
scheduled to attend a police training course which commences
subsequent to the one-year limit. In no case shall any extension granted
for the reasons herein listed exceed six months.
D. Upon successful completion of the police training course as set forth in
Subsection C herein, the probationary or temporary appointment of the
person shall continue for twelve months. The purpose of the additional
twelve-month probationary or temporary appointment is to permit the
Township to determine whether the person satisfactorily performs his/
her duties as a Township police officer. The additional twelve-month
probationary or temporary appointment period shall commence on the
date of graduation from the police training course set forth above,
§ 27-5 WASHINGTON CODE § 27-7
24:130
§ 27-7. Oath of allegiance.
Each member of the Police Department shall, before entering upon the
performance of his duties, take and subscribe an oath to bear true faith
and allegiance to the government established in this state, to support the
Constitutions of the United States of America and the State of New Jersey
and to faithfully, impartially and justly discharge and perform all the duties
of his office, which oath or affirmation shall be filed with the Clerk.
§ 27-8. Chief of Police. [Amended 5-16-1977; 5-19-1986 by Ord. No.
17-86; 2-14-2018 by Ord. No. 02-18]
A. The Township shall appoint a Chief of Police, who shall have all the
powers set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 and who shall be directly
responsible to the Township Committee, as the appropriate authority,
for the efficiency and routine day-to-day operations of the Police
Department. The Chief of Police shall, pursuant to policies established
by the appropriate authority:
(1) Administer and enforce rules and regulations and special
emergency directives for the disposition and discipline of the force
and its officers and personnel;
(2) Have, exercise, and discharge the functions, powers and duties of
the force;
(3) Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel;
(4) Delegate such of his authority as the Chief may deem necessary for
the efficient operation of the force to be exercised under the Chief's
direction and supervision; and
(5) Report at least monthly to the Township Committee, as the
appropriate authority, in such form as shall be prescribed by such
authority on the operation of the force during the preceding month,
and make such other reports as may be requested by the Township
Committee.
B. The Chief of Police shall recommend to the Police Committee from time
to time the purchase of new equipment or the repair or rearrangement
of such old equipment as will increase the efficiency of the Department.
He shall have full charge and control of all the apparatus and
equipment of the Department and its assignment and use and shall be
held responsible for its care, cleanliness and safekeeping.
C. The Chief of Police shall, at his discretion, assign members of the
Washington Township Police Department to work assigned to these
work functions, and the officers assigned within these functions may be
changed from time to time as necessary to efficiently carry out the
duties of the Department as mandated by § 27-9.
§ 27-7 (RESERVED) § 27-9
24:131
§ 27-9. Duties.
The Police Department, through its Chief, shall:
§ 27-10. Special law enforcement officers. [Amended 7-16-2018 by
Ord. No. 10-18]
A. Preserve the public peace; protect life and property; prevent crime;
detect and arrest offenders against the penal laws and ordinances
effective within the Township; suppress riots, mobs and insurrections;
disperse unlawful or dangerous assemblage; and preserve order at all
elections and public meetings and assemblages.
B. Administer and enforce laws and ordinances to regulate, direct, control
and restrict the movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the
use of the streets by vehicles and persons; to protect the safety and
facilitate the convenience of motorists and pedestrians; and to make
and enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with the ordinances
and resolutions of the Township for such purposes.
C. Remove or cause to be removed all nuisances in the public streets,
parks and other public places of the Township and inspect and observe
all places of public amusement or assemblage and all places of business
requiring any state or municipal license or permit and report thereon to
the appropriate department.
D. Provide proper police attendance and protection at fires.
E. Provide for the attendance of its members in court as necessary for the
prosecution and trial of persons charged with crimes and offenses and
shall cooperate fully with the law enforcement and prosecuting
authorities of federal, state and county governments.
F. Operate a training program to maintain and improve the police
efficiency of the members of the Department.
A. There may also be appointed not more than seven Class One, seven
Class Two and seven Class Three special law enforcement officers in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq. Such special law
enforcement officers shall meet the qualifications set forth in N.J.S.A.
40A:14-146.10 and be trained in accordance with the standards of the
Police Training Commission. Such special law enforcement officers
shall be under the instructions of the Chief of Police, be subject to such
rules and regulations as applicable to the Police Department and shall
be appointed for a term not exceeding one year, but may be appointed,
reappointed or employed as the occasion demands. The Chief of Police
may authorize special law enforcement officers when on duty to
exercise the same powers and authority as regular members of the
Police Department, subject to the certification and training
requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.11, including the carrying of
firearms and the power of arrest. Such special law enforcement officers
shall not be members of the Police Department. Their powers, rights
§ 27-9 WASHINGTON CODE § 27-10
24:132
§ 27-11. Hours of employment. [Amended 2-16-1972; 12-15-2008 by
Ord. No. 19-08]
The hours of employment of uniformed members of the Police Department
shall not exceed 12 consecutive hours in any one day nor 60 hours in any
one week, provided that, in case of an emergency, the officer, board or other
and duties shall immediately cease and terminate at the expiration of
the term for which they were appointed.
B. There shall be three classifications of special officers. The Police
Training Commission shall prescribe by rule or regulation the training
standards to be established for each classification. The classifications
shall be based on the duties to be performed by the special law
enforcement officer, as follows:
(1) Class One. Officers of this class shall be authorized to perform
routine traffic detail, spectator control and similar duties. Class
One officers shall have the power to issue summonses for
disorderly persons and petty disorderly persons offenses, violations
of Township ordinances and violations of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes. The use of a firearm by an officer of this class shall be
strictly prohibited. No Class One officer shall be assigned any
duties which may require the carrying or use of a firearm.
(2) Class Two. Officers of this class shall be authorized to exercise full
powers and duties similar to those of a permanent, regularly
appointed full-time police officer. The use of a firearm by an officer
of this class may be authorized only after the officer has been fully
certified as successfully completing training as prescribed by the
Police Training Commission.
(3) Class Three. Officers of this class shall be authorized to exercise
full powers and duties similar to those of a permanent, regularly
appointed full-time police officer while providing security at a
public or nonpublic school or a county college on the school or
college premises during hours when the public or nonpublic school
or county college is normally in session or when it is occupied by
public or nonpublic school or county college students or their
teachers or professors. While on duty in the jurisdiction of
employment, an officer may respond to offenses or emergencies off
school or college grounds if they occur in the officer's presence
while traveling to a school facility or county college, but an officer
shall not otherwise be dispatched or dedicated to any assignment
off school or college property. The use of a firearm by an officer of
this class shall be authorized pursuant to the provisions of
Subsection b. of Section 7 of P.L. 1985, c. 39 (N.J.S.A.
40A:14-146.14). An officer of this class shall not be authorized to
carry a firearm while off duty unless the officer complies with the
requirements set forth in Subsection I. of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-6
authorizing a retired law enforcement officer to carry a handgun.
§ 27-10 (RESERVED) § 27-11
24:133
official having charge or control of the Police Department or the police
system shall have full authority to summon and keep on duty any and all
such members during the period of emergency.
§ 27-12. Removal and suspension.
§ 27-13. Uniforms.
All members of the Police Department shall provide and maintain in clean
and serviceable condition such wearing apparel and equipment as is
prescribed by the Police Commissioner. The first uniform shall be furnished
at the expense of the Township.
§ 27-14. Firearms.
All firearms shall be provided by the Township, shall remain the property of
the Township and shall be subject to recall by the Township Committee.
§ 27-15. Promotions. [Amended 6-17-1991 by Ord. No. 14-91;
8-19-1991 by Ord. No. 24-91; 9-20-1993 by Ord. No. 26-93;
7-17-1995 by Ord. No. 23-95; 8-18-1997 by Ord. No. 20-97;
10-20-1997 by Ord. No. 23-97; 3-16-1998 by Ord. No. 3-98;
5-15-2000 by Ord. No. 12-00; 6-19-2000 by Ord. No. 16-00;
7-15-2002 by Ord. No. 26-02; 12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 19-08;
11-18-2013 by Ord. No. 19-13; 4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 04-14;
5-15-2017 by Ord. No. 08-17]
A. Each regular police officer shall hold his office and continue in
employment during good behavior and efficiency, and no person shall
be removed from office or employment for any other causes than
incapacity, misconduct, neglect of duty, conduct unbecoming a police
officer, disobedience of the rules and regulations established or
hereafter established for the Department or absence from duty without
just cause for five days or more.
B. Any member of the Department may be suspended, removed, fined or
reduced from his office or employment for just cause upon due notice
and service of written charges and a hearing.
A. Promotion policy. Promotion denotes vertical movement in the
organization hierarchy from one rank classification to another,
accompanied by increases in salary as may be provided for by salary
ordinance or applicable collective negotiations agreement. Validity of
the promotional process can be accomplished only through clear,
concise procedures. A promotional process has been developed to
identify employees who possess the ability to assume greater
responsibilities combined with the necessary skills and knowledge to
perform competently at a higher organizational level. This policy is
established for the positions of Corporal, Sergeant, Lieutenant, Captain
and Chief of Police. The Police Promotional Committee is responsible
§ 27-11 WASHINGTON CODE § 27-15
24:134
for the implementation of the promotional process. [Amended
2-14-2018 by Ord. No. 02-18]
B. Eligibility.
(1) A patrolman/woman of the Department shall be eligible to
participate in the promotional process to the rank of Corporal,
provided that he/she has completed five years of service, including
probation, with the Washington Township Police Department, with
a minimum of two consecutive evaluations from the candidate's
first-line supervisor that meet or exceed performance standards for
the two consecutive years immediately preceding the date of
announcement of the promotional opportunity, and the candidate
must have no suspensions, fines, or demotions on his record in the
two years preceding the date of announcement of the promotional
opportunity. The patrolman/woman shall have demonstrated
consistent performance meeting the minimum performance
requirements on all previous duty assignments. All candidates for
promotion to the rank of Corporal must possess at least an
associate's degree to be eligible for said promotion.
(2) A patrolman/woman or Corporal of the Department shall be eligible
to participate in the promotional process to the rank of Sergeant,
provided that he/she has completed five years of service, including
probation, with the Washington Township Police Department, with
a minimum of two consecutive evaluations from the candidate's
first-line supervisor that meet or exceed performance standards for
the two consecutive years immediately preceding the date of
announcement of the promotional opportunity, and the candidate
must have no suspensions without pay, fines, or demotions on his or
her record in the two years preceding the date of announcement of
the promotional opportunity. The patrolman/woman or Corporal
shall have demonstrated consistent performance meeting the
minimum performance requirements on all previous duty
assignments. All candidates for promotion to the rank of Sergeant
must possess at least an associate's degree to be eligible for said
promotion.
(3) Sergeants shall be eligible for promotion to the rank of Lieutenant.
Lieutenants shall be eligible for promotion to the rank of Captain.
All candidates must have no suspensions without pay, fines, or
demotions on his or her record in the two years preceding the date
of announcement of the promotional opportunity. The candidate
shall have demonstrated consistent performance meeting the
minimum performance requirements on all previous duty
assignments. In the event that a suitable candidate for Captain
does not exist based upon the eligibility requirements, Sergeants
shall become eligible. All candidates must possess at least a
bachelor's degree to be eligible for said promotion.
§ 27-15 (RESERVED) § 27-15
24:135
(4) Lieutenants and Captains shall be eligible for promotion to Chief of
Police. All candidates must have no suspensions without pay, fines,
or demotions on his or her record in the two years preceding the
date of announcement of the promotional opportunity. The
candidate shall have demonstrated consistent performance
meeting the minimum requirements on all previous assignments. In
the event that a suitable candidate for Chief does not exist based
upon the eligibility requirements, Sergeants shall become eligible.
All candidates must possess at least a bachelor's degree to be
eligible for said promotion.
(5) All prerequisites for eligibility for promotions, including
educational degree requirements and years of service, must be met
as of the date the notice of a promotional examination is posted.
There shall be no exceptions to this requirement. A candidate who
commits a disciplinary violation during the pendency of the
promotional examination process shall be disqualified from
promotion if the disciplinary violation results in a suspension
without pay, fine or demotion.
(6) All promotions to the level of Chief of Police, Captain, Lieutenant,
Sergeant and Corporal shall be made from the membership of the
Washington Township Police Department, provided that the
candidate meets the eligibility requirements of this article and
successfully completes the process, as contained herein.
C. Testing process.
(1) There shall be no written examination requirements for
promotions, except for Corporal and Sergeant, which shall have an
initial written test as the first phase of the process (50 questions for
Corporal and 100 questions for Sergeant). The remainder of the
selection processes shall be conducted through a series of
departmental interviews by ranking members of the Department
and the Township Committee.
(2) Posting of notice.
(a) At least 60 days prior to the date of testing, a notice shall be
posted at the Police Department that shall set forth:
[1] The position that is available through promotion;
[2] The date, time, and location where the process/interviews
shall be conducted; and
[3] The list of study-oriented materials.
(b) All officers wishing to participate in the process shall submit
their desire to do so in writing.
(3) For Corporal and Sergeant Promotions, the process shall consist of
three departmental oral examination panels, in addition to the
§ 27-15 WASHINGTON CODE § 27-15
24:136
initial written test. The first panel shall consist of a Sergeant's
panel, the second panel shall consist of an administrative panel,
and the third panel shall consist of the Chief of Police, Mayor, Police
Commissioner and, at the option of the Mayor, a fourth person
selected by the Mayor, such fourth person being an individual
experienced and knowledgeable in law enforcement from outside
of Township government (Police Promotional Committee).
(4) For the position of Lieutenant, the process shall consist of two
departmental oral examination panels. The first panel shall consist
of an administrative panel, and the second panel shall consist of the
Chief of Police, Mayor, Police Commissioner and, at the option of
the Mayor, a fourth person selected by the Mayor, such fourth
person being an individual experienced and knowledgeable in law
enforcement from outside of Township government (Police
Promotional Committee).
(5) For the positions of Captain and Chief of Police, the process shall
consist of an oral examination panel (Police Promotional
Committee) consisting of the Chief of Police, Mayor, Police
Commissioner and, at the option of the Mayor, a fourth person
selected by the Mayor, such fourth person being an individual
experienced and knowledgeable in law enforcement from outside
of Township government (Police Promotional Committee). For the
positions of Captain and Chief of Police, the Township may require
an independent review of the candidate's credentials for eligibility
by an outside party, qualified by law enforcement experience and
expertise to conduct such a review.
(6) Written Corporal and Sergeant examination.
(a) The written test shall comprise questions pertaining to the
same topics that shall be covered during the interviews and as
listed below [Subsection C(7)].
(b) All candidates taking the written test shall receive the same
questions.
(c) The maximum attainable score is 100%, and a score of 80% or
better is considered passing. Seniority is not applicable to the
written test.
(d) All candidates who pass the written test shall be eligible to
participate in the remaining interview process. Candidates
who pass the written test shall be notified by the Chief of Police
that the candidates who passed are continuing with the
promotional process and shall be notified of a date, time, and
place for the scheduled interview process. Candidates scoring
below 80% shall be eliminated from the remainder of the
promotional process, and shall be notified as such by the Chief
of Police.
§ 27-15 (RESERVED) § 27-15
24:137
(e) Candidates participating in the remaining interview process
shall be given at least 10 days' notice prior to the date of the
interviews. The candidates shall be notified of the date, time,
and place of their interviews.
(7) The questions asked in the interviews and written examination
shall be based upon leadership skills, supervisory knowledge,
departmental policies, rules and regulations, standard operating
procedures, Attorney General guidelines, problem solving, law
enforcement theory appropriate to the rank in question, and
general knowledge pertaining to the overall function of the
department. All interviews shall be recorded.
(8) The oral examinations shall consist of a series of four detailed
examination questions to which the candidate must provide oral
answers, and an interview. The four examination questions may be
based on hypothetical situations. All candidates shall receive the
same questions. The questions shall be appropriate for the level of
authority and level of policy implementation expected of officers
holding the rank for which the candidates are being interviewed.
The candidates' oral answers to the questions asked shall be
evaluated by the interviewers with emphasis placed upon the
candidates' practical application of acceptable police operating
procedures. Each member of the interview panel shall score each
oral answer and shall also score the candidate's performance
during the interview. Each question is worth 20%, and the
interview itself is worth 20%, with 100% being the maximum
attainable score. The candidate's overall score for the specific oral
examination panel shall be the average of the combined scores
from each member of the applicable oral examination panel.
(a) Question 1=20%.
(b) Question 2=20%.
(c) Question 3=20%.
(d) Question 4=20%.
(e) Interview = 20%.
(f) Total = 100%.
(9) The interview portion shall be based on the candidate's past
performance and evaluations, and shall represent 20% of the
candidate's overall score as stated in Subsection C(8). Each
candidate shall also have the opportunity to make a personal
statement during all of the interview panels.
(10) Other factors considered in scoring the interview and oral
examination questions shall be:
(a) The candidate's performance and leadership skills.
§ 27-15 WASHINGTON CODE § 27-15
24:138
(b) The candidate's initiative.
(c) The candidate's breadth of knowledge.
(d) The candidate's educational background.
(e) The candidate's training.
(f) The candidate's career development.
(g) The candidate's supervisory knowledge.
(h) The candidate's supervisory experience.
(i) The candidate's attitude, including:
[1] Use of sick time.
[2] Efforts in supporting departmental goals and objectives.
[3] Handling and care of police equipment.
[4] Communications and interaction with fellow employees
and the public.
(j) Discipline.
(k) Commendations.
(l) Appearance and demeanor.
(m) Special assignments.
*Note: Any letters of approbation received from outside the
Department between the date the promotional process is
announced and interview date shall not be considered for the
posted examination.
(11) Seniority shall be assessed as the final stage of the promotional
process for all candidates for all ranks and shall be worth 1/4 of a
percentage point (based on 100%) for every year of service with the
Washington Township Police Department. Seniority shall be
determined by the number of years of service completed as of the
date of notice of the promotional exam process.
(12) Upon completion of all oral examinations and interviews, the
rankings shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police, who shall review
the rankings, add in seniority [Subsection C(11)], and establish a
final recommendation for promotion. A list of candidates shall be
generated depending on final ranking. The overall examination
score shall be calculated as the average of all the panels plus
seniority, based on a maximum score of 100%.
(13) Candidates who successfully complete the promotional process but
do not receive a promotion at the conclusion of the process shall be
§ 27-15 (RESERVED) § 27-15
24:139
placed on a promotional list for the same rank for which the
candidates were tested.
(14) Promotional lists shall remain active for two years from the date of
final results being published. A candidate on the list may be
recommended for promotion to the appropriate rank without
further examination within the two-year time period. The
establishment of a list shall be made upon recommendation of the
Chief of Police or the Police Promotional Committee (for Captain
and Chief promotions), to the Mayor and Township Committee, and
upon the adoption of a resolution establishing the list by the
Township Committee. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Corporal
list shall expire one year from the date of the conclusion of the
Corporal selection process, or upon the commencement of a
Sergeant's promotional process, at which time the list shall be
vacated, and the new Sergeant's list shall take effect.
(15) The candidate receiving the highest overall score for the rank
being tested for shall be recommended by the Chief of Police to the
Mayor and the Township Committee for promotion.
(16) The candidate receiving the highest overall final score for the rank
of Chief of Police shall be recommended by the Police Promotional
Committee to the Mayor and Township Committee.
(17) The Police Chief or his/her designee shall be responsible for
conducting all examination phases of the promotional process.
(18)No member of the Police Department shall be promoted unless and
until the Township Committee adopts a resolution approving the
recommendation of the Chief of Police or the Police Promotional
Committee, as may be applicable to the promotion being
considered. The Township Committee reserves the right and
discretion to accept or reject the recommended candidate,
provided that the Township Committee may exercise this authority
only in a manner consistent with law. If the recommended
candidate is rejected, the candidate having the next-highest overall
score for the rank in question shall be recommended.
(19) Request for results. [Amended 2-14-2018 by Ord. No. 02-18]
(a) Upon completion of the promotional process, each candidate
may submit a request in writing for his or her results (must be
submitted within 10 days from the date of the conclusion of the
promotional process), which includes his or her:
[1] Written examination results.
[2] Final interview scores.
[3] Final overall score.
[4] Seniority.
§ 27-15 WASHINGTON CODE § 27-15
24:140
§ 27-16. Compensation for college credits. [Amended 5-19-1986 by
Ord. No. 17-86]
§ 27-17. Emergency dispatchers. [Amended 5-19-1986 by Ord. No.
17-86]
The positions of Emergency Dispatchers are hereby established. An
Emergency Dispatcher may be appointed by the Township Committee for a
term not exceeding one year. Any such appointment may be revoked at any
time without notice and without hearing.
[5] Overall ranking.
(b) Within 10 days of receipt of his/her scores, a candidate may
submit a letter to the Police Promotional Committee requesting
a retabulation of the scores to confirm accuracy. The letter
must state why the candidate believes such action is
warranted.
A. Annual compensation. All full-time members of the Police Department
below the rank of Captain shall receive annual compensation for college
credits as set forth in the contract negotiated between Washington
Township and the Washington Township Police Officers Association.
B. Payment. Levels shall be based on the number of credits completed by
February 1 of each year. Payment shall be made after the officer
presents a voucher approved by the Chief of Police and a record of
credits. No credit shall be considered if a minimum grade of C or its
equivalent has not been awarded in the subject. Probationary
patrolmen shall not be eligible for this compensation. Officers who
serve only a portion of a year shall be paid based on that portion of the
year they were employed.
§ 27-15 (RESERVED) § 27-17
24:141

ARTICLE II
Mutual Aid
[Added 9-19-1994 by Ord. No. 19-94 (Sec. 4-18 of the Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 27-18. Establishment.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1, there is hereby established a mutual
police aid agreement between the Township of Washington and each of the
following municipalities which adopts a reciprocal ordinance: Mount Olive
Township; Chester Township; Bedminster Township; Tewksbury Township;
Lebanon Township; Mansfield Township; and the Town of Hackettstown.
§ 27-19. Authorization.
The Chief of Police of the Township of Washington, or his designee, is
authorized to request assistance from the Chief of Police or other head of
the Police Department of any other municipality that adopts a reciprocal
ordinance, to provide aid during and after any emergency in order to
protect life and property or to assist in suppressing a riot or disorder.
§ 27-20. Grant of assistance; powers of members.
The Chief of Police of the Township of Washington, or his designee, shall
provide assistance to any other municipality that accepts the terms of
this agreement and makes a valid request to supply such personnel and
equipment, to the extent possible without endangering persons or property
within the Township of Washington. The members of the Washington
Township Police Department supplying such aid shall have the same
powers, authority, rights and immunities as the members of the police force
of the municipality to which assistance is rendered.
§ 27-21. Assumption of costs.
The Township of Washington shall, upon providing assistance to another
municipality which has enacted a reciprocal mutual aid ordinance, assume
the cost and expense of providing its personnel and equipment to the
requesting municipality, except in such instances where the requesting
municipality receives state or federal aid by way of reimbursement. Under
those circumstances, the costs incurred by the Township of Washington
shall be submitted to the municipality requesting assistance for
reimbursement out of the funds received by way of state or federal aid.
§ 27-22. Injury and death benefits.
Members of the Washington Township Police Department suffering injury,
or their legal representatives if death results while rendering assistance in
another municipality, shall be entitled to all such benefits they would have
realized if injury or death had occurred in the performance of normal duties
within the Township of Washington.
§ 27-18 (RESERVED) § 27-23
24:143
§ 27-23. Standard operating procedures.
The Chief of Police of the Township of Washington, or his designee, and
the Chiefs of the other participating municipalities or their designees shall
jointly prepare written standard operating procedures (SOP) which shall
address the implementation of this mutual police aid agreement. A copy
of the SOP, and all amendments and revisions thereto, shall be filed with
each participating Police Department and the respective Clerks of each
participating municipality and with the police dispatcher for each such
municipality.
§ 27-24. Term of agreement.
This mutual police aid agreement shall have an initial term of one year
and shall be automatically renewed for additional and successive one-year
terms, unless and until one of the parties hereto elects to terminate the
agreement by providing prior written notice to the other party to the
agreement.
§ 27-25. Filing of copies.
A copy of this article shall be transmitted to the Municipal Clerk of each
municipality named herein no later than five business days following final
adoption.
§ 27-23 WASHINGTON CODE § 27-25
24:144
Chapter 31
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 21.
§ 27-25 (RESERVED) § 27-25
24:145

ARTICLE I
Direct Deposit
[Adopted 9-15-2014 by Ord. No. 14-14]
§ 31-1. Direct deposit mandated.
All full time employees and elected public officials who receive
compensation from the Township of Washington are mandated to have
direct deposit of their compensation as of September 19, 2014, in
accordance with Chapter 28 P.L. 2013, as codified at N.J.S.A. 52:14-15f(b).
§ 31-2. Request for exemption.
Municipal employees may, in writing directed to the Township
Administrator, request an exemption from the direct deposit mandate. Such
requests shall be presented to the Township Committee within 30 days. The
Township Committee may grant such an exemption by resolution for good
cause.
§ 31-1 (RESERVED) § 31-2
24:147
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 39
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 13.
First Aid Squad — See Ch. 14.
Police Department — See Ch. 27.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 87.
§ 39-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations concerning the
operation and maintenance of certain alarm systems within the Township of
Washington and to provide penalties for violations of any of the provisions
set forth herein.
§ 39-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ALARM DEVICE — Any type of alarm-actuating equipment which provides
warning of intrusion, fire, smoke, burglary, medical emergency, flood or
like perils, including dial alarms (devices using normal telephone lines
transmitting notification by telephone directly to a third-party service
provider.
ALARM SYSTEM — The installation in one or more buildings of one or more
alarm devices for the express purpose of giving visual or audible warning,
or both, of an emergency, such as a burglary, intrusion, fire, smoke, medical
emergency, flood or like perils, and to which the Washington Township
Police Department, the First-Aid Squad or the Fire Department may be
expected to respond.
AUDIBLE ALARM — A device that emits an audible signal from the premises
that it is designed to protect.
FALSE ALARM — An alarm signal resulting in a response by the Washington
Township Police, First-Aid Squad or Fire Department, where an emergency
situation does not exist.
LOCAL ALARM — An audible alarm or one that emits a flashing light or
other warning not transmitted beyond the immediate area.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, corporation, association or
other legal entity.
§ 31-2 WASHINGTON CODE § 39-3
24:148
§ 39-3. Permit required.
On or after the effective date of this chapter, no owner, tenant, person or
occupant (herein collectively referred to as "person") shall install or cause
to be installed in any premises within the Township of Washington any
alarm system, device or apparatus that communicates a condition that may
be expected to result in a response by the Washington Township Police,
First-Aid Squad or Fire Department without first receiving a permit for the
installation.
§ 39-4. Applications for permits; fees; expirations and renewals.
A. Applications for permits shall be on a form prescribed by the Chief of
Police of the Township.
B. Permits shall be issued by the Chief of Police or such other person
authorized as his designee.
C. No permit shall be issued unless the applicant demonstrates that the
alarm system to be installed meets the standards set forth in this
chapter.
D. An application for a permit shall constitute an authorization that the
Township may, on reasonable notice to the person, inspect the alarm
system for the purpose of determining whether the system continues to
comply with the standards set forth in this chapter.
E. An initial registration fee of $50 shall be payable to the Township upon
issuance of a two-year permit. [Amended 4-16-2012 by Ord. No.
06-12; 4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 06-14]
F. Permits shall be issued annually and shall expire on December 31 of the
year issued. Renewals must be submitted on or before December 31
accompanied by a check in the amount of $25 made payable to the
Township of Washington. All permits expiring during calendar year
2014 are extended to December 31, 2014, and must be renewed prior to
December 31, 2014. All permits expiring during calendar year 2015 are
extended to December 31, 2015, and must be renewed prior to
December 31, 2015. After December 31, the application will be treated
as a new application. All renewals shall be for a one-year period.
[Amended 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 06-12; 4-21-2014 by Ord. No.
06-14]
G. A service fee of $100 shall be payable for each alarm activation by a
nonpermitted system that results in a response by the Washington
Township Police, First-Aid Squad or Fire Department. Failure to pay the
service fee within 30 days shall result in the issuance of a summons for
failure to obtain a permit as required by § 39-3.
§ 39-3 (RESERVED) § 39-5
24:149
§ 39-5. Standards for alarm systems. [Amended 9-21-2009 by Ord.
No. 24-09]
All alarm systems referred to in this chapter shall, at the time of their
installation and at all times thereafter, meet the following standards:
§ 39-6. Existing alarm systems.
Alarm systems installed or in use at the effective date of this chapter shall
conform to the requirements of this chapter within 180 days after the
effective date hereof. All persons shall apply for permits for such systems
within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter. In the event of a failure
of any system to comply with the provisions of this subsection or of § 39-5
of this chapter, the Township may prosecute under § 39-9.
§ 39-7. Information to be filed with police.
A. All alarm systems must meet reasonable safety standards, such as those
acceptable to Underwriters Laboratories or equivalent.
B. Every alarm system capable of signaling multiple types of warnings
shall be equipped with separate distinguishing signals, as reasonably
required by the Chief of Police, to the end that the appropriate
authorities, upon receipt of a signal, may immediately ascertain the
nature and cause of the signal.
C. All alarm systems capable of emitting audible signals shall be equipped
with an operating device which will automatically, by mechanical,
electrical or other means, shut off such audible signal after 15 minutes
of continuous sound audible beyond the boundaries of the premises in
which the alarm system is located.
D. In any case where the alarm system emits sound in violation of the
foregoing subsection, the operation or maintenance of the alarm system
shall be deemed to constitute the grant of permission by the owners and
occupants of the premises for law enforcement, first aid or fire officials
to enter the said premises and investigate and to reset the alarm
system.
A. It shall be the responsibility of all persons maintaining an alarm system
within the Township to leave with the Police Department the name of a
person or persons who can be reached in case of an emergency or
malfunction of the alarm device in order that the device can be
temporarily disconnected. Additionally, owners may leave a tagged key
to the premises with the Chief of Police of the Township, provided that,
in so doing, the owner thereby releases the Township of Washington
and the Police Department from any claims of damage or loss in
connection with said action.
B. Persons having an alarm device which is being tested or repaired shall
notify the Police Department before tests or repairs commence and
§ 39-5 WASHINGTON CODE § 39-7
24:150
§ 39-8. False alarms; service fees.
after completion of same so as to avoid the possibility of activating a
false alarm.
C. The permittee is responsible for whatever charges are required by any
alarm company making such installations.
A. It shall be the responsibility of all persons maintaining an alarm system
within the Township to prevent the transmission of false alarms through
a program of training and periodic inspection and maintenance of the
system.
B. Notification and investigations. In the case of a false alarm, any person
having knowledge thereof shall immediately notify the Police
Department. In the case of false alarms, the Chief of Police shall cause
an investigation to be made and shall keep a record of the alarms on
file.
C. Service fees for false alarms. In any twelve-month period from July 1
through June 30, the following service fees shall apply in order to help
offset the cost of responding to a false alarm:
(1) Upon the occurrence of the first and second false alarms, a written
warning shall be issued to the owner or proprietor by the Chief of
Police or his designee.
(2) Upon the occurrence of all subsequent false alarms, a service fee
shall be payable by the owner or proprietor in accordance with the
following schedule:
Number of False Alarms Service Fee
Third false alarm $100
Fourth false alarm $150
Fifth false alarm $200
Sixth false alarm $250
Seventh false alarm $300
Eighth false alarm $350
Ninth false alarm $400
Tenth false alarm $450
(3) In the event of a 10th or subsequent false alarm, in addition to the
service fee established herein, the occurrence of a 10th false alarm
in any twelve-month period between July 1 and June 30 shall be
deemed a violation of this section, and the Police Chief, or his
designee, or the Fire Chief, as appropriate, shall cause a summons
to issue in Municipal Court, for prosecution under § 39-9 of this
chapter.
§ 39-7 (RESERVED) § 39-8
24:151
§ 39-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firms, corporations or other organizations found
to be in violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the
penalties provided in § 1-3 of this Code. Each violation of the requirements
of this chapter and each and every day the same is violated shall be deemed
to be a separate and distinct offense.
Chapter 42
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages in parks — See Ch. 137. Peace and good order — See Ch. 140.
(4) Service fees shall be payable to the Township of Washington within
30 days of service of written notice of the third or subsequent false
alarms. The calculation of the number of false alarms shall be
without regard to whether the false alarms involved intrusion
alarms or fire alarms. Failure to pay such service fee within 30 days
shall be deemed a violation of this section, and the Police Chief, or
his designee, or the Fire Chief, as appropriate, shall cause a
summons to issue in Municipal Court for prosecution under § 39-9
of this chapter. [Amended 4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 06-14]
§ 39-8 WASHINGTON CODE § 39-9
24:152
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 12-20-1971 as Ch. VII of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 42-1. Purpose.
This article is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the township in accordance with the provisions of an Act
of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled An Act Concerning
Alcoholic Beverages, comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of 1933, its
supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.,
and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 42-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, relevant words and phrases shall have the same
meanings they have in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq. and the rules and regulations
of the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 42-3. Licenses.
A. Laws applicable. All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all
proceedings under this article shall be in accordance with the Act, rules
and regulations referred to in § 42-1, and all other applicable laws of
the State of New Jersey or of the United States.
B. Issuing authority. All licenses required by this article shall be issued by
the governing body, which shall also administer the provisions of this
article.
C. License required. No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages
within the township without having obtained a license in accordance
with the Act referred to in § 42-1 and the provisions of this article.
D. License fees. The annual license fees for the sale or distribution of
alcoholic beverages under licenses permitted in the township shall be
as follows: [Amended 1-17-1972; 8-19-1974; 8-18-1975;
8-16-1976; 9-17-1979 by Ord. No. 62-79; 10-20-1980 by Ord. No.
45-80; 12-21-1981 by Ord. No. 46-81; 11-15-1982 by Ord. No.
22-82; 12-19-1983 by Ord. No. 30-83; 5-20-1985 by Ord. No.
15-85; 9-20-2004 by Ord. No. 21-04; 2-20-2006 by Ord. No.
01-06; 6-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-13]
Class of License Annual License Fee
Plenary retail consumption $2,500
Plenary retail distribution $2,500
Club $188
§ 42-1 (RESERVED) § 42-3
24:153
§ 42-4. Hours; minors.
§ 42-5. Suspension or revocation of licenses.
E. Renewal of licenses. Renewal of licenses shall be subject to approval by
the Township Board of Health, Police Department and Construction
Official. [Added 9-17-1979 by No. 62-79]
A. Hours of sale. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, consumed
in or delivered to a licensed premises on any day between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., except that on Sunday no alcoholic beverages
shall be sold, served, consumed in or delivered to a licensed premises
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. This subsection shall not
apply to January 1 when no person shall sell, serve, deliver or permit
the consumption of alcoholic beverages on licensed premises between
the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 10:00 a.m. on
Sundays. [Amended 2-20-2006 by Ord. No. 01-06]
B. Minors prohibited in premises. Persons under the age of 21 years of age
shall not be allowed to frequent, loiter or remain in any room used or
devoted to the sale, service or consumption of alcoholic beverages upon
a licensed premises, unless accompanied by their parent, guardian or
adult husband or wife, provided that this provision shall not be applied
to restaurants or guest rooms and private or public dining rooms, nor to
minors holding special work permits issued by the Division of Alcoholic
Beverage Control. [Amended 9-17-1979 by Ord. No. 62-79;
5-20-1985 by Ord. No. 15-85]
A. Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this article or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
B. Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by service of a five-day notice of
charges preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable
opportunity for hearing.
C. Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for violation of this article.
§ 42-3 WASHINGTON CODE § 42-5
24:154
ARTICLE II
Possession or Consumption by Minors on Private Property
[Adopted 11-20-2000 by Ord. No. 24-00]
§ 42-6. Underage consumption.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age who, without legal
authority, knowingly possesses or knowingly consumes an alcoholic
beverage on private property except as provided for in § 42-9 below.
§ 42-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall, in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 as amended, be punished
by a fine not to exceed $250 for the first offense and not to exceed $350 for
any subsequent offense.
§ 42-8. Additional penalties.
A. In addition to the fine authorized for this offense, the Court may
suspend or postpone for six months the driving privilege of the
defandant. Upon the conviction of any person and the suspension or
postponement of that person's driver's license, the Court shall forward
a report to the Division of Motor Vehicles stating the first and last day of
suspension or postponement period imposed by the Court pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 as amended. If a person at the time of the imposition of
a sentence is less than 17 years of age, the period of license
postponement, including a suspension or postponement of the privilege
of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day the
sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six months after the
person reaches the age of 17 years.
B. If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a valid
driver's license issued by this state, the Court shall immediately collect
the license and forward it to the Division of Motor Vehicles, along with
the report. If for any reason the license cannot be collected, the Court
shall include in the report the complete name, address, date of birth,
eye color and sex of the person, as well the first and last date of the
license suspension period imposed by the Court.
C. The Court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the
person is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of
license suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive
a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt of a
written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
D. If a person convicted under this article is not a New Jersey resident, the
Court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresident
§ 42-6 (RESERVED) § 42-8
24:155
§ 42-9. Exceptions.
driving privilege of the person based on the age of the person and
submit it to the Division of Motor Vehicles on the required report. The
Court shall not collect the license of a nonresident convicted under
this article. Upon receipt of a report from the Court, the Division of
Motor Vehicles shall notify the appropriate officials in the licensing
jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement.
A. Nothing contained in this article is intended nor shall it be construed as
prohibiting an underaged person from consuming or possessing an
alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious observance, ceremony
or rite or consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in the
presence of and with the permission of a parent, guardian or relative
who has attained the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic
beverages.
B. As used in the preceding Subsection A, the following terms shall have
the meaning set forth:
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of the
underaged person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — The underaged person's grandparent, aunt or uncle,
sibling or any other persons related by blood or affinity.
C. Nothing contained in this article is intended nor shall it be construed as
prohibiting possession of alcoholic beverages by any such person while
actually engaged in the performance of employment by a person who is
licensed under Title 33 of the Revised Statues or while actively engaged
in the preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel
management program at a county vocational school or post secondary
educational institution; provided, however, that this article shall not be
construed to preclude the imposition of a penalty under this article,
N.J.S.A. 33:1-81 or any other section of law against a person who is
convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on or at premises
licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 42-8 WASHINGTON CODE § 42-9
24:156
Chapter 46
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 125. Animals — See Ch. 231.
§ 42-9 (RESERVED) § 42-9
24:157

ARTICLE I
Animal Control Officer and Municipal Humane Law Enforcement
Officer
[Adopted 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 12-1818]
§ 46-1. Animal Control Officer.
The position of Animal Control Officer (ACO) is hereby established. The
ACO shall be appointed by the Township Committee and shall be under
the control and direction of the Chief of Police or his/her designee. The
ACO shall be responsible for animal control within the jurisdiction of the
Township and shall enforce and abide by the applicable provisions of Title
4, Chapter 19, of the New Jersey Revised Statutes, and any amendments
thereof, and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 46-2. Municipal Humane Law Enforcement Officer.
The position of Municipal Humane Law Enforcement Officer (HLEO) is
hereby established. The HLEO shall be appointed by the Township
Committee, upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police, and shall be
under the jurisdiction of the Township Police Department. The HLEO shall
be responsible for animal welfare within the jurisdiction of the Township,
and shall enforce and abide by the provisions of Title 4, Chapter 22 of
the New Jersey Revised Statutes, and any amendments thereof, and the
provisions of this chapter. The HLEO shall be authorized to investigate
and sign complaints, arrest violators, and otherwise act as an officer for
detection, apprehension, and arrest of offenders against the animal welfare
and animal cruelty laws of the state and ordinances of the Township.
18.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Articles I through IV as Articles II
through V, respectively.
§ 46-1 (RESERVED) § 46-2
24:159

ARTICLE II
Dog Licensing
[Adopted 12-20-1971 as Ch. IX of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 46-3. Definitions. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 13-92;
4-15-1996 by Ord. No. 12-96]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
KEEPER — Any person exercising control over a dog or permitting a dog to
remain on premises under his control.
KENNEL — Any establishment where the business of boarding, selling or
breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet shop.
OTHER ANIMALS — All creatures other than a dog or dog hybrid.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, includes every
person having a right of property in the dog and every person who has a
dog in his keeping.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.[Added 3-21-2005 by Ord. No.
14-05]
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, where dogs are kept or displayed for sale.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid declared
potentially dangerous by a Municipal Court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-23.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs seized either under
the provisions of this article or otherwise.
RUN AT LARGE — The running or standing of any dog, on any street
or other public or private place, except on the property of the owner or
custodian of the dog, unattended and not under the immediate control of
some responsible person able to control such dog.
SHELTER — Any establishment where dogs are received, housed and
distributed without charge.
SUFFER — The failure of the owner or harborer of any dog or dogs to
prevent the occurrence of any act on the coming into existence of any
condition prescribed or otherwise regulated by this article, regardless of
the prior knowledge thereof by such owner or harborer.
VICIOUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid which has been declared by a
Municipal Court to be a vicious dog pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-22.
§ 46-4. Licensing provisions.
§ 46-3 (RESERVED) § 46-4
24:161
A. License; when required. Licenses shall be required for the following
dogs of licensing age:
(1) Any dog owned or kept within the Township by a resident of the
Township on the first day of January of any calendar year.
(2) Any dog acquired by any person during the course of any calendar
year and kept within the Township for more than 10 days after
acquisition.
(3) Any dog attaining licensing age during the course of the calendar
year.
(4) Any unlicensed dog brought into the Township by any person and
kept within the Township for more than 10 days.
(5) Any dog licensed by another state, brought into the Township by
any person and kept within the Township for more than 90 days.
(6) Any unlicensed dog belonging to a rescue organization and brought
into the Township by any person and fostered within the Township
for more than 30 days. [Added 12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 12-16]
B. Application for license. Registration numbers shall be issued in the
order in which applications are received. Each application for a license
under this article shall give the following information:
(1) A general description of the dog sought to be licensed, including
breed, sex, age, color and markings and whether the dog is of a
long- or short-haired variety.
(2) The name, street and post office address of the owner of, and the
person who shall keep or harbor, the dog.
(3) Submission of evidence of rabies inoculation. [Added 9-17-1979
by Ord. No. 63-79]
C. Application for license; when made. Applications for licenses for dogs
which are required to be licensed by the provisions of Subsection A
shall be made before the first day of February of each calendar year. In
all other cases, the application for a license shall be made within 10
days of the day upon which the dog in question first becomes subject to
the provisions of this article.
D. License record. The information on all applications under this article
and the registration number issued to each licensed dog shall be
preserved for a period of three years by the Township Clerk. In addition,
he shall forward similar information to the State Department of Health
each month on forms furnished by the Department.
E. Fees. The person applying for a license shall pay a fee of $13 for each
unneutered dog and $10 for each neutered dog. There shall be a late
charge of $4 per month for any application made after January 31 and
§ 46-4 WASHINGTON CODE § 46-4
24:162
§ 46-5. Pet shops, kennels, shelters and pounds.
before March 1 of each year and an additional charge of $3 per month
for any month or part of a month for any application made on or after
March 1. The same fee shall be charged for the annual renewal of
each license. [Amended 5-15-1978; 10-19-1981 by Ord. No. 35-81;
12-19-1994 by Ord. No. 29-94; 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 17-0819;
10-20-2014 by Ord. No. 16-14; 11-16-2015 by Ord. No. 12-15;
12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 12-16]
F. Expiration date. Each dog license and registration tag shall expire on
the last day of January of the calendar year following the calendar year
in which it was issued.
G. Exceptions. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any dog
licensed under § 46-5 of this article. Dogs used as guides for blind
persons and commonly known as "Seeing Eye" dogs and dogs used to
assist a deaf person and commonly known as "Hearing Ear" dogs shall
be licensed in the same manner as other dogs, except that the owner or
keeper shall not be required to pay any fee. [Amended 12-19-2016 by
Ord. No. 12-16]
A. License required. Any person who keeps or operates, or proposes to
establish a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound, shall apply to the
Township Clerk for a license entitling him to keep or operate the
establishment. Any person holding the license shall not be required to
secure individual licenses for dogs owned by the licensee and kept at
the establishment; licenses shall not be transferable to another owner
or different premises.
B. Application information. The application shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name and permanent and local address of the applicant.
(2) The street address where the establishment is located, or proposed
to be located, together with a general description of the premises.
(3) The purposes for which it is to be maintained.
(4) The maximum number of dogs to be accommodated by the
establishment at any one time.
C. Approval of Health Officer. No license shall be issued until the proposed
licensee submits a written statement from the Health Officer of the
Board of Health that the establishment or proposed establishment
complies with local and state rules governing the location of and
sanitation at the establishment.
19.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it would take effect 1-1-2009.
§ 46-4 (RESERVED) § 46-5
24:163
§ 46-6. Disposition of fees.
D. License term. Any license issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or
pound shall state the purpose for which the establishment is
maintained, and all such licenses shall expire on June 30 each year.
[Amended 9-21-2009 by Ord. No. 25-09]
E. License fees. The annual license fees for kennel and pet shop licenses
shall be as follows:
(1) Kennel accommodating 10 or fewer dogs: $10.
(2) Kennel accommodating more than 10 dogs: $25.
(3) Pet shop: $10.
(4) Shelter or pound: no fee.
F. Compliance with state regulations.
(1) All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be
subject to revocation by the Township Committee on
recommendation of the State Department of Health or the Board of
Health for failure to comply with the rules and regulations of the
State Department of Health or the Board of Health, after the owner
has been afforded a hearing by either the State Department of
Health or the Board of Health.
(2) Any person holding a license to establish, keep or operate a kennel,
pet shop, shelter or pound shall comply with all Township
ordinances and the rules and regulations promulgated by the State
Department of Health governing the sanitary conduct and
operation of kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds, the
preservation of sanitation and the prevention of the spread of
rabies and other diseases of dogs within and from these
establishments.
G. Reports to State Health Department. The Clerk shall forward to the
State Department of Health a list of all kennels, pet shops, shelters and
pounds licensed within 30 days after the licenses are issued, which list
shall include the name and address of the licensee and the kind of
license issued.
H. Control of dogs off premises. No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter
or pound shall be permitted off the premises, except on leash or in a
crate or other safe control.
A. License fees and other moneys collected or received under the
provisions of this article, except registration tag fees, shall be
forwarded to the Township Treasurer within 30 days after collection or
receipt and shall be placed in a special account separate from any of the
other accounts of the Township and shall be used for the following
purposes only: collecting, keeping and disposing of dogs liable to
§ 46-5 WASHINGTON CODE § 46-6
24:164
§ 46-7. Dog canvass. [Amended 9-17-1979 by Ord. No. 63-79]
The Township shall cause an annual dog canvass to be conducted of all dogs
owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the Township. The person or
persons so designated to conduct this canvass shall report to the Clerk, the
Board of Health and to the State Department of Health the results thereof,
setting forth in separate columns the following information:
§ 46-8. Animal Control Officer. [Added 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 13-92]
seizure under this article; local prevention and control of rabies;
providing anti-rabies treatment under the direction of the local Board
of Health for any person known or suspected to have been exposed
to rabies; all other purposes prescribed by the statutes of New Jersey
governing the subject, and for administering the provisions of this
article. Any unexpended balance remaining in the special account shall
be retained therein until the end of the third fiscal year following and
may be used for any of the purposes set forth in this article. At the
end of the third fiscal year following and at the end of each fiscal year
thereafter, there shall be transferred from the special account to the
general funds of the Township any amount then in the account which is
in excess of the total amount paid into the special account during the
last two fiscal years next preceding.
B. The registration tag fee for each dog shall be forwarded within 30 days
after collection by the Clerk to the State Department of Health.
[Amended 10-19-1981 by Ord. No. 35-81]
A. The names and addresses of persons owning, keeping or harboring
dogs.
B. The number of licensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each person,
together with the registration number of each dog.
C. The number of unlicensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each
person, together with a complete description of each unlicensed dog.
A. Establishment. The position of Certified Animal Control Officer is
hereby established under the jurisdiction of the Police Department. The
Certified Animal Control Officer shall be an employee of the Township
and subject to the control and direction of the Chief of Police or his
designee.
B. Appointment. The Township Committee shall appoint and employ a
Certified Animal Control Officer who shall be responsible for animal
control within the Township of Washington and who shall enforce and
abide by the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 4:19-17
through 4:19-30.
C. Duties. The Certified Animal Control Officer shall be responsible to
enforce the measures and provisions for the control of dogs contained
§ 46-6 (RESERVED) § 46-8
24:165
§ 46-9. Vicious dogs. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 13-92]
§ 46-10. Impounding and destruction of certain dogs. [Amended
9-17-1979 by Ord. No. 63-79; 7-16-1984 by Ord. No. 20-84;
7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 13-92]
in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 through 4:19-30 and
the provisions of this article.
D. Qualifications. The Certified Animal Control Officer shall be a person 18
years of age or older who has satisfactorily completed a course of study
approved by the Commissioner of Health on the control of animals,
prescribed by P.L. 1983, c. 525,20 or who has been employed in the State
of New Jersey in the capacity of and with similar responsibilities to
those required of certified animal control officers pursuant to the
provisions of P.L. 1983, c. 525, for a period of three years.
A. Applicable state law. State law governing vicious and potentially
dangerous dogs and all requirements pertaining to the declaration of
vicious and potentially dangerous dogs are set forth in N.J.S.A. 4:19-17
et seq.
B. Costs of impoundment to be responsibility of owner. If a dog is declared
to be vicious or potentially dangerous pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et
seq., the owner shall be liable to the Township for all costs and
expenses associated with its impoundment and/or destruction. The fees
for impoundment and destruction shall be as set forth in § 46-12, Fees
for impoundment and destruction of dogs.
C. Potentially dangerous dog license; fees. It shall be the duty of the owner
of a dog which is declared to be potentially dangerous to secure a
special potentially dangerous dog license, registration number and red
identification tag and to comply with any other conditions imposed by
the Municipal Court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-24. The license fee for a
potentially dangerous dog pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-17, et seq. shall be
$700. [Amended 4-15-1996 by Ord. No. 12-96]
A. Causes for impounding. The Animal Control Officer shall take into
custody and seize, or cause to be taken into custody and impounded,
any of the following dogs: [Amended 12-19-1994 by Ord. No. 29-94]
(1) Any unlicensed dog running at large in violation of the provisions of
this article.
(2) Any dog off the premises of the owner of or the person keeping or
harboring the dog which the Animal Control Officer or his agent
has reason to believe is a stray dog.
(3) Any dog off the premises of the owner of or the person keeping or
harboring such dog without a current registration tag on its collar.
20.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16a.
§ 46-8 WASHINGTON CODE § 46-10
24:166
§ 46-11. Disposition of unclaimed dogs.
The Animal Control Officer is authorized and empowered to cause the
destruction of any unclaimed dog, in as humane a manner as possible, under
any of the following contingencies:
(4) Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner of or the
person keeping or harboring such dog.
(5) Any dog which he has reasonable cause to believe may be vicious or
potentially dangerous as provided in N.J.S.A. 4:19-19, provided that
these dogs may also be seized by any police officer, and provided
further that if the dogs cannot be seized with safety, they may be
killed.
B. Access to premises. Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to
perform any duty under this article is hereby authorized to go onto any
premises to seize for impounding any dog which he may lawfully seize
and impound when the officer is in immediate pursuit of the dog, except
on the premises of the owner of the dog if the owner is present and
forbids the same.
C. Notice of seizure.
(1) If any dog so impounded or seized wears a registration tag, collar
or harness showing the name and address of any person, or if the
owner of or the person keeping or harboring the dog is known, the
Animal Control Officer shall immediately serve on the person
whose address is given on the collar, or on the person owning,
keeping or harboring the dog, a notice, in writing, stating that the
dog has been seized and will be liable to be disposed of or
destroyed if not claimed within seven days after service of the
notice.
(2) A notice under this subsection may be served either by delivering it
to the person on whom it is to be served or by leaving it at the
person's usual or last known place of abode or at the address given
on the collar or by forwarding it by mail in a prepaid letter
addressed to that person at his usual or last known place of abode
or to the address given on the collar.
A. When any dog so seized has not been claimed by the person owning,
keeping or harboring the dog within seven days after notice or within
seven days of the dog's detention when notice has not been or cannot be
given, as set forth in the previous subsection.
B. If the person owning, keeping or harboring any dog so seized has not
claimed the dog and has not paid all expenses incurred by reason of its
detention, including but not limited to a pickup fee of $10, veterinary
expenses and maintenance expenses.
§ 46-10 (RESERVED) § 46-11
24:167
§ 46-12. Fees for impoundment and destruction of dogs. [Amended
12-19-1994 by Ord. No. 29-94]
The person owning, keeping or harboring any dog seized pursuant to
§ 46-10, Impounding and Destruction of Certain Dogs, shall be required to
pay all expenses incurred by reason of its detention, including veterinary
and maintenance expenses and any expenses which may be incurred by the
Township if necessary to destroy said animal, as well as an administration
fee of $20.
§ 46-13. Regulations.
No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog in the Township except in
compliance with the provisions of this article and the following regulations.
C. If the seized dog is unlicensed at the time of its seizure and the person
owning, keeping or harboring the dog has not produced a license and
registration tag as provided in this article.
A. Wearing of registration. All dogs which are required by the provisions of
this article to be licensed shall wear a collar or harness with the
registration tag for the dog securely fastened thereto.
B. Use of registration tags. No person except an officer in the performance
of his duties shall remove a registration tag from the collar of any dog
without the consent of the owner, nor shall any person attach a
registration tag to a dog for which it was not issued.
C. Interference with official duties. No person shall hinder, molest or
interfere with anyone authorized or empowered to perform any duty
under this article.
D. Disturbing the peace. No person owning, keeping or harboring an
animal shall permit, suffer or allow said animal to: [Amended
7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 13-9221]
(1) Habitually bark, howl or cry. The habitual barking, howling or
crying of a dog or dogs in the Township is hereby declared to be a
disturbing noise within the meaning of N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, Subsection
8, and a nuisance.
(2) Run at large within the limits of the Township, except that the
provision shall not apply to hunting dogs during hunting season or
while they are being trained, provided that at all times such dogs
are under the control of the owner or trainer.
(3) In the case of a dog or dogs, be off the premises of such owner or
person so harboring said dog or be upon a public street or other
public place in the Township, unless the dog shall be accompanied
21.Editor's Note: This ordinance also deleted former Subsection 9-8.5, Additional
Regulations.
§ 46-11 WASHINGTON CODE § 46-13
24:168
§ 46-14. Animal bites. [Amended 7-16-1984 by Ord. No. 20-84]
by a person who is capable of controlling such dog and has the dog
securely confined.
(4) Cause damage to any lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds, trees or
any property of persons other than the owner or person having the
care, custody or control of such dogs. [Amended 2-19-2007 by
Ord. No. 3-07]
(5) Soil or defile or to commit any nuisance upon any sidewalk, street
or thoroughfare, in or upon any public property or in or upon the
property of persons other than the owner or person having the
care, custody or control of such dog.
A. Dog bites; known owner or harborer. Where it has been determined that
a person has been bitten by a dog, the individual, or his parent or
guardian if he is a minor, shall immediately notify the police. When the
owner or keeper of any dog is notified by the police that the dog has
bitten an individual, the owner or keeper of the dog shall comply with
the following procedures:
(1) Have the dog examined by a licensed veterinarian within 12 hours,
unless the dog has a current rabies vaccination. [Amended
11-17-1986 by Ord. No. 40-86]
(2) Have the dog kept in quarantine in the owner's home or at a kennel
at the direction of the authorized agent of the of Health for a period
of 10 days, unless the dog does not have a current rabies
vaccination. The unvaccinated dog must be quarantined under the
supervision of a licensed veterinarian for a period of 10 days, the
cost of which is to be borne by the owner or harborer. [Amended
12-17-1990 by Ord. No. 36-90]
(3) At the end of 10 days have the dog reexamined by a veterinarian
and a written report of the dog's state of health sent to the Board of
Health.
(4) Where the dog dies for any reason within the quarantine period,
the owner or keeper shall be responsible for obtaining the head of
the animal and transporting the head to the State Department of
Health. In lieu thereof, the owner may request that the Township
transport the head of the animal and shall pay the Township a fee of
$125 or the actual cost, whichever is less, which will cover all
transportation expenses incurred by the Township in providing this
service. [Amended 6-15-1987 by Ord. No. 15-87; 4-16-1990 by
Ord. No. 15-90; 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 24-94]
B. Animal bites; unknown owner or harborer. Where the owner or keeper
of an animal, wild or domestic, which has bitten a person is unknown,
the individual bitten, or his parent or guardian if he is a minor, or the
owner or harborer of a domestic animal who has been bitten shall be
§ 46-13 (RESERVED) § 46-14
24:169
§ 46-15. Enforcement. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 13-92;
5-16-2005 by Ord. No. 17-05; 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 12-18]
In addition to the Animal Control Officer and Municipal Humane Law
Enforcement Officer, all police officers of the Township, regular and special,
and their authorized agents are hereby given full power and authority
and are charged with the duty to enforce all provisions of this article,
as permitted by law. In addition, the Department of Public Works
Superintendent or his/her duly authorized designee, the Health Officer or
his/her duly authorized designee, the Zoning Officer and/or his/her duly
authorized designee and the Township Engineer and/or his/her duly
authorized designee, are hereby given full power and authority and are
charged with the duty to enforce the provisions of § 46-16.
§ 46-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-17-1979 by Ord. No.
63-79; 10-15-1984 by Ord. No. 25-84; 4-16-2007 by Ord. No. 9-07]
§ 46-17. Removal of feces. [Added 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 13-92;
amended 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 14-05]
responsible for the transportation of the head of the biting animal to
the State Department of Health for rabies testing. In lieu thereof, such
individual may request that the Township transport the head of the
animal and shall pay the Township a fee of $125 or the actual cost,
whichever is less, which will cover all transportation expenses incurred
by the Township in providing this service. [Amended 6-15-1987 by
Ord. No. 15-87; 4-16-1990 by Ord. No. 15-90; 12-17-1990 by Ord.
No. 36-90; 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 24-94]
A. Except as otherwise provided by N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 et seq., and N.J.S.A.
4:19-16 et seq., any person who violates §§ 46-4, 46-5, or 46-13A, B or C
of this article shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $5 nor more
than $50 for each offense, to be recovered by and in the name of the
local Board of Health or the Township, as the case may be, except that
for the first offense in the case of a violation of § 46-4 or § 46-13A, the
penalty shall be not less than $1 nor more than $50 to be recoverable in
the same manner.
B. For any other violation of the provisions of this article, the penalty shall
be as provided in § 1-3 of this Code.
A. Any person owning or in charge of any pet which soils, defiles,
defecates on or commits any nuisance of any common thoroughfare,
sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area, park or any place where
people congregate or walk, or upon any public property whatsoever, or
upon any private property without permission of the owner of said
property, shall immediately remove all feces deposited by any such pet
in a sanitary manner.
B. The feces removed from the aforementioned designated areas shall be
disposed of by the person owning or in charge of the pet by placement
§ 46-14 WASHINGTON CODE § 46-17
24:170
in a designated waste receptacle, or other sealed, nonabsorbent,
leakproof container, and discarded in a refuse container which is
regularly emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector;
or by disposal into a system designed to convey domestic sewage for
proper treatment and disposal.
C. The provisions of this article shall not apply to pet owners and keepers
who require the use of a disability assistance animal while such animal
is being used for that purpose.
§ 46-17 (RESERVED) § 46-17
24:171

ARTICLE III
Cats
[Adopted 11-16-1992 by Ord. No. 22-92 (Ch. XXVI of the Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 46-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — Any dog or cat.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species, male, female or altered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.22
FARM CAT — Any cat which is retained and used for the control of rodents
on land in agricultural use or any real property whereupon large farm
animals, such as horses, cattle or sheep, are kept.
KENNEL — Any establishment where the business of boarding, selling or
breeding cats for sale is carried on, except a pet shop.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The agency or department of Washington
Township or any designated representative thereof charged with
administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under
the provisions of this article.
NEUTERED — Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction as certified
by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat shall include every
person having a right of property (or custody) in such cat and every person
who has such cat in his/her keeping or who harbors or maintains a cat or
knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by
that person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization or
institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein cats for sale are kept or displayed.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of cats seized either under
the provisions of this article or otherwise.
SHELTER — Any establishment where cats are received, housed and
distributed without charge.
§ 46-19. Rabies vaccination.
22.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “certified animal control officer,” which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 12-18.
§ 46-18 (RESERVED) § 46-19
24:173
§ 46-20. Licensing requirements.
A. Vaccination and license requirements. No person shall own, keep,
harbor or maintain any cat over seven months of age within Washington
Township unless such cat is vaccinated and licensed. The provisions of
this article do not apply to cats held in licensed animal shelters, pounds,
kennels or pet shops or those held by a state or federal licensed
research facility or a veterinary establishment where cats are received
or kept for diagnostic, medical, surgical or other treatments.
B. Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the latest Compendium of Animal
Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization, published by
the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as
provided for in Subsection D.
C. Vaccination certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the
owner of each animal vaccinated on a form recommended by the state.
D. Exemptions. Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of such
vaccination for a specified period of time by the Township Clerk upon
presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that, because of an
infirmity or other physical condition or regimen of therapy, the
inoculation of such cat shall be deemed inadvisable.
A. Application for license; when made. Applications for licenses for cats
shall be made before the first day of February of each calendar year. In
all other cases, the application for a license shall be made within 10
days for any newly acquired cat of licensing age or for any cat which
attains licensing age. This requirement shall not apply to a nonresident
keeping a cat which is licensed in another state for the current year
within Washington Township for no longer than 90 days.
B. Cats must have license number displayed. Any person who shall own,
keep or harbor a cat of licensing age shall annually apply for and
procure from the Township Clerk a license and official registration tag
with license number or a registration sleeve for each cat owned, kept or
harbored and shall place upon such cat a collar or other device with the
license number securely fastened thereto or displayed thereon.
Acceptable methods of displaying the license number shall include, but
not be limited to, breakaway or elastic collars. License tags or sleeves
are not transferable.
C. Cats brought into jurisdiction.
(1) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into Washington
Township any cat licensed in another state for the current year, and
bearing a registration tag or sleeve, and shall keep the same or
permit the same to be kept within Washington Township for a
period of more than 90 days shall immediately apply for a license
and registration tag or sleeve for each such cat.
§ 46-19 WASHINGTON CODE § 46-20
24:174
(2) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into Washington
Township any unlicensed cat and shall keep the same or permit the
same to be kept within Washington Township for a period of more
than 10 days shall immediately apply for a license and registration
tag or sleeve for each such cat.
(3) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the
Township any unlicensed cat belonging to a rescue organization
which cat is fostered within the Township for more than 30 days
shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag or sleeve
for each such cat. [Added 12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 12-16]
D. Application; contents; preservation of information. The application shall
state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the cat for which
license and registration are sought and whether it is of a long- or shorthaired
variety, also the name, street and post office address of the
owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such cat. The
information on said application and the registration number issued for
the cat shall be preserved for a period of three years by the Township
Clerk.
E. License forms and tags. License forms and official tags or sleeves shall
be furnished by the Township, shall be numbered serially and shall bear
the year of issuance and the name of Washington Township.
F. Evidence of inoculation with rabies vaccine or certification of
exemption; requirement for license. The Township Clerk shall not grant
any such license and official registration tag or sleeve for any cat unless
the owner thereof provides evidence that the cat to be licensed and
registered has been inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a type approved
by and administered in accordance with the recommendations of the
United States Department of Agriculture and the United States
Department of Human Services and that the rabies inoculation will not
expire during the current licensing year or has been certified exempt as
provided by § 46-19D of this article. The rabies inoculation shall be
administered by a duly licensed veterinarian permitted by law to do the
same.
G. License fee schedule. The annual fee for a license shall be $11.50 for
each unneutered cat and $8.50 for each neutered cat. There shall be a
late charge of $4 per month for any application made after January 31
and before March 1 of each year and an additional charge of $3 per
month for any month or part of a month for any application made on or
after March 1. Proof of rabies inoculation showing that the inoculation
will not expire prior to November 1 of the current licensing year, as well
as proof of neutering, must be presented when applying for a license.
[Amended 12-19-1994 by Ord. No. 29-94; 9-15-2008 by Ord. No.
17-0823; 10-20-2014 by Ord. No. 16-14; 11-16-2015 by Ord. No.
12-15; 12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 12-16]
23.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it would take effect 1-1-2009.
§ 46-20 (RESERVED) § 46-20
24:175
§ 46-21. Animal bites.
H. Fees; renewals; expiration date of license.
(1) The fee for the renewal of a license and registration tag or sleeve
shall be the same as for the original, and said license, registration
tag or sleeve and renewal thereof shall expire on the last day of
January in the year following the year in which it was issued.
(2) Only one license and registration tag or sleeve shall be required in
the licensing year for any cat in Washington Township. Any valid
New Jersey license tag or sleeve issued by a New Jersey
municipality shall be accepted by the Township as evidence of
compliance.
I. Loss of license. If a license tag or sleeve has been misplaced or lost, the
cat licensing official may issue a duplicate license and/or registration
sleeve for that particular cat at a fee of $0.50.
J. Proof of licensing. Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person
owning, keeping, maintaining or harboring a cat, upon the request of
any health official, police officer, Animal Control Officer or other
authorized person.
K. Interfering with persons performing duties under this article. No
person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this article.
L. Disposition of fees collected. License fees and other moneys collected
or received under the provisions of this article shall be forwarded to the
Treasurer and shall be placed in a special account separate from any of
the other accounts of the Township and shall be used for the following
purposes only: for collecting, keeping and disposing of cats liable for
seizure, for local prevention and control of rabies, for providing
antirabies treatment under the direction of the Board of Health for any
person known or suspected to have been exposed to rabies and for
administering the provisions of this article. Any unexpected balance
remaining in such special account shall be retained until the end of the
third fiscal year following and may be used for any of the purposes set
forth in this subsection. At the end of said third fiscal year following,
and at the end of each fiscal year thereafter, there shall be transferred
from such special account to the general funds of the Township any
amount then in such account which is in excess of the total amount paid
into the special account during the last two fiscal years next preceding.
M. Exemptions for farm cats. Farm cats shall be licensed and registered as
other cats and must be vaccinated as other cats, except that the owner
or keeper of that cat or cats shall not be required to pay any fee
therefor.
A. Cat bites; known owner or harborer. Where it has been determined that
a person has been bitten by a cat, the individual, or his parent or
§ 46-20 WASHINGTON CODE § 46-21
24:176
§ 46-22. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, any person who violates or
who fails or refuses to comply with this article shall be liable to a penalty
according to the provisions of Article 1, General Provisions, § 1-3, General
penalty, of the Township Code of the Township of Washington.
guardian if he is a minor, shall immediately notify the police. When the
owner or keeper of any cat is notified by the police that the cat has
bitten an individual, the owner or keeper of the cat shall comply with
the following procedures:
(1) Have the cat examined by a licensed veterinarian within 12 hours,
unless the cat has a current rabies vaccination.
(2) Have the cat kept in quarantine in the owner's home or at a kennel
at the direction of the authorized agent of the Board of Health for a
period of 10 days, unless the cat does not have a current rabies
vaccination. The unvaccinated cat must be quarantined under the
supervision of a licensed veterinarian for a period of 10 days, the
cost of which is to be borne by the owner or harborer.
B. At the end of 10 days have the cat reexamined by a veterinarian and a
written report of the cat's state of health sent to the Board of Health.
C. Where the cat dies for any reason within the quarantine period, the
owner or keeper shall be responsible for obtaining the head of the
animal and transporting the head to the State Department of Health. In
lieu thereof, the owner may request that the Township transport the
head of the animal and shall pay the Township a fee of $100 which will
cover all transportation expenses incurred by the Township in providing
this service.
§ 46-21 (RESERVED) § 46-22
24:177

ARTICLE IV
Livestock Nuisances
[Adopted 7-18-1994 by Ord. No. 13-94 (Ch. XXVII of the Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 46-23. Trespassing and damage by animals prohibited.
No person shall suffer, allow or permit any horse, cattle, goats, pigs, sheep,
llamas or other livestock which he owns, keeps, leases, harbors or shelters
to trespass upon public property or the property of any other persons in the
Township of Washington without their permission, nor to damage shrubbery,
flowers, gardens, lawns, fields, domestic animals or any other property of
any kind belonging to any other person.
§ 46-23 (RESERVED) § 46-23
24:179

ARTICLE V
Feeding of Wildlife
[Adopted 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 12-05]
§ 46-24. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife
in any public park or on any other property owned or operated by the
Township of Washington so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 46-25. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 46-26. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the Township, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife (for
example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or
unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 46-27. Enforcement. [Amended 5-16-2005 by Ord. No. 17-05]
All police officers of the Township, regular and special, the Department
of Public Works Superintendent or his/her duly authorized designee, the
Health Officer or his/her duly authorized designee, the Zoning Officer and/
or his/her duly authorized designee and the Township Engineer and/or his/
her duly authorized designee, are hereby given full power and authority and
are charged with the duty to enforce all provisions of this article.
§ 46-28. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-16-2007 by Ord. No.
9-07]
Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this article shall be subject, upon conviction, to the penalties
provided in § 1-3 of this Code.
§ 46-24 (RESERVED) § 46-28
24:181
Chapter 53
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 137.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 148.
Trees and shrubs — See Ch. 196.
§ 53-1. Duties of owners and tenants.
It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant or person in possession of any lands
in the township to:
§ 53-2. Notice to owners or tenants.
A. Keep all brush, hedges or other plant life, growing within ten feet of any
roadway and within the line connecting point on the two street lot lines
at a distance of 25 feet of the intersection of two roadways, cut to a
height of not more than 2 1/2 feet above the existing street grade at
center line for the preservation of public safety.
B. Keep the lands free of brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps,
roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris, where the
same are inimical to the preservation of public health, safety or general
welfare of the township, or which may constitute a fire hazard.
A. After an investigation of any complaint of a resident, officer or
employee of the township relative to a violation of this chapter, or upon
his own motion, the Building Inspector shall make a written report of
the conditions complained of to the Township Committee at their next
regular meeting. If the reported conditions are found to exist, the
Township Committee shall direct the Clerk to notify the owner, tenant
or person in possession of the lands complained of in writing, either
personally or by registered mail, to remove such brush, weeds, dead or
dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth, filth, garbage, trash, or
other debris, within ten days after receipt of the notice. The Building
Inspector shall reinspect the lands in question after the ten-day period
expires and report in writing to the Township Committee at their next
regular meeting whether the condition complained of has been abated
or remedied.
B. Additional notice required. Notice of violations for any property
declared vacant and abandoned pursuant to Chapter 148 shall be given
to a foreclosing creditor pursuant to the procedures set forth in § 148-9
of this Code as required by P.L. 2014, c. 35.24 [Added 12-15-2014 by
Ord. No. 17-14]
24.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12s.
§ 46-28 WASHINGTON CODE § 53-3
24:182
§ 53-3. Removal by township; costs established as a lien.
If the owner, tenant or person in possession of the lands in question fails
to abate the condition complained of within ten days after receipt of notice,
the Building Inspector shall cause the condition complained of to be abated
and shall certify the cost to the Township Committee, who shall examine
the certificate and if it is correct, cause the cost as shown thereon to be
charged against the lands. The amount so charged shall become a lien upon
the lands and shall be added to and become a part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon the lands, shall hear interest at the same rate as
taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same officer and in the
same manner as taxes. Costs shall be in addition to any penalties imposed
for any violation of this chapter.
Chapter 56
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 60.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 111.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 148.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 172.
Zoning — See Ch. 217.
Housing standards — See Ch. 240.
§ 53-3 (RESERVED) § 53-3
24:183

ARTICLE I
General Building Regulations
[Adopted 12-20-1971 as Sec. 12-1 of the Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 56-1. Liability of Building Subcode Official.
The Building Subcode Official or any employee charged with the
enforcement of this code acting in good faith and without malice for the
township in the discharge of his duties shall not thereby render himself
liable personally, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for
any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any
act required or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his
duties. Any suit brought against the Building Subcode Official or employee,
because of such act or omission performed by him in the enforcement of
any provision of this code, shall be defended by the legal department of the
township until final termination of the proceedings.
§ 56-2. Right of entry.
The Building Subcode Official, in the discharge of his official duties and
upon proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building,
structure or premises at any reasonable hour.
§ 56-3. Definitions.
As used in the Building Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CORPORATION COUNSEL — The Township Attorney.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Washington.
§ 56-4. Size of dwellings. [Amended 2-16-1981 by Ord. No. 4-81]
A. All new dwellings and buildings being converted into living quarters
shall have a minimum size of 1,200 square feet of habitable area with a
minimum of 900 square feet on the ground floor (the floor containing
the living room, dining room and kitchen, no part of which shall be
below grade). This required area shall be exclusive of porches,
breezeways, garages, basement recreation rooms, laundries, furnace
rooms, utility rooms and workshops. No basement room which has
more than 1/2 of its clear ceiling height above the average adjoining
finish grade shall be considered to be a habitable area. Any habitable
basement room shall comply with all requirements of the code with
regard to windows, lighting and ventilation.
B. Any person aggrieved by the minimum floor space requirements
established in Subsection A shall have a right of appeal to the Township
Committee. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall set forth a brief
statement indicating how many square feet are proposed and why relief
§ 56-1 (RESERVED) § 56-4
24:185
§ 56-5. Driveway construction. [Added 12-17-1979 by Ord. No.
75-79;25 amended 12-15-1980 by Ord. No. 50-80]
from the minimum floor space requirements should be granted. If the
petitioner requests a hearing, that request should also be made in
writing. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Township Committee
shall set a time and place for a hearing, if one was requested, and
shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. If, upon consideration
of all pertinent facts, the Township Committee is satisfied that the
requested deviation from the minimum floor space requirements will
not adversely affect the public health, safety or morals, it shall adopt a
resolution permitting the deviation.
A. Construction permits. No construction permit shall be issued for the
construction of, alteration of or addition to any structure that will
require access for a motorized vehicle without first obtaining a
driveway construction permit (Chapter 172, Streets and Sidewalks,
Article III, Driveway Construction) and completing all that is required
thereunder, except the final surface course, as described by Chapter
172, Streets and Sidewalks, § 172-23C(2). This final surface course
must then be completed at any time prior to the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy for that particular structure. This requirement shall not
be deemed necessary where driveway construction has been included
in the performance guaranty and/or other guaranties for improvements,
such as in new approved major subdivisions under construction.
B. Certificates of occupancy; performance bonds.
(1) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for the construction of,
addition to or alteration of any structure which has an incomplete
driveway, as indicated by the driveway permit described in Chapter
172, Streets and Sidewalks, Article III, Driveway Construction, and
further described by the specific requirements in the driveway
permit issued for that structure.
(2) In the event that the final surface course, as described by Chapter
172, Streets and Sidewalks, § 172-23C(2), cannot be completed
prior to the time of application of a certificate of occupancy
because of the winter season restrictions, i.e., frost, unavailable
materials, etc., then the Township Superintendent of Public Works
or his designated nominee may waive this requirement until a more
favorable time. This extension of time shall not exceed six months
(180 days) from the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. This
waiver will be applicable only after the applicant has posted a
performance guaranty in the form of cash or certified check in an
amount to cover 150% of the estimated cost of said work, as
25.Editor's Note: Section 3 of this ordinance provided as follows: "Nothing in this ordinance
is intended to limit the authority of the enforcing agency or Construction Official under
the State Uniform Construction Code Act, P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.) or
any rules or regulations adopted thereunder."
§ 56-4 WASHINGTON CODE § 56-5
24:186
determined by the Township Superintendent of Public Works or his
designated nominee.
(3) Upon completion and approval of the final surface course, the
applicant shall present a written request for release of his
performance guaranty. The Township Clerk will then act in
conjunction with the governing body to effect said release with the
written confirmation of the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 56-5 (RESERVED) § 56-5
24:187

ARTICLE II
Uniform Construction Codes26
[Adopted 3-21-1977 (Ch. XIIA of the Revised General Ordinances)]
§ 56-6. Enforcing agency.
§ 56-7. Fees. [Added 5-20-1991 by Ord. No. 11-9127; amended
3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 10-97; 4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 10-03;
4-21-2008 by Ord. No. 05-08]
A. Established; composition. There is hereby established in the Township
of Washington a State Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency,
consisting of a Construction Official, Building Subcode Official,
Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode Official, Fire Protection
Subcode Official and such other subcode officials for such additional
subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs,
State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform
Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief
administrator of the enforcing agency.
B. Qualifications. Each official position created by Subsection A hereof
shall be filled by a person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L.
1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.), as amended, and N.J.A.C.
5:23, provided that, in lieu of any particular subcode official, an on-site
inspection agency may be retained by contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23
to hold each such position.
C. Single office location. The public shall have the right to do business
with the enforcing agency at one office location, except for emergencies
and unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances.
A. Construction permit fees.
(1) Building subcode fees. The building subcode fee shall be as follows:
(a) New construction. New construction permit fees shall be based
upon the volume of the proposed structure, and the rate per
cubic foot shall be determined by the proposed use pursuant to
Section 302.0, Use Group Classification, of the International
Building Code/2006, NJ Edition. Fees shall be as established in
New Jersey Administrative Code 5:23-4.20(c)(2), as may be
amended from time to time. [Amended 5-18-2009 by Ord.
No. 06-09]
(b) Renovations; alterations; repairs. Permit fees for renovations,
alterations and repairs shall be based upon the estimated cost
of the work and be as established in New Jersey Administrative
26.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq. provides for the enforcement of New Jersey's
uniform construction codes by the municipalities.
27.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 12A-2, Fees, as last amended
12-17-1984 by Ord. No. 32-84.
§ 56-6 (RESERVED) § 56-7
24:189
Code 5:23-4.20(c)(2), as may be amended from time to time.
[Amended 5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 06-09]
(c) The minimum fee shall be $50.
(d) Permit fees for additions. Permit fees for additions shall be
computed on the same basis as for new construction for the
added portion.
(e) Combination renovations and additions. For combination
renovations and additions, the fee shall be computed as the
sum of the fees computed separately in accordance with
Subsection A(1)(b) and (d) above.
(f) Temporary structures (i.e., tents, construction trailers and
similar structures): $25 each.
(g) Pools:
[1] Aboveground: $100.
[2] Inground: $250.
(h) Siding and roofing
Estimated Cost Fee
Up to $5,000 $100
Over $5,000 $200
(2) Plumbing subcode fee. The plumbing subcode fee shall be as
follows: [Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 08-10]
(a) A fee of $20 for each fixture or stack for all fixtures, except as
listed in Subsection A(2)(b) through (g). The minimum fee shall
be $50. For the purposes of computing this fee, fixtures or
stacks shall include, but not be limited to, lavatories, kitchen
units, slop sinks, urinals, water closets, bathtubs, shower
stalls, laundry tubs, floor drains, dishwashers, clothes washers,
drinking fountain, roof drain.
(b) A fee of $50 for each sewer pump.
(c) A fee of $75 for each backflow preventer (lawn sprinkler),
installation or demolition of liquid propane or oil tank, and
commercial heating and equipment. A flat fee of $75 for fuel
oil/gas piping (up to three fixtures).
(d) A fee of $80 for each water heater, water service, and sewer
connection.
(e) A fee of $100 per special device for grease traps, interceptor/
separators, water conditioners, hot water boilers, steam
boilers or similar devices.
§ 56-7 WASHINGTON CODE § 56-7
24:190
(f) A flat fee of $100 for cross connections and backflow
preventers subject to testing and requiring reinspection.
(g) A fee of $300 for each water-cooled air conditioning or
refrigerant unit.
(3) Electrical subcode fee. The electrical subcode fee shall be as
follows: [Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 08-10]
(a) Devices. Includes total of lighting fixtures, receptacles,
switches, detectors, light poles, fractional HP motors,
emergency and exit lights, communication points and alarm
devices/fire alarm control panel(s).
[1] First 15 items: $40.
[2] Each additional 20 or portion of 20 items: $25.
(b) Pools.
[1] Pool permit: $100 each.
[2] Pool permit w/underwater light(s): $125 each.
[3] Storable pool, spa, hot tub: $75 each.
[4] Annual inspection of commercial pools, spas, or hot tubs
[per N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.18(1)]: $100 each.
(c) Motors and apparatus rated in/by horsepower. Includes, but is
not limited to, garbage disposal, space heater/air handler, all
other motors 1 HP and over, equal to or greater than:
[1] One HP up to five HP: $20 each.
[2] Five HP up to 50 HP: $75 each.
[3] Fifty HP up to 100 HP: $200 each.
[4] Greater than 100 HP: $600 each.
(d) Transformers and apparatus rated in/by kilowatt. Includes, but
is not limited to electric range/receptacle, oven/surface unit,
electric water heater, electric dryer/receptacle, dishwasher,
central A/C unit, space heater/air handler, baseboard heat,
transformers/generators, electric sign lighting, equal to or
greater than:
[1] One KW up to five KW: $20 each.
[2] Five KW up to 50 KW: $75 each.
[3] Fifty KW up to 100 KW: $200 each.
[4] Greater than 100 KW: $600 each.
§ 56-7 (RESERVED) § 56-7
24:191
(e) Service panels and MCCs rated in amperes. Includes, but is not
limited to, service, subpanels, motor control center, equal to or
less than:
[1] Two hundred amperes: $75 each.
[2] Two hundred amperes up to 600 amperes: $250 each.
[3] Greater than 600 amperes: $800 each.
(f) Photovoltaic systems, including micro-inverters: fee based on
the designated kilowatt rating of the solar photovoltaic system
as follows: [Amended 7-15-2019 by Ord. No. 12-19]
[1] One KW up to 17 KW: $100 each.
[2] Eighteen KW up to 50 KW: $200 each.
[3] Fifty-one KW up to 100 KW: $400 each.
[4] One hundred one KW to 1,000 KW: $600 each.
[5] Over 1,001 KW: $900, plus additional $300 per each
additional 1,000 KW.
(g) There shall be a minimum fee of $50 in all of the above
categories.
(4) Mechanical subcode fees. The fees for a mechanical inspection in a
structure of Group R-3 or R-5 shall be as set forth below. No
separate fee shall be charged for gas, fuel oil, or water piping
connections associated with the mechanical equipment inspected.
[Amended 7-15-2019 by Ord. No. 12-19]
(a) Water heater: $80 each.
(b) Steam boiler: $120 each.
(c) Hot water boiler: $120 each.
(d) Hot air furnace: $80 each.
(e) Oil tank: $80 each.
(f) LPG tank: $80 each.
(g) Fireplace: $80 each.
(h) Generator: $50 each.
(i) Gas piping connection:
[1] First connection: $80.
[2] Each additional: $15.
§ 56-7 WASHINGTON CODE § 56-7
24:192
(j) Fuel oil piping connection:
[1] First connection: $80.
[2] Each additional: $15.
(5) Fire-protection subcode fees. The fire-protection fee shall be 10%
of the building subcode fee for new structures. For the installation
or replacement of fire-protection systems or equipment in existing
structures, the fee shall be based on the cost of work, utilizing the
same method as used for the building subcode. The minimum fee
shall be $50.
B. Plan review fee. The fee for plan review shall be 20% of the amount to
be charged for a construction permit.
C. Demolition permit fee. The fee for a demolition permit shall be based
upon the alleged use of the building or structure as heretofore existed,
pursuant to Section 202.0, Use Group Classification of the International
Building Code/2006, NJ Edition.
(1) The demolition permit fee for buildings or structures falling within
the Use Group Classification S or U shall be $100 for demolition of
structures being undertaken at one time on one lot.
(2) The demolition permit fee for buildings or structures falling within
all remaining use group classifications shall be $300 per building or
structure.
(3) There shall be no fee for the demolition of buildings or structures
which have been condemned and/or ordered to be demolished by
the Township of Washington.
D. Removal of building fee. The fee for a permit for removal of one building
from one lot to another or to another location on the same lot shall be
$10 per $1,000 of the estimated cost of moving, plus the estimated cost
of new foundations and all work necessary to place the building in its
completed condition in the new location.
E. Sign construction fee. The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be
$2 per square foot surface area of the sign, computed on one side only
for double-faced signs. The minimum fee shall be $50.
F. (Reserved)28
G. (Reserved)29
H. Certificate of occupancy fees.
28.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Gas piping, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 08-10.
29.Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, Tank installation, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No.
08-10.
§ 56-7 (RESERVED) § 56-7
24:193
(1) For a certificate of occupancy, the fee shall be 10% of the new
construction permit fee. The minimum fee shall be $40.
(2) The fee for a continued certificate of occupancy for all use group
classifications shall be in the amount of $100 per building or
structure.
(3) For a temporary certificate of occupancy, there shall be a fee of
$100.
I. Elevator fees. Elevator fees shall be established by the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs.
J. Variation fees. The fee for an application for a variation shall be $50 for
Class II and Class III structures. For Class I structures, the fee shall be
$500.
K. Reinstatement of lapsed permit fee. The fee for the reinstatement/
extension of a lapsed permit shall be $10 for each six-month lapsed
period starting at the date the permit was issued.
L. Extra inspection fee. There shall be a charge of $15 for each extra
inspection required due to the fault of the owner, builder or contractor,
or their agents.
M. Surcharge fee. In order to provide for the training, certification and
technical support programs required by the Uniform Construction Code
Act and the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, the enforcing
agency shall collect, in addition to the fees specified above, a surcharge
fee of $0.0016 per cubic foot of volume of new construction and $80 per
$1,000 of value for all other construction. Such surcharge fee shall be
remitted to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, Department of
Community Affairs, as provided for in the regulations. All fees may be
rounded to the nearest dollar amount.
§ 56-7 WASHINGTON CODE § 56-7
24:194
Chapter 60
BUILDINGS, MOVING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 56. Traffic control at construction sites — See Ch.
172, Art. VIII.
§ 60-1. Permit required.
No person shall move any building or structure through any streets of the
township without a permit issued as hereinafter provided.
§ 60-2. Application.
Any person desiring to move any building or structure shall make
application to the Building Subcode Official for a permit. The application
shall designate the streets through which the moving will be done, the
dimensions of the building, the estimated length of time required for such
moving and such other facts as the Building Subcode Official may require.
The fee for the permit shall be deposited with the Clerk. The permit may
be applied for by the owner of the building or structure to be moved by the
mover or contractor.
§ 60-3. Bond required.
The applicant shall file with the Clerk a bond in the amount of $5,000
with sureties satisfactory to the Clerk, conditioned for the payment of any
damage or injury to the trees, streets or other township property along the
designated route and for the replacement of any trees or other township
property destroyed by the moving, and further conditioned for the payment
of any additional fee due the township for exceeding the time limit fixed for
such moving.
§ 60-4. Fees. [Amended 3-21-1977]
The fee for a permit shall be as provided in Chapter 56, Building
Construction, § 56-7D, of this Code.
§ 60-5. Removal of wires and cables.
The person receiving a permit shall, at his own expense, arrange for the
removal of any wires or cables which may interfere with the moving. If
any wires or cables which may interfere with the moving pertain to the
fire alarm system or police telephone system or any other municipal system
of the township, then the person receiving such permit shall, at his own
expense, arrange for the removal of wires so as not to interfere in any
manner with the continual operation of such systems of the township.
§ 56-7 BUILDINGS, MOVING OF § 60-6
60:195
§ 60-6. Traffic control.
All moving operations as they relate to the problem of traffic shall be done
under the supervision of the Chief of Police and at such times as may be
fixed by the Chief of Police.
§ 60-7. Barricades and detour signs.
It shall be the duty and obligation of the contractor engaged in the moving
operations to furnish and place barricades and detour signs which may be
necessary for the proper diversion of motor vehicle traffic.
Chapter 66
CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Games of chance — See Ch. 96.
Noise — See Ch. 125.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 137.
Zoning — See Ch. 217.
§ 66-1. License required.
No person shall conduct a circus, fair, carnival, rodeo or similar public
exhibition within the township without having first obtained a license and
paid the required license fee.
§ 66-2. Fee; exceptions.
The fee for a license under this chapter shall be $25 for each day the activity
is to be conducted. Religious, charitable, fraternal and similar nonprofit
organizations conducting activities licensed by this chapter in order to raise
money for charity or some other public purpose or for the entertainment or
recreation of the residents of the township shall not be required to pay any
fee, but shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter.
§ 66-3. Additional application information.
In addition to general data required, an application for a license under this
chapter shall contain the following information:
A. The date or dates and the hours during which the licensed activity will
be conducted.
B. A list of all the games, attractions, contents or performances that will
be included in the activity to be conducted, a general description of
each and, if not operated by the licensee or his employees, the name
and address of the concessionaire or other person operating them.
§ 60-6 WASHINGTON CODE § 66-3
66:196
§ 66-4. Inspection.
In addition to all other investigations required, the premises at which the
licensed activity is to be conducted shall be inspected by the Chief of Police
or a police officer designated by him to determine if there is adequate offstreet
parking available and that the licensed activity can be conducted
without undue interference with vehicular or pedestrian traffic on public
streets. The application shall also be investigated by the Building Inspector
and a representative of the Board of Health to determine if the licensed
activity can be conducted without endangering public health or safety. All
such officials shall report the results of their investigations to the Township
Clerk within 14 days.
§ 66-5. Approval of Township Committee; issuance of license.
Upon receiving the results of the investigations, the Township Clerk shall
transmit them, together with the information contained in the application
for the license, to the Township Committee. The Township Committee shall
approve or disapprove the application within a reasonable time. Upon the
approval of the Township Committee and payment of the required licensed
fee, the Clerk shall immediately issue the license. The license shall be valid
only on the date or dates and during the hours set forth in the application.
Chapter 74
CURFEW
C. A description of the off-street parking and sanitary facilities available at
the location at which the activity is to be conducted.
D. Appropriate evidence that the licensee has made adequate provision for
the payment of workmen's compensation to any of his employees who
may be injured as required by N.J.S.A. 34:15-71.
§ 66-3 CURFEW § 66-5
74:197

ARTICLE I
Halloween Curfew30
[Adopted 7-19-1993 by Ord. No. 20-93 (Sec. 6-13 of the Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 74-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall be defined to mean:
GUARDIAN — A person, other than a parent to whom legal custody of the
juvenile has been given by court order or who is acting in the place of the
parent or who is responsible for the care and welfare of the juvenile.
JUVENILE — An individual who is under the age of 18 years.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including but
not limited to a public street, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk, bridge, alley,
plaza, park, recreation, athletic or shopping area, public transportation
facility, vehicle used for public transportation, parking lot or any other
public building, structure or area.
§ 74-2. Curfew established; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for juveniles to be in any public place between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of each and every day during the period from
October 28 until November 1, inclusive, of the year, unless accompanied by
a parent or guardian. This prohibition does not apply if said juvenile is:
§ 74-3. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit, suffer or allow
any juvenile in his or her care to be in any public place between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of each and every day during the period from
October 28 until November 1, inclusive, of each year, except as set forth in
§ 74-2 above.
A. Engaged in or traveling to or from a business or occupation which the
laws of the State of New Jersey authorize a juvenile to perform.
B. Engaged in an errand involving a medical emergency.
C. Attending religious services, extracurricular school activities, activities
sponsored by a religious or community organization or other cultural,
educational or social events or is in direct transit to or from such
events.
30.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded Ord. No. 5-82, adopted 4-19-1982, and Ord. No.
25-84, adopted 10-15-1984.
§ 74-1 CURFEW § 74-4
74:199
§ 74-4. Trick or treating.
Trick or treating by any person shall take place in Washington Township
only between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. on October 31 of each
year.
§ 74-5. Responsibility of police force.
Every member of the police force while on duty is hereby authorized to
detain any such juvenile willfully violating the provisions of this article until
the parent or guardian of the child shall take him or her into custody, but
such officer shall immediately, upon taking custody of the child, attempt to
communicate with the parent or guardian.
§ 74-6. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person found guilty of having violated § 74-2 or 74-3 above shall
perform community service and may be subject to a fine of no more
than $1,000, and if parents or guardians, as well as a juvenile, are found
guilty of violating this article, the parents or guardians shall perform
community service together with the juvenile. The period of community
service will not exceed 90 days.
B. Any person found guilty of having violated § 74-4 of this article shall be
subject, upon conviction, to the penalties provided in § 1-3 of this Code.
[Amended 4-16-2007 by Ord. No. 9-07
§ 74-4 WASHINGTON CODE § 74-6
74:200
Chapter 79
DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 217.
§ 79-1. Adoption of maps.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1988, Chapter 44
(N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7) and P.L. 1997, Chapter 327 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.), the Drug-
Free Zone Maps dated April 24, 1998, prepared by Carl E. Denzier, P.E., the
Township Engineer, are hereby approved and adopted as an official finding
and record of the location and areas within the Township of Washington of
property which is owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school
or school board and the areas on or within 1,000 feet of such properties and
property used for a public park, public building or public housing facility as
those facilities are defined in the above-referenced statute and of the areas
on or within 500 feet of such properties.
§ 79-2. Construal of provisions.
The Drug-Free Zone Maps approved and adopted pursuant to § 79-1 of this
chapter shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as to the
location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property owned
by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board which
is used for school purposes and on or within 500 feet of such property
owned by or leased to a public entity which is used for a public park, public
building or public housing facility until such time, if any, that this chapter
shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the
location and boundaries of such properties and the Drug Free Zones.
§ 79-3. Notice of boundary changes.
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, and the municipal governing body, or the entity
responsible for the operation of any public park, public building or public
housing facility are hereby directed and shall have the continuing obligation
to promptly notify the Township Engineer and the Township Attorney of any
changes or contemplated changes in the location and boundaries of any
property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school board
and which is used for school purposes and of any public areas designated
on said maps.
§ 79-4. Copies on file.
The Township Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file
the original of the maps approved and adopted pursuant to § 79-1 of this
§ 74-6 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 79-4
79:201
chapter, and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any
person, agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy,
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the maps approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true
copy, of such maps and of this chapter shall be provided without cost to the
County Clerk and to the Office of the Morris County Prosecutor.
§ 79-5. Additional findings.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the maps approved and adopted pursuant to § 79-1
of this chapter were prepared and are intended to be used as evidence
in prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state, and that
pursuant to state law, such maps shall constitute prima facie evidence
of the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools and of public
parks, public buildings and public housing facilities within the
Township of Washington.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board or to a public entity.
(3) That such property is and continues to be used for school purposes
or public purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property or on or within 500 feet of such public
property.
B. Except as otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved and
adopted maps, all of the property depicted on the maps approved and
adopted herein as school property was owned by or leased to a school
or school board and all of the property depicted on the maps approved
and adopted herein as public areas was owned by or leased to a public
entity and was being used for public purposes as of the effective date of
P.L. 1988, Chapter 44 with respect to school property and as of the
effective date of P.L. 1997, Chapter 327 with respect to public areas.
C. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1988, Chapter 44, and P.L. 1997,
Chapter 327, a prosecutor is not precluded from introducing or relying
upon any other evidence or testimony to establish a violation of the
offenses defined in those statutes, including use of a map or diagram
other than the ones approved and adopted pursuant to § 79-1 of this
chapter. The failure of the maps approved herein to depict the location
and boundaries of any property which is, in fact, used for school
purposes and which is owned or leased to any elementary or secondary
school or school board, or used for a public park, public building or
public housing facility and which is owned by or leased to any public
entity, whether the absence of such depiction is the result of
§ 79-4 WASHINGTON CODE § 79-5
79:202
Chapter 81
DUMPSTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 101.
Littering — See Ch. 104.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 148.
Solid waste — See Ch. 168.
Solid waste (Board of Health) — See Ch. 250.
inadvertent omission or the result of any changes in the location and
boundaries of such property which have not yet been incorporated into
a revised approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding
and record that such property is not owned by or leased to a public
entity, or that such property is not used for public purposes.
D. All of the requirements set forth in P.L. 1988, Chapter 44 and P.L. 1997,
Chapter 327, concerning the preparation, approval and adoption of
Drug-Free Zone Maps have been complied with.
§ 79-5 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 79-5
79:203

ARTICLE I
Dumpsters and Refuse Containers
[Adopted 10-18-2010 by Ord. No. 22-10]
§ 81-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all
times and to prohibit the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge
of liquids, semi-liquids or solids from the containers to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Washington
and/or the waters of the state so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 81-2. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Washington or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow-removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 81-3. Covering of containers; prevention of leaks and discharges.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
§ 81-1 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 81-3
79:205
§ 81-4. Exceptions to prohibition.
Exceptions are as follows:
§ 81-5. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or Construction
Official of the Township of Washington.
§ 81-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to the penalties set forth in § 1-3 of the Code of the
Township of Washington.
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of
Washington.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 81-3 WASHINGTON CODE § 81-6
79:206
Chapter 85
FERTILIZER AND PESTICIDE MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 111. Zoning — See Ch. 217.
§ 85-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the application of fertilizers and
pesticides, other than Rodeo or an equivalent product, within 25 feet of
C1 and other streams or state open waters, as said terms are defined in
Chapter 111, Land Use Procedures, so as to protect public health, safety
and welfare and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 85-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Terms not
defined herein shall have the meanings set forth in Chapter 111, Land Use
Procedures.
FERTILIZER — Any substance used to promote soil fertility.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PESTICIDE — Any substance or mixture of substances intended for
preventing, destroying, repelling or mitigating any pest; and any substance
or mixture of substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliator
or desiccant. It shall include all pesticide products registered as such by
the United States Environmental Protection Agency and the New York
State Department of Environmental Protection Agency and the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection and all products for which
experimental use permits and provisional registrations have been granted
by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 85-3. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall apply fertilizers or pesticides, except for Rodeo or an
equivalent product, to any area that is within 25 feet of the bank of a stream,
state open water or defined watercourse.
§ 81-6 FERTILIZER AND PESTICIDE MANAGEMENT § 85-4
85:207
§ 85-4. Exceptions.
Any application of a fertilizer or pesticide that is permitted by the
Washington Township Right to Farm Ordinance, § 217-40, or by state law,
which law pre-empts the provisions of this chapter, including but not limited
to the New Jersey Right to Farm Act.
§ 85-5. Enforcement.
All police officers of the Township, regular and special, the Zoning Officer,
the Department of Public Works Superintendent or his/her duly authorized
designee and the Health Officer or his/her duly authorized designee are
hereby given full power and authority and are charged with the duty to
enforce all provisions of this chapter.
§ 85-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-16-2007 by Ord. No.
9-07]
Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject, upon conviction, to the penalties
provided in § 1-3 of this Code.
Chapter 87
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 39. Property maintenance — See Ch. 148.
§ 87-1. Local enforcement authorized.
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383),31
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the Township
of Washington.
§ 87-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words are defined as follows:
CHIEFS OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT — Each duly elected Chief of a duly
constituted Volunteer Fire Company serving the territorial jurisdiction of
the Township of Washington, in the County of Morris.
CORPORATION COUNSEL — The Township Attorney.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Washington, in the County of Morris and
State of New Jersey.
31.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202.
§ 85-4 WASHINGTON CODE § 87-3
85:208
§ 87-3. Designation of enforcing agency.
The local enforcing agency shall be the Washington Township Fire
Prevention Office, which shall be headed by the Fire Official.
§ 87-4. Powers and duties of enforcing agency.
The local enforcing agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act32 and
the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures and
premises within the established boundaries of the municipality, other than
owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings, and shall faithfully comply
with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire
Code.
§ 87-5. Inspections of life hazard uses.
The local enforcing agency established by § 87-3 shall carry out the periodic
inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code on behalf
of the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs of New Jersey.
§ 87-6. Fire Official; appointment; terms; removal.
§ 87-7. Supervision. [Amended 12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 33-00]
The Washington Township Fire Official shall report directly to the Township
Administrator.
§ 87-8. Annual report.
The local enforcing agency, in addition to any other reporting requirements
delegated to it under the Uniform Fire Code, shall submit annually a report
to the Township Committee and Chiefs of the Fire Department summarizing
A. The local enforcing agency shall be under the direct supervision and
control of the Fire Official of the Township of Washington. The Fire
Official shall be appointed by the Township Committee. Prior to
appointment, the Chiefs of the Fire Department may submit nonbinding
recommendations to the Township Committee. The Fire Official shall
serve for a term of one year. [Amended 12-18-2000 by Ord. No.
33-00]
B. Such inspectors and other employees as may be necessary in the local
enforcing agency may be appointed by the Township Committee upon
the recommendation of the Fire Official.
C. The Fire Official, inspectors and other employees of the local enforcing
agency shall be subject to removal by the Township Committee for
inefficiency or misconduct. Upon request, said employee shall be
afforded an opportunity to be heard by the Township Committee or a
designated hearing officer.
32.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 87-3 FERTILIZER AND PESTICIDE MANAGEMENT § 87-8
85:209
all proceedings and actions taken during the calendar year under review.
The report shall contain such information as inspection reports,
correspondence, notices and orders relevant to all proceedings under the
code as may be required by the Chiefs of the Fire Department and/or the
Township Committee.
§ 87-9. Corporation Counsel.
The Township of Washington specifically appoints and designates the
Township Attorney to assist the local enforcing agency to enforce the code.
The Township Attorney shall advise the agency and undertake such actions
at law as shall be necessary to gain compliance with the code.
§ 87-10. Board of Appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act,33 any person
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcing agency shall have the right to
appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of the County of Morris.34
§ 87-11. Non-life-hazard uses. [Added 9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 22-00;
amended 7-19-2004 by Ord. No. 15-04; 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 15-05;
2-15-2010 by Ord. No. 04-10; 4-15-2019 by Ord. No. 07-19]
A. In addition to the registrations required by the Uniform Fire Code, the
following non-life-hazard uses shall register with the Bureau of Fire
Prevention. These uses shall be inspected once per year and shall pay
an annual fee as set forth below:
Use Annual Fee
A — Assembly Use Group
A-1 Eating establishment under 50 $50
A-2 Take-out food service (no seating) $50
A-3 House of worship not exclusively used for
religious purposes
$50
A-4 Recreation centers, multipurpose, etc.
(fewer than 50)
$75
A-5 Court rooms, library, fraternal
organizations, condominium centers (fewer
than 50)
$75
A-6 Senior centers (fewer than 50) $75
B — Business Use Group
B-1 Professional use one- and two-story (up to
1,000 square feet)
$42
33.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and 27D-208, respectively.
34.Editor's Note: Original § 3-3, Uniform Fire Safety Code, added 8-19-1985 by Ord. No.
28-85, was repealed 12-27-1994 by Ord. No. 30-94.
§ 87-8 WASHINGTON CODE § 87-11
85:210
Use Annual Fee
B-2 One- and two-story (1,001 to 2,500 square
feet)
$50
B-4 Three- to five-story
(Less than 5,000 square feet) $100
(5,001 to 10,000 square feet) $150
B-5 Three- to five-story (10,001 square feet or
greater)
$190
C — Retail/Mercantile Use Group
M-1 One- and two-story (less than 5,000 square
feet)
$125
M-2 One- and two-story (more than 5,000 square
feet and less than 12,000 square feet)
$150
M-4 Three- to five-story (less than 5,000
square feet)
$200
M-5 Three- to five-story (more than 5,000
square feet and less than 12,000 square feet)
$225
D — Manufacturing/Factory Group
F-1 One- and two-story (less than 5,000 square
feet)
$100
F-2 One- and two-story (more than 5,000
square feet and less than 12,000 square feet)
$125
F-4 Three- to five-story (less than 5,000 square
feet)
$175
F-5 Three- to five-story (more than 5,000
square feet and less than 12,000 square feet)
$200
S — Storage Use Group
S-1 One- and two-story (less than 5,000 square
feet)
$75
S-2 One- and two-story (more than 5,000
square feet and less than 12,000 square feet)
$125
S-4 Three- to five-story (less than 5,000 square
feet)
$175
S-5 Three- to five-story (more than 5,000
square feet and less than 12,000 square feet)
$200
R — Residential Use Group
R-1 As defined in Uniform Fire Code $75
R-2 3 As defined in Uniform Fire Code See § 87-11E
R-3 As defined in Uniform Fire Code See § 87-11E
§ 87-11 FERTILIZER AND PESTICIDE MANAGEMENT § 87-11
85:211
Use Annual Fee
R-4 As defined in Uniform Fire Code See § 87-11E
U — Utilities Use Group
U-1 Under 2,500 square feet $100
U-2 2,500 and over square feet $125
E — Common Areas Use Group
E-1 One- and two-story (less than 5,000 square
feet)
$75
E-2 One- and two-story (more than 5,000 square
feet and less than 12,000 square feet)
$100
E-3 One- and two-story (more than 12,000
square feet)
$125
E-4 Three- to five-story (less than 5,000 square
feet)
$125
E-5 Three- to five-story (more than 5,000
square feet and less than 12,000 square feet)
$150
E-6 Three- to five-story (more than 12,000
square feet)
$200
F — Agricultural Use Group
Initial registration $75
Subsequent annual registration $50
B. Uses not classified above that are subject to the Uniform Fire Code
shall be classified as business uses.
C. Uses required to register with the state as life-hazard uses shall not be
required to register under this section.
D. Township-owned buildings, buildings owned and occupied by municipal
fire companies and/or rescue squads, buildings owned and occupied by
nonprofit religious organizations that are used solely for religious
purposes and buildings owned and occupied by nonprofit organizations
used solely for nonprofit purposes shall be exempt from inspection fees.
E. All residential uses except R-1 Uses shall be inspected in the common
areas only and the fees established for the Common Areas Use Group
shall apply.
F. Failure to pay registration fee shall result in a penalty of double the
outstanding registration fee, in addition to the initial registration fee.
§ 87-11 WASHINGTON CODE § 87-12
85:212
§ 87-12. Enforcement, violations and penalties. [Added 9-18-2000
by Ord. No. 22-00]
Enforcement, violations and penalties shall be managed in conformity with
the Uniform Fire Safety Act, the Uniform Fire Code and all other laws of the
State of New Jersey.
§ 87-13. Fees. [Added 12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 33-00; amended
2-14-2018 by Ord. No. 04-18; 4-15-2019 by Ord. No. 07-19]
All state permit fees and Fire Code status fees shall be as established by
the Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.1 et seq., except for the following, as
permitted by N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9(f):
§ 87-14. Key box system. [Added 11-18-2019 by Ord. No. 14-19]
A. Certificate of smoke detector and carbon monoxide alarm compliance
(CSDCMAC) certificate:
(1) Requests for a CSDCMAC received more than 10 business days
prior to the change of occupant: $40;
(2) Requests for a CSDCMAC received four to 10 business days prior to
the change of occupant: $70;
(3) Requests for a CSDCMAC received fewer than four business days
prior to the change of occupant: $125.
(4) The fee for each additional inspection after failure(s) of Subsection
A(1), (2), or (3) above shall be the same as the fee for the initial
inspection.
B. Failure to pay application free for permit shall result in a penalty of
double the application fee, in addition to the initial application fee.
A. Key box required; applicability. The Township Fire Official may require
a property owner or operator to install a key box where the property is
protected by a fire protection system with secured openings that may
impede access to or within a structure or an area on that property if
immediate access is necessary for lifesaving or firefighting purposes.
This requirement applies to all existing buildings, structures and
property, except for owner-occupied one- or two-family residences. The
Fire Official may require the installation of a key box for an unoccupied
or vacant building, structure or property.
B. Key box location, contents and installation.
(1) The Township Fire Official shall approve in writing the type,
location, and installation of the key box.
(2) The key box shall be installed as per manufacturer specifications.
§ 87-12 FERTILIZER AND PESTICIDE MANAGEMENT § 87-14
85:213
(3) The property owner or operator of each property required to have a
key box shall, at all times, keep the following in the key box as
required by the Township Fire Official. Keys shall be clearly labeled
or marked to identify the doors they open or devices they operate.
(a) Keys to locked points of ingress, whether on the interior or
exterior of such property and/or buildings.
(b) Keys to locked mechanical rooms.
(c) Keys to locked elevator rooms.
(d) Keys to elevator controls.
(e) Keys to any fence or secured areas.
(f) All access or combination codes to locked points of egress or
ingress, whether on the interior or exterior of such property
and/or buildings.
(g) A business-size card containing the emergency contact person
and phone number for such property or building.
(h) Keys to other areas as directed by the Fire Official.
(i) Other material as directed by the Fire Official.
C. Key box maintenance and associated cost. In the event the key to the
structure is changed or rekeyed, the owner or operator shall
immediately notify the Township Fire Official and provide the updated
access key. The key to the lock shall be secured in the key box. The
property owner shall be responsible for all costs associated with the
installation and maintenance of the key box. The Township may recoup
from the owner or operator all costs incurred in connection with the
procurement, installation and maintenance of a key box.
D. Violations and penalties.
(1) Fire Prevention shall be the enforcing agency of this subsection.
(2) Any owner or operator violating any provision of this subsection
shall be subject to a fine of $100 for the first offense, $200 for the
second offense, and $300 for the third and future offenses for
failure to comply. The existence of a violation for a period of up to
30 continuous days shall constitute a single violation.
(3) The Township Fire Official shall notify the responsible party of any
violation in writing. Within 30 days of the service of such notice, the
owner/operator shall correct the violation or show why the
structure was not subject to this section. The Township Fire
Marshal shall consider such information, reaffirm or rescind the
key box fine and notify the owner of his/her decision by mail. The
owner/operator may appeal the decision of the Township Fire
Official within 20 days after service of the notice of decision by
§ 87-14 WASHINGTON CODE § 87-14
85:214
Chapter 92
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 56.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 121.
Sewers — See Ch. 155.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 175.
Water — See Ch. 213, Ch. 255.
Zoning — See Ch. 217.
Sewage disposal — See Ch. 247.
§ 92-1. Statutory authorization.35
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Township Committee of the Township
of Washington, Morris County, New Jersey, does ordain as follows.
§ 92-2. Findings of fact.
§ 92-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
submitting an appeal in writing to the Township Committee, which
shall hold a hearing thereon and shall affirm, reverse or modify the
decision of the Township Fire Official.
A. The flood hazard areas of the Township of Washington are subject to
periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health
and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities
and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses
that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected
from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health.
35.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 16-85 also repealed former Section 15-4, Floodplain
Regulations, added 11-15-82 by Ord. No. 26-82.
§ 87-14 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 92-3
92:215
§ 92-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 92-5. Definitions.
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects.
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines and streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard.
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas.
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard.
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion in flood heights or velocities.
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters.
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage.
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 92-3 WASHINGTON CODE § 92-5
92:216
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Planning Board's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO Zone on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to
three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding
is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of
flooding in any even year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.[Added 4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 8-87]
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended, through its design and construction, to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage
to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation
system.[Added 4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 8-87]
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations located within the area of special flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building which is built, in the
case of a building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top
of the elevated floor or, in the case of a building in a coastal highhazard
area, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural
member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means
of piling, columns (posts and piers) or sheer walls parallel to the flow
of the water and which is adequately anchored so as not to impair the
structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude
of the base flood. In an area of special flood hazard, elevated building
also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters. In areas of coastal high hazard, elevated
building also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of
"elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means
of breakaway walls.36[Added 4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 8-87]
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
36.Editor's Note: The former definitions of "existing mobile home park or mobile home
subdivision" and "expansion to an existing mobile home park or mobile home subdivision,"
which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 8-87.
§ 92-5 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 92-5
92:217
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report provided in which
the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as
well as the Flood Boundary/Floodway Map and the water surface
elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow
of inland or tidal waters and/or the unusual and rapid accumulation or
runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOODS — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than 0.2 foot.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area,
including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of other applicable nonelevation design
requirements.[Amended 4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 8-87]
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term
"manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and
other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive
days. For insurance purposes, the term "manufactured home" does not
include park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles[Added
4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 8-87]
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two
or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.37[Added 4-20-1987
by Ord. No. 8-87]
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter. 38
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act,
P.L. 97-348, includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided that the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start" means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on
37.Editor's Note: The former definition of "mobile home," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 8-87.
38.Editor's Note: The former definition of "new mobile home park or mobile home
subdivision," which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 4-20-1987 by Ord.
No. 8-87.
§ 92-5 WASHINGTON CODE § 92-5
92:218
§ 92-6. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Washington, County of Morris, State of New
Jersey.
§ 92-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled the Flood
Insurance Study for the Township of Washington, dated September 15,
1983, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary/
Floodway Maps and any revisions thereto, is hereby adopted by reference
and declared to be a part of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study is
on file at the Washington Township Clerk's office, Washington Township
Municipal Building, 43 Schooley's Mountain Road, Long Valley, New Jersey.
a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of
piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of
excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling: nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms: nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of
the main structure.[Amended 4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 8-87]
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a mobile home or a gas
or liquid storage tank, that is principally aboveground.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or
repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being
restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this
definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either
any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are
solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or any alteration of a
structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State
Inventory of Historic Places.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
§ 92-5 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 92-8
92:219
§ 92-8. Penalties for noncompliance. [Amended 4-16-2007 by Ord.
No. 9-07]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall be subject, upon conviction,
to the penalties provided in § 1-3 of this Code. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the Township Committee of the Township of Washington from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
§ 92-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and any other ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 92-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 92-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering consideration larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
Township of Washington, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal
Insurance Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 92-12. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in § 92-7.
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by
the Planning Board and may include but not be limited to plans in duplicate
A. Considered as minimum requirement.
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body.
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
§ 92-8 WASHINGTON CODE § 92-12
92:220
drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations
of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials and drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
§ 92-13. Administration and implementation by Planning Board.
The Planning Board is hereby appointed to administer and implement this
chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 92-14. Duties and responsibilities of Planning Board.
Duties of the Planning Board shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures.
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed.
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 92-17B(2).
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review.
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of § 92-18A are met.
B. Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation and floodway
data have not been provided in accordance with § 92-7, Basis for
Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, the Planning Board
shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to
administer § 92-17B(1), Residential Construction, and § 92-17B(2),
Nonresidential Construction. [Amended 4-20-1987 by Ord. No.
8-87]
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
§ 92-12 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 92-14
92:221
§ 92-15. Appeals Board.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all new
or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the
structure contains a basement.
(2) For all new substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level).
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in § 92-12C.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Division of Water Resources, prior to
any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence
of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations, where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between
a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting
the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
appeal the interpretation as provided in §§ 92-15 and 92-16.
A. An Appeals Board, as established by the Township Committee,
consisting of one member of the Planning Board, one member of the
Environmental Commission, one member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and two members of the Township Committee (no more
than one member of the Township Committee shall be serving on the
Planning Board), shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter.
B. The Appeals Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by
the Planning Board in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Appeals Board, or any taxpayer,
may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of New Jersey as
provided by law.
§ 92-14 WASHINGTON CODE § 92-15
92:222
§ 92-16. Conditions for variances.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Appeals Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
chapters of this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(2) The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
(5) The necessity of a waterfront location to the facility, where
applicable.
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area.
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
(10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
(11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of Subchapter D and the purposes of
this chapter, the Township Committee may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
this chapter.
F. The Township Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances to
the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided that the items in
§ 92-15 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 92-16
92:223
§ 92-17. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
Subchapter D(1) through (11) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the
procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter.
C. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
D. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense or create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in § 92-15D or conflict
with existing local laws or ordinances.
F. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation.
A. General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard, the following
standards are required:
(1) Anchoring.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of
the structure.
(b) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not to be limited to, the use of over-the-top or
frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces. [Amended 4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 8-87]
(2) Construction materials and methods.
§ 92-16 WASHINGTON CODE § 92-17
92:224
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(b) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Utilities.
(a) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the system.
(b) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters.
(c) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.
(d) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding. [Added
4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 8-87]
(4) Subdivision Proposals.
(a) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
(b) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems,
located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
(c) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
(d) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less.
(5) Enclosure openings. For all new construction and substantial
improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are
subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must
either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A
minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no
§ 92-17 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 92-17
92:225
§ 92-18. Floodways.
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in § 92-7 are
areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers or other coverings or devices, provided that
they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. [Added
4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 8-87]
B. Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood
elevation data have been provided as set forth in § 92-7, Basis for
Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, or in § 92-14B, Use of
Other Base Flood Data, the following standards are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above base flood
elevation.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to the level of the base flood elevation or, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water.
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subchapter. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 92-14C(2). [Amended
4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 8-87]
C. Mobile homes.
(1) Mobile homes shall be anchored in accordance with § 92-17A(1)(b).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation. 39 [Amended 4-20-1987 by Ord.
No. 8-87]
39.Editor's Note: Former Subsection c3, which immediately followed this subsection and
dealt with mobile homes placed in a floodway, was repealed 4-20-87 by Ord. No. 8-87.
§ 92-17 WASHINGTON CODE § 92-18
92:226
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris,
potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
Chapter 96
GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 96-1. Conduct of games on Sunday.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:8-31 and 5:8-58, games of chance, commonly known
as "bingo" and "raffles," may be conducted in the township on the first day
of the week, commonly known and designated as "Sunday," provided that
the applicant for the license to conduct the game otherwise qualifies under
the provisions of the aforementioned statutes and the rules and regulations
of the Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission and, specifically,
provided that the organization conducting the games is charitable,
religious, educational or patriotic, a fire company or first-aid organization
or other type of organization specifically qualifying under the provisions of
the aforementioned statutes.
§ 96-2. Authority to approve granting of raffle licenses. [Added
5-18-2015 by Ord. No. 03-15]
A. Prohibition of encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development, unless a technical
evaluation demonstrates that encroachments shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
B. If Subchapter A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvement shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction
provisions of § 92-17, Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
C. Prohibition of the placement of any mobile homes, except in an existing
mobile home park or existing mobile home subdivision.
D. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 foot at any
point.
A. The Township Clerk is hereby delegated the authority to approve the
granting of raffle licenses within the Township of Washington. In the
event that the Township Clerk has a conflict of interest or is otherwise
unable to issue said license, then the Township Committee shall retain
the authority.
B. The Township Clerk shall notify the Township Committee when raffle
licenses are issued, as appropriate, but at least every three months.
§ 92-18 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 96-2
92:227
Chapter 98
GEOLOGIC HAZARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 101.
§ 98-1. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the following meanings as used in this
chapter:
GEOLOGIC HAZARDS — Solution channels, collapse sinkholes, subsidence
sinkholes, disappearing streams, closed depressions and caves.
§ 98-2. Discovery of hazards.
Geologic hazards may exist in developments which received approvals prior
to the adoption of this chapter regulating development in limestone areas.
Those hazards may be discovered during or after construction. In such
cases it shall be unlawful for the developer and/or the owner to continue
construction activities which would impact the geologic hazard until the
following have occurred:
§ 98-3. Enforcement.
The Township Construction Official, the Township Engineer and any other
duly authorized official of the Township of Washington shall be authorized
to enforce the terms of this chapter.
A. The occurrence of the hazard has been reported to the Township Clerk
and Engineer within 24 hours of discovery.
B. A report on the geologic hazard which analyzes the impact of the
hazard and details a remediation plan has been prepared and submitted
to the township for review and approval by the Township Geotechnical
Consultant (TGC).
C. After obtaining approval of the remediation plan from the municipality,
necessary remediation of the hazard to prevent or minimize damage to
buildings, structures, utilities, driveways, parking areas, roadways and
other site improvements and to minimize pollution of the groundwater
has been performed.
D. Any damage to improvements has been repaired and restoration of
ground cover and landscaping has been accomplished.
E. The township has been reimbursed for the cost of inspection or other
costs incurred in connection with the geologic hazard.
§ 96-2 WASHINGTON CODE § 98-4
98:228
§ 98-4. Violations and penalties.
Failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter shall subject a
person to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3,
General penalty, and shall in addition result in the imposition of a stop work
order and/or the suspension of any building permit issued for the property
in question.
Chapter 101
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 13.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 87.
Geologic hazards — See Ch. 98.
§ 101-1. Purpose.
This chapter entitles the township to reimbursement for the extraordinary
costs of replacing expended resources and nonreusable equipment
maintained or procured by the township or the township's Fire Department
or any of its agencies and used during an emergency response action to stop
or contain the release or threatened release of any hazardous materials.
§ 101-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMERGENCY RESPONSE ACTION — All of the activities conducted by
the township and/or the township's Fire Department to cleanup, remove,
prevent, contain or mitigate a discharge of hazardous materials that poses
an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare.
EXPENDED RESOURCES — In general, those resources expended that
are reasonable, necessary and allocable to the emergency response action.
Expended resources shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Materials and supplies acquired, consumed or expended specifically for
the purpose of the emergency response action.
A.
Compensation of employees or independent contractors for the time
and efforts devoted specifically to the emergency response action.
B.
Rental or leasing of equipment used specifically for the emergency
response action (such as protective, scientific and technical equipment
and clothing).
C.
§ 98-4 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 101-2
101:229
EXTRAORDINARY COSTS — Costs in excess of $1,000 per incident.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any material, solid, liquid or gas, classified as
a hazardous material by federal, state or local legislation or regulation.
RELEASE — Any intentional or unintentional action or omission resulting
in the releasing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying or
dumping of hazardous substances into the waters or on to the lands within
the borders of the township, or into waters outside the jurisdiction of the
township when damage may result to the lands, waters or natural resources
within the borders of the township.
THREATENED RELEASE — Any imminent or impending event potentially
causing but not resulting in a release, but causing the township to
undertake an emergency response action.
VEHICLE — Any motorized equipment, registered or unregistered,
including but not limited to passenger cars, motorcycles, trucks, tractortrailers,
construction equipment and farm machinery.
VESSEL — Any container, drum, barrel, box, cylinder or tank used to hold
or contain or carry or store any hazardous materials.
§ 101-3. Responsibility for reimbursement.
Replacement costs for equipment owned by the township, the
township's Fire Department or a mutual aid company or department
that is contaminated beyond reuse or repair, if the loss occurred during
an emergency response action (such as self-contained breathing
apparatus irreparably contaminated during the response).
D.
Decontamination of equipment and personnel contaminated during an
emergency response action.
E.
Special technical services specifically required for an emergency
response action (such as costs associated with the time and efforts
of technical experts or specialists not otherwise provided for by the
township).
F.
G. Other special services specifically required for the emergency action.
Laboratory costs of analyzing samples taken during the emergency
response action.
H.
I. Costs of cleanup, storage or disposal of the released material.
Costs assessed with services and supplies procured in response to an
evaluation resulting from a release.
J.
Medical expenses incurred, including postexposure medical
surveillance.
K.
Legal expenses incurred as a result of the emergency response action,
including efforts to recover expenses pursuant to this chapter.
L.
§ 101-2 WASHINGTON CODE § 101-3
101:230
§ 101-4. Time period for payment.
Any person, owner or company responsible for or contributing to any
release or threatened release of hazardous materials shall reimburse the
Township of Washington within a period of 45 days after receipt of a bill
from the Township of Washington.
§ 101-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-16-2007 by Ord. No.
9-07]
Any person, owner or company responsible for or contributing to any
release or threatened release of a hazardous material who fails to reimburse
the Township of Washington within the time set forth in this chapter shall
be subject, upon conviction, to the penalties provided in § 1-3 of this Code.
A. Reimbursement to the township for the extraordinary costs of replacing
expended resources and nonreusable equipment shall be made by the
following parties jointly and severally:
(1) The owner or operator of any vehicle responsible for or
contributing to any release or threatened release of hazardous
materials.
(2) The owner or person responsible for any vessel containing
hazardous materials involved in or contributing to any release or
threatened release on public or private property whether
stationary or in transit, whether accidental or through the
negligence or intentional acts of the owner or person responsible
for the vessel.
(3) The owner or person responsible for any property from which any
release or threatened release of hazardous materials emanate,
whether accidental or through the negligence or intentional acts of
the owner of person responsible for the property.
(4) Any person responsible for or contributing to any release or
threatened release of hazardous material on public or private
property, whether accidental or through the negligence or
intentional acts of the person responsible for contributing to the
release or threatened release.
B. Any person or company responsible for or contributing to any release or
threatened release of a hazardous material may be required to provide
reimbursement directly to the township for services rendered by any
recovery company, towing company or other technical assistance
required by the township to handle such incident.
§ 101-3 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 101-5
101:231
Chapter 103
HIGHLANDS AREA EXEMPTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 56.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 92.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 111.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 121.
Soil disturbance — See Ch. 164.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 170.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 175.
Zoning — See Ch. 217.
§ 101-5 WASHINGTON CODE § 101-5
101:232
ARTICLE I
Title, Purpose, Scope
§ 103-1.1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Washington Township
Highlands Area Exemption Ordinance."
§ 103-1.2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the procedural and substantive
requirements by which the municipality will issue Highlands Act Exemption
Determinations. Such determinations pertain only to Highlands Act
Exemptions 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8. Highlands Act Exemption Determinations
indicate whether proposed activities, improvements or development
projects affecting lands located within the Township's Highlands Area are
exempt from the Highlands Water Protection and Planning Act ("Highlands
Act," N.J.S.A. 13:20-1 et seq.), and are therefore exempt from the Highlands
Water Protection and Planning Council's ("Highlands Council") Regional
Master Plan, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's
(NJDEP) Highlands Water Protection and Planning Act Rules ("Preservation
Area Rules," N.J.A.C. 7:38-1 et seq.), and from any amendments to the
Township's Master Plan, development regulations, or other regulations
adopted pursuant to the approval of the Township's Petition for Plan
Conformance by the Highlands Council.
§ 103-1.3. Scope/applicability.
The provisions of this chapter pertain to activities, improvements and
development projects involving lands located within the Township of
Washington Highlands Area. The Highlands Area comprises that portion
of the municipality for which the applicable provisions of the Township's
Master Plan, land use ordinances and other pertinent regulations have
been deemed by the Highlands Council to be in conformance with the
Highlands Regional Master Plan (RMP) (see § 103-3.1A). The provisions
of this chapter shall not be construed to alleviate any person or entity
from the provisions and requirements of any other applicable ordinances,
rules, or regulations of the municipality, or from any other applicable law,
regulation, or requirement of any county, state, or federal authority having
jurisdiction; nor shall the provisions of this chapter deprive any person or
entity from seeking a Highlands exemption determination from the NJDEP
or the Highlands Council.
§ 103-1.4. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted under the authority of the Highlands Act and the
New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law ("MLUL," N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
In the Highlands Act, the Legislature identified numerous categories of
activities that are exempt from the Act, the RMP, the Preservation Area
Rules, and any amendments to a master plan, development regulations,
§ 103-1.1 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 103-1.4
101:233
or other regulations adopted by a local government to conform them with
the RMP. See N.J.S.A. 13:20-28. The Legislature granted the Highlands
Council the authority to administer the plan conformance process and to
approve, reject, or approve with conditions municipal plan conformance
petitions. See N.J.S.A. 13:20-14 and 13:20-15. The Legislature, through
the MLUL, granted authority to New Jersey municipalities to govern land
use and development within their borders and, through the Highlands
Act, established requirements for Highlands municipalities to conform their
land use and development regulations with the RMP. In a July 19, 2012,
memorandum of understanding (MOU) between the Highlands Council and
the NJDEP, the Council and the NJDEP recognized the circumstances in
which it would be appropriate for conforming, Highlands Council-certified
municipalities to make determinations regarding specified Highlands Act
exemptions.
§ 103-1.4 WASHINGTON CODE § 103-1.4
101:234
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 103-2.1. Word usage.
Terms used in the body of this chapter which are defined by the Highlands
Act (N.J.S.A. 13:20-3) are intended to have the same definitions as provided
in the Highlands Act. Unless expressly stated to the contrary or alternately
defined herein, terms which are defined by the MLUL are intended to
have the same meaning as set forth in the MLUL. For purposes of this
chapter, the terms "shall" and "must" are indicative of a mandatory action
or requirement while the word "may" is permissive.
§ 103-2.2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT — Construction
for the purposes of supporting common farmsite activities, including but
not limited to the production, harvesting, storage, grading, packaging,
processing, and the wholesale and retail marketing of crops, plants,
animals, and other related commodities and the use and application of
techniques and methods of soil preparation and management, fertilization,
weed, disease, and pest control, disposal of farm waste, irrigation, drainage
and water management, and grazing. (N.J.S.A. 13:20-3.)
AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL USE — The use of land for common
farmsite activities, including but not limited to the production, harvesting,
storage, grading, packaging, processing, and the wholesale and retail
marketing of crops, plants, animals, and other related commodities and
the use and application of techniques and methods of soil preparation and
management, fertilization, weed, disease, and pest control, disposal of farm
waste, irrigation, drainage and water management, and grazing. (N.J.S.A.
13:20-3.)
AGRICULTURAL IMPERVIOUS COVER — Agricultural or horticultural
buildings, structures or facilities with or without flooring, residential
buildings and paved areas, but not meaning temporary coverings. (N.J.S.A.
13:20-3.)
APPLICANT — Any entity applying to the Board of Health, Planning Board,
Zoning Board of Adjustment, Zoning Officer, Construction Official or other
applicable authority of the municipality for permission or approval to
engage in an activity that is regulated by the provisions of this chapter.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance, or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to Section 25 or
Section 27 of P.L. 1975, c.291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36).
BUILDING PERMIT — Used interchangeably with the term "construction
permit;" see definition below.
§ 103-2.1 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 103-2.2
101:235
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code, Chapter 23 of Title 5 of the New Jersey
Administrative Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et seq.), providing authorization to
begin work subject to the conditions and requirements established under
the provisions therein.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any building or other structure, or of any
mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for which
permission may be required pursuant to the MLUL. (N.J.S.A. 13:20-3;
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4.)
DISTURBANCE — The placement of impervious surface, the exposure or
movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation. (N.J.S.A. 13:20-3.)
DISTURBANCE, ULTIMATE — The total existing or proposed area of
disturbance of a lot, parcel, or other legally designated (or otherwise legally
recognized) tract or subdivision of land, for the purpose of, and in
connection with, any human activity, property improvement, or
development, including the surface area of all buildings and structures,
all impervious surfaces, and all associated land disturbances such as
excavated, filled, and graded areas, and all lawn and landscape areas.
Ultimate disturbance shall not include areas of prior land disturbance which
at the time of evaluation: a) contain no known man-made structures
(whether above or below the surface of the ground) other than such features
as old stone rows or farm field fencing; and b) consist of exposed rock
outcroppings, or areas which, through exposure to natural processes (such
as weathering, erosion, siltation, deposition, fire, flood, growth of trees
or other vegetation) are no longer impervious or visually obvious, or
ecologically restored areas which will henceforth be preserved as natural
areas under conservation restrictions.
ENVIRONMENTAL LAND USE OR WATER PERMIT — A permit, approval,
or other authorization issued by the Department of Environmental
Protection pursuant to the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act, P.L. 1987,
c.156 (N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.), the Water Supply Management Act, P.L.
1981, c.262 (N.J.S.A. 58:1A-1 et seq.), the Water Pollution Control Act, P.L.
1977, c.74 (N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.), the Realty Improvement Sewerage
and Facilities Act (1954), P.L. 1954, c.199 (N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq.), the
Water Quality Planning Act, P.L. 1977, c.75 (N.J.S.A. 58:11A-1 et seq.), the
Safe Drinking Water Act, P.L. 1977, c.224 (N.J.S.A. 58:12A-1 et seq.), or the
Flood Hazard Area Control Act, P.L. 1962, c.19 (N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq.).
(N.J.S.A. 13:20-3.)
FARM MANAGEMENT UNIT — A parcel or parcels of land, whether
contiguous or noncontiguous, together with agricultural or horticultural
buildings, structures and facilities, producing agricultural or horticultural
products, and operated as a single enterprise. (N.J.S.A. 13:20-3.)
§ 103-2.2 WASHINGTON CODE § 103-2.2
101:236
FOREST MANAGEMENT PLAN — A written guidance document describing
the forest resources present on a property, the landowner's management
goals and objectives, and the recommended practices or activities to be
carried out over time on the land. This tool is used to evaluate a forest
land's current state and provide a management process which, over time,
meets the landowner's objectives, while maintaining health and vigor of
the resource. Forest management plans are typically written for a ten-year
period. (RMP, Glossary.)
FARMSITE — A "farm management unit" as defined above.
HIGHLANDS APPLICABILITY DETERMINATION — A determination made
by the NJDEP (pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:38-2.4) indicating whether a project
proposed for the Preservation Area is a major Highlands development,
whether any such major Highlands development is exempt from the
Highlands Act, and whether the project is consistent with the applicable
Areawide Water Quality Management Plan.
HIGHLANDS AREA — That portion of the municipality for which the land
use planning and regulation are in conformance with, or are intended or
proposed to be in conformance with, the Highlands RMP.
HIGHLANDS PRESERVATION AREA APPROVAL (HPAA) — An approval
issued by the NJDEP pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:38-6 pertinent to a regulated
activity in the Highlands Preservation Area, and including an HPAA that
contains a waiver pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:20-33b.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER — A spouse, child, parent, sibling, aunt,
uncle, niece, nephew, first cousin, grandparent, grandchild, father-in-law,
mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, stepparent, stepchild,
stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, or half sister, whether the individual is
related by blood, marriage, or adoption. (N.J.S.A. 13:20-3.)
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any structure, surface, or improvement that
reduces or prevents absorption of stormwater into land, including, but
not limited to, porous paving, paver blocks, gravel, crushed stone, decks,
patios, elevated structures, and other similar structures, surfaces, or
improvements. (N.J.S.A. 13:20-3.)
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES, CUMULATIVE — The total area of all existing or
proposed impervious surfaces situated or proposed to be situated within the
boundary lines of a lot, parcel, or other legally recognized subdivision of
land, expressed either as a measure of land area such as acreage or square
feet, or as a percentage of the total lot or parcel area.
MAJOR HIGHLANDS DEVELOPMENT — Except as otherwise provided
pursuant to Subsection a. of Section 30 of the Highlands Act
("Exemptions"): (1) any nonresidential development in the Preservation
Area; (2) any residential development in the Preservation Area that requires
an environmental land use or water permit [from the NJDEP, see definition
above], or that results in the ultimate disturbance of one acre or more
of land or a cumulative increase in impervious surface by one-quarter
acre or more; (3) any activity undertaken or engaged in the Preservation
Area that is not a development but results in the ultimate disturbance of
§ 103-2.2 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 103-2.2
101:237
one-quarter acre or more of forested area or that results in a cumulative
increase in impervious surface by one-quarter acre or more on a lot; or
(4) any capital or other project of a state entity or local government unit
in the Preservation Area that requires an environmental land use or water
permit [from the NJDEP, see definition above], or that results in the ultimate
disturbance of one acre or more of land or a cumulative increase in
impervious surface by one-quarter acre or more. Major Highlands
development shall not include any agricultural or horticultural development
or agricultural or horticultural use. Solar panels shall not be included in any
calculation of impervious surface. (As defined by the Highlands Act, N.J.S.A.
13:20-1 et seq., as amended.)
MASTER PLAN — For purposes of this chapter, all references to the
"Township Master Plan," "master plan," or "Master Plan," refer to the
municipal Master Plan, as defined in the MLUL (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-5), as
adopted by the Township Planning Board.
MASTER PLAN, HIGHLANDS REGIONAL (RMP) — For purposes of this
chapter, all references to the Highlands Regional Master Plan (RMP), shall
be by use of the words "Highlands Regional Master Plan," "Highlands RMP,"
"Regional Master Plan," or "RMP."
MUNICIPAL LAND USE LAW (MLUL) — The New Jersey Municipal Land
Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1, et seq.
NJDEP — New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
NJDEP PRESERVATION AREA RULES — The regulations established by the
NJDEP to implement requirements of the Highlands Act, titled "Highlands
Water Protection and Planning Act Rules," and codified at N.J.A.C. 7:38-1 et
seq.
PLANNING AREA — Lands within the Highlands Region that are not located
in that portion designated by the Highlands Act as the "Preservation Area"
(see metes and bounds description at N.J.S.A. 13:20-7b).
PRESERVATION AREA — Lands within the Highlands Region that are
located in that portion designated by the Highlands Act as the "Preservation
Area" (see metes and bounds description at N.J.S.A. 13:20-7b).
SOLAR PANEL — An elevated panel or plate, or a canopy or array thereof,
that captures and converts solar radiation to produce power, and includes
flat plate, focusing solar collectors, or photovoltaic solar cells and excludes
the base or foundation of the panel, plate, canopy, or array. (N.J.S.A.
13:20-3.)
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
§ 103-2.2 WASHINGTON CODE § 103-2.2
101:238
ARTICLE III
Geographic Area of Applicability
§ 103-3.1. Highlands Planning Area and Preservation Area.
The Highlands Act establishes the Preservation Area and Planning Area of
the Highlands Region. It describes the varied attributes of each and sets
forth the major land use planning goals that pertain to the lands located
within each. The Act defines the geographic extent of the Highlands Region
to include the aggregated land area making up its constituent municipalities
(N.J.S.A. 13:20-7a). It provides a physical delineation of the Preservation
Area by use of a specific metes and bounds description (N.J.S.A. 13:20-7b),
designating all remaining lands within the Highlands Region as the
Planning Area.
A. Highlands Area. The Washington Township Master Plan incorporates
the Highlands Preservation Area and Planning Area, inclusive of the
goals applicable to each, as an integral component of the planning and
land use policies of the municipality. For purposes of this chapter, this
Area is designated as the Washington Township Highlands Area, and
consists of Highlands Planning Area and Highlands Preservation Area
lands. A map of the Washington Township Highlands Area appears in
Exhibit 1.
B. Applicability specified. This chapter applies specifically and solely to
lands designated as the Washington Township Highlands Area, as
delineated in Exhibit 1.
§ 103-3.1 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 103-3.1
101:239

ARTICLE IV
Highlands Act Exemption Determinations
§ 103-4.1. Highlands Act exemptions.
A. Section 30 of the Highlands Act identifies as exempt, specific activities,
improvements and development projects affecting lands within the
Highlands Region. Such activities, improvements and projects may be
proposed as a component of any type of land use application submitted
to the municipality for approval, including but not limited to zoning
permit applications, building permit applications, and Applications for
Development (as defined in § 103-2.2). Any such qualifying activity,
improvement or development project is exempt, with regard specifically
to that activity, improvement or development project, from the
requirements of the Highlands Act, the Highlands RMP, the NJDEP
Preservation Area Rules and any amendments to the Washington
Township's master plan, development regulations, or other regulations
adopted pursuant to the approval of Washington Township's petition for
plan conformance by the Highlands Council. Such an exemption
specifically applies to any Highlands Area land use ordinance adopted
by the Township pursuant to the Highlands Council's approval of
Washington Township's petition for plan conformance.
B. Where any application submitted to the municipality for approval
proposes to rely upon a Highlands Act Exemption, the applicant must,
as a condition of application completeness, and prior to review or
approval of the application by the applicable municipal authority,
provide sufficient evidence that the proposed activity, improvement, or
development project in fact qualifies as a Highlands Act exemption.
Such evidence shall consist of either a state agency exemption
determination or a municipal exemption determination (see Subsection
A or B below) indicating that the proposed activity, improvement, or
development project qualifies for a Highlands Act exemption.
C. State agency exemption determination. State agency exemption
determinations shall consist of either a Highlands applicability
determination issued by the NJDEP for a Preservation Area proposal, or
a Highlands exemption determination issued by the Highlands Council
for a Planning Area proposal. State agency determination may be
requested with regard to any Highlands Act exemption; however, for
applications involving any exemption not identified in § 103-4.2 below, a
state agency exemption determination is required. Any applicant
seeking a formal exemption determination for a capital or other project
of any state entity or local government unit, or for any other publiclyowned
or controlled land or facility also must request a state agency
exemption determination.
D. Municipal exemption determination. For an application involving any of
the specific exemptions listed in § 103-4.2 below, the applicant may
request a municipal exemption determination. The applicant may rely
upon the findings of a municipal exemption determination to the same
§ 103-4.1 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 103-4.1
101:241
§ 103-4.2. Highlands Act exemptions eligible for municipal
determination.
Effective as of the date on which the municipality receives written
authorization from the Highlands Council to proceed, an applicant may seek
a municipal exemption determination for the Highlands Act exemptions
listed hereunder.
extent as would apply to an exemption determination issued by the
Highlands Council or the NJDEP.
A. Exemption 1. The construction of a single-family dwelling, for an
individual's own use or the use of an immediate family member, on a lot
owned by the individual on the date of enactment of the Highlands Act
(August 10, 2004) or on a lot for which the individual entered into a
binding contract of sale to purchase on or before May 17, 2004.
B. Exemption 2. The construction of a single-family dwelling on a lot in
existence on the date of enactment of the Highlands Act (August 10,
2004), provided that the construction does not result in the ultimate
disturbance of one acre or more of land or a cumulative increase in
impervious surface by one-quarter acre or more.
(1) A municipal exemption determination indicating that an applicant
qualifies under Highlands Act Exemption 2 shall require approval
and filing of a deed notice along with a site plan delineating the
total exempt area and the extent of the disturbance recognized in
the municipal exemption determination (see § 103-4.4 below).
Municipal exemption determinations in such instances shall not
take effect until the applicant has provided proof of filing of the
approved deed notice.
C. Exemption 4. The reconstruction of any building or structure for any
reason within 125% of the footprint of the lawfully existing impervious
surfaces on the site, provided that the reconstruction does not increase
the lawfully existing impervious surface by one-quarter acre or more.
This exemption shall not apply to the reconstruction of any agricultural
or horticultural building or structure for a nonagricultural or
nonhorticultural use.
(1) For purposes of this chapter, this exemption shall not be construed
to permit multiple 125% footprint expansions, but rather, to permit
one or more reconstruction activities cumulatively resulting in a
maximum 125% increase in the footprint of the impervious surfaces
lawfully existing on the site, provided they do not cumulatively
exceed the one-quarter-acre limitation. Any determination of
whether the expansion of impervious cover meets the statutory
criteria for the exemption must account for the preexisting
impervious cover, and such expansion must be contiguous to the
location of the existing impervious cover. See In re August 16, 2007
§ 103-4.1 WASHINGTON CODE § 103-4.2
101:242
§ 103-4.3. Exemption designee(s).
Municipal exemption determinations regarding Highlands Act exemptions
shall be issued by the Washington Township Zoning Officer, Planner or
Engineer ("exemption designees"). The exemption designees shall be
authorized to issue municipal exemption determinations on behalf of the
municipality, and shall only begin to do so after satisfactory completion
of a Highlands Council training class for which the individual(s) has/have
received formal certification from the Highlands Council.
Determination of NJDEP ex rel. Christ Church, 414 N.J. Super. 592
(App. Div. 2010), certif. denied, 205 N.J. 16 (2010).
(2) For Preservation Area determinations, the applicable date of lawful
existence shall be August 10, 2004, the date of enactment of the
Highlands Act. For Planning Area determinations, the date of
lawful existence shall coincide with the effective date of the
municipally-adopted Highlands Area Checklist Ordinance or
Highlands Area Land Use Ordinance, whichever is earlier.
D. Exemption 5. Any improvement to a single-family dwelling in existence
on the date of enactment of the Highlands Act (August 10, 2004),
including but not limited to an addition, garage, shed, driveway, porch,
deck, patio, swimming pool or septic system.
E. Exemption 6. Any improvement, for nonresidential purposes, to a place
of worship owned by a nonprofit entity, society or association, or
association organized primarily for religious purposes, or a public or
private school, or a hospital, in existence on the date of enactment of
the Highlands Act (August 10, 2004), including but not limited to new
structures, an addition to an existing building or structure, a site
improvement, or a sanitary facility.
F. Exemption 7. An activity conducted in accordance with an approved
woodland management plan pursuant to Section 3 of the Farmland
Assessment Act, P.L. 1964, c.48 (N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.3) or a forest
stewardship plan approved pursuant to Section 3 of P.L.2009, c. 256
(N.J.S.A. 13:1L-31), or the normal harvesting of forest products in
accordance with a forest management plan or forest stewardship plan
approved by the State Forester.
G. Exemption 8. The construction or extension of trails with nonimpervious
surfaces on publicly owned lands or on privately owned
lands where a conservation or recreational use easement has been
established.
A. Updates to training certification. In the event of programmatic
changes, updated information, or modifications to procedures, updated
training certification may be required of exemption designees in order
to maintain qualifications for providing municipal exemption
determinations. The Highlands Council will provide training modules
§ 103-4.2 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 103-4.3
101:243
§ 103-4.4. Application procedures.
on an as-needed basis, to provide base training to new employees, and/
or to further the expertise of already certified individuals. Exemption
designees and the municipalities they serve will be advised of any
need for upgraded training, which will be provided and funded by the
Highlands Council.
B. Interim determinations. For the duration of any period during which the
municipality is without a qualified exemption designee(s) due to
changes in personnel or other extenuating circumstances, applicants
seeking Highlands Act exemption determinations shall be referred to
the NJDEP or the Highlands Council, for a state agency determination
pursuant to § 103-4.1A above.
A. Municipal exemption applications. Requests for municipal exemption
determination shall be submitted on forms provided by the Zoning
Board Secretary and shall be accompanied by sufficient information
and documentary evidence to demonstrate whether the proposed
activity, improvement or development project qualifies for the
applicable exemption. Required submission materials applicable to
each exemption appear at § 103-4.7 below.
B. Completeness determination. The exemption designee shall review the
application and all accompanying materials to determine whether
sufficient information has been submitted to make a determination on
the application. In the event of a finding that the application is
incomplete, the exemption designee shall, within 10 calendar days of
receipt, issue such findings in writing to the applicant, indicating what
information is required to properly consider the application.
C. Time for determination. The exemption designee shall issue municipal
exemption determinations within 10 calendar days of receipt of a
complete application. The exemption designee, however, may consult
with the Executive Director (or applicable designee) of the Highlands
Council as needed in making any exemption determination. In such
circumstance, the exemption designee shall seek such assistance within
the ten-day period and shall issue the determination within at least 10
calendar days of receiving the requested guidance. In no case shall
failure to meet this date constitute approval of the exemption.
D. Determinations. All municipal exemption determinations shall be
provided in writing, shall certify to the applicability or inapplicability of
the exemption, and shall include a statement of the rationale for the
decision. Any municipal exemption determination certifying to the
applicability of Highlands Act Exemption No. 2 shall be contingent upon
submission of proof of filing of the required deed notice, as set forth at
§ 103-4.4E, below. Any municipal exemption determination certifying to
the applicability of Highlands Act Exemption No. 4 shall be signed by a
least two exemption designees.
§ 103-4.3 WASHINGTON CODE § 103-4.4
101:244
§ 103-4.5. Appeal of municipal exemption determination.
A municipal exemption determination may be appealed by any affected
person/entity by filing a notice of appeal within 20 calendar days of issuance
or receipt of said determination, whichever is later, specifying the grounds
for the appeal. Appeals must be filed with the NJDEP in the case of any
Preservation Area exemption, and with the Highlands Council, in the case of
any Planning Area exemption. All appeals shall be copied to the exemption
E. Notice of determination required. The exemption designee(s) shall
provide copies of all municipal exemption determinations, including a
copy of the full application, to the Highlands Council, and for decisions
regarding lands in the Highlands Preservation Area, to the NJDEP, in
either case, within 10 business days of issuance.
F. Deed notice for exemption No. 2. Any municipal exemption
determination that certifies to the applicability of Highlands Act
Exemption No. 2 (§ 103-4.2 above), shall be issued conditionally,
pending fulfillment of the requirement that a deed notice be recorded in
the office of the County Clerk or Register, as applicable, indicating the
extent of the exemption that has been consumed. The deed notice shall
incorporate each of the components listed below and the applicant shall
provide a copy of the filed deed notice to the Highlands Council within
five business days of filing.
(1) Clear identification of the name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s)
in fee of the property;
(2) Designated tax block and lot number(s), street address(es),
municipality and county of location of the property;
(3) Reference to the municipal exemption determination (by date,
numbering if applicable) issued and under which the deed notice is
being filed;
(4) Description of the approved area of ultimate disturbance and the
impervious surface area, with verification that these remain below
the statutory limits;
(5) For properties of one acre or more in area, metes and bounds
delineation indicating the portion of the property for which the
ultimate disturbance has been authorized;
(6) Agreement to abide by the ultimate disturbance and impervious
surface limits imposed, any furtherance thereof rendering the
municipal exemption determination null and void; and
(7) Notice that the owner(s) and subsequent owner(s) and lessees shall
cause all leases, grants, and other written transfers of interest in
the property to contain provisions expressly requiring all holders
thereof to take the property subject to the limitations therein set
forth.
§ 103-4.4 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 103-4.5
101:245
designee(s), who shall immediately transmit to the NJDEP or the Highlands
Council, as applicable, copies of the notice of appeal, the municipal
exemption determination application, and all supplemental materials
constituting the record that the exemption designee relied upon in issuing
the municipal exemption determination. Where the municipal exemption
determination deems an activity, improvement or development project
exempt, the filing of an appeal to the NJDEP or the Highlands Council shall
stay all proceedings in furtherance of its approval by the municipality.
§ 103-4.6. Effect of certified exemption.
Issuance of a municipal exemption determination that certifies to the
applicability of a Highlands Act exemption shall recognize the applicant's
exemption from the provisions of the RMP, NJDEP Preservation Area Rules,
and any municipal ordinances and requirements adopted under the
authority of the Highlands Act to achieve Highlands Plan conformance.
The exemption is restricted solely to the extent of the specified activity,
improvement, or development project as described in the language of the
Highlands Act exemption, or to any lesser activity, improvement, or
development project as proposed and certified through a municipal
exemption determination application. Any activity, improvement, or
development project, or any part thereof, that is not specifically listed as
an exemption or exceeds the limits of an exemption, remains subject to
all of the above regulatory programs to the full extent of the respective
applicability of each. Issuance of a Highlands exemption determination shall
not relieve the applicant from securing all other required federal, state, or
local approvals.
§ 103-4.7. Application fees.
Applications for a municipal exemption determination shall be accompanied
by an escrow fee of $200 unless waived by the Township Zoning Officer
because review by the Township Planner and/or Township Engineer is
deemed to be unnecessary.
§ 103-4.8. Submission requirements.
All applications shall be accompanied by the municipal exemption
determination application form, the applicable fees, and the information
listed below, as applicable to the particular exemption or exemption(s)
being sought by the applicant. All references to professional preparers
indicated herein shall be construed to include any and all qualified
individuals licensed, certified, or otherwise eligible and authorized to
complete such work, in accordance with the applicable laws and legal
requirements of the State of New Jersey including but not limited to the
MLUL (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) and Title 13 of the New Jersey
Administrative Code, Law and Public Safety. Where the exemption designee
finds that any submission item is not necessary to address the evidentiary
requirements that must be satisfied for issuance of an exemption
determination, either because alternate items have been provided by the
§ 103-4.5 WASHINGTON CODE § 103-4.8
101:246
applicant, or the relevant information is readily available through records,
maps, or any other documents on file in the offices of the municipality, the
exemption designee may waive the applicant's obligation to submit such
information.
A. Exemption 1.
(1) A copy of a deed, closing or settlement statement, title policy, tax
record, mortgage statement or any other official document showing
that the lot was legally owned by the applicant on or before August
10, 2004, and indicating the lot and block as designated by the
municipal tax mapping, the municipality and county in which the
lot is located, and the street address;
(2) If the applicant did not own the lot, a copy of the binding contract
of sale executed by the seller and the applicant on or before May
17, 2004, for the lot on which the house is to be constructed; and
(3) A certification by the applicant stating that the single-family
dwelling proposed for construction on the lot specified and
described therein by tax lot and block, municipality and county of
location, and street address, is intended for the applicant's own use
or the use of an immediate family member as identified therein by
name and relationship to the applicant.
B. Exemption 2.
(1) A copy of the recorded deed or plat showing that the lot was
created on or before August 10, 2004, or proof of subdivision
approval on or before August 10, 2004;
(2) A property survey certified by a licensed New Jersey professional
land surveyor indicating the property boundary lines and overall lot
size, and showing what structures currently exist on the lot, if any;
(3) A parcel plan certified by a licensed New Jersey professional
engineer showing all existing and proposed development, including
all structures, grading, clearing, impervious surface and
disturbance, and including the calculations supporting the claim
that impervious surfaces and areas of disturbance are within the
limits necessary for Exemption 2; and
(4) A metes and bounds description of the area of the lot to be
disturbed, limited to less than one acre and a draft conservation
restriction or deed notice (pursuant to § 103-4.4E, above) to cover
the balance of the lot.
C. Exemption 4.
(1) A parcel plan certified by a licensed New Jersey professional
engineer depicting:
§ 103-4.8 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 103-4.8
101:247
(a) All existing property improvements, including all structures,
grading, clearing, impervious surfaces and limits of
disturbance, lawfully existing on the site as of August 10, 2004,
for Preservation Area projects and as of the effective date of
the municipal Highlands Area Checklist Ordinance or
Highlands Area Land Use Ordinance, whichever is earlier; and
(b) All proposed development including all structures, impervious
surfaces, clearing limits, and limits of disturbance, including
grading; and
(2) A copy of any official documentation of the original date of
construction of the building or otherwise establishing the
lawfulness of existing impervious surfaces.
D. Exemption 5.
(1) A copy of any official documentation proving the single family
dwelling was in existence on August 10, 2004;
(2) A description of the proposed improvement; and
(3) A certification from the applicant that the property and all
improvements will continue to be used for single-family dwelling
purposes.
E. Exemption 6.
(1) A copy of any official documentation indicating that the place of
worship, public or private school or hospital was in existence on
August 10, 2004;
(2) For improvements to a place of worship, documentation showing
that the entity, society or association, or association organized
primarily for religious purposes has nonprofit status;
(3) A site plan certified by a licensed New Jersey professional engineer
depicting:
(a) All existing property improvements including all structures,
grading, clearing, impervious surfaces and limits of
disturbance, existing on the site on August 10, 2004; and
(b) All proposed development including all structures, impervious
surfaces, clearing limits, and limits of disturbance, including
grading.
F. Exemption 7.
(1) For a private landowner with an approved woodland management
plan or forest stewardship plan:
(a) A copy of the applicant's tax bill showing that the site has
farmland assessment tax status under the New Jersey
§ 103-4.8 WASHINGTON CODE § 103-4.8
101:248
Farmland Assessment Act, N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq., if
applicable;
(b) A brief description of the total area of woodlands that is the
subject of the approved woodland management plan or forest
stewardship plan;
(c) A brief description of the length of time that the area to be
managed has been in use for woodland management or forest
stewardship plan; and
(d) A copy of the approved woodland management plan or forest
stewardship plan.
(2) For the normal harvesting of forest products in accordance with a
forest management plan or forest stewardship plan approved by
the State Forester:
(a) A brief description of the total area where the normal
harvesting of forest products occurs;
(b) A brief description of the length of time that the area to be
managed has been in use for normal harvesting of forest
products; and
(c) A copy of a forest management plan or forest stewardship plan
approved by the State Forester.
G. Exemption 8.
(1) A site plan certified by a licensed New Jersey professional engineer
showing the proposed trail construction with details including the
location, and width of existing and proposed trails and those off-site
trails to which they connect, if any;
(2) A written description of the non-impervious materials to be used;
and
(3) For privately owned property, a copy of a deed for the property and
the conservation or recreational use easement on the property.
§ 103-4.8 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 103-4.8
101:249
Chapter 105
HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 56. Zoning — See Ch. 217.
§ 103-4.8 WASHINGTON CODE § 103-4.8
105:250
ARTICLE I
Housing Rehabilitation Program
[Adopted 3-18-1996 by Ord. No. 5-96 (Sec. 12-6 of the Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 105-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to meet Washington Township's fair share
housing obligation through provisions designed to result in the voluntary
rehabilitation of substandard low- and moderate-income housing units
within the township in one or more of the following ways:
§ 105-2. Definitions.
As used herein, the terms which follow shall have the following meanings:
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent within the means of a low- or
moderate-income household as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4.
APPLICANT — The person applying for financial assistance for housing
rehabilitation.
DEPARTMENT — The Morris County Department of Community
Development.
HOUSING OFFICER — The person designated by the Township Committee
to administer the provisions of this article.
HOUSING TRUST FUND — The fund established pursuant to the township's
Development Fee Ordinance. 40
LOW-INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to Federal
Department of Housing and Urban Development or the standards included
in N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 1 et seq. for home ownership and rental costs, occupied
or reserved for occupancy by households with a gross household income
equal to 50% or less of the median gross household income for households
of the same size within the housing region in which the housing is located
and which is subject to affordability controls promulgated by the Council on
Affordable Housing.
A. Through grants from the township's Housing Trust Fund to eligible lowand
moderate-income homeowners for rehabilitation of owner-occupied
housing through a program to be administered by the township and/or
its agent.
B. Through direct grants as may be available from the Morris County
Department of Community Development to eligible low- and moderateincome
homeowners for housing rehabilitation of owner-occupied
housing.
40.Editor's Note: See Chapter 111, Land Use Procedures, Article VII, Development Fee and
Affordable Housing Contribution.
§ 105-1 HOUSING § 105-2
105:251
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to
Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or the standards
in N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 1 et seq. for home ownership and rental costs, occupied
or reserved for occupancy by households with a gross household income in
excess of 50% but less than 80% of the median gross household income for
households of the same size within the housing region in which the housing
is located and which is subject to the affordability controls promulgated by
the Council on Affordable Housing.
REHABILITATION — The restoration of a substandard housing unit to a
decent, safe and sanitary condition by eliminating the condition(s) making
the unit substandard and bringing the unit up to code standard.
SUBSTANDARD HOUSING — A dwelling unit that is unsafe and/or
unsanitary based upon one or more of the following characteristics:
§ 105-3. Eligibility.
A. It is inhabited by 1.01 or more persons per room.
B. Absence of a private entranceway to the dwelling unit.
Absence of complete plumbing facilities and adequate kitchen facilities,
including a sink with piped water, a stove and a refrigerator.
C.
D. Absence of central heat.
One or more major health and safety code violations, including one
major system deficiency in which any one of the following systems
must be replaced or extensively repaired: plumbing (including wells
and sanitary plumbing), heating, roof, electrical or major load-bearing
structural systems.
E.
A. Only owners of houses or structures within the Township of Washington
are eligible for the financial assistance made available pursuant to this
article. The homeowner must either live in a low- or moderate-income
household (owner-occupied housing) or must agree to rent the house or
other dwelling unit to be rehabilitated to a low- or moderate-income
household (rental housing).
B. All required forms must be completed by an applicant for housing
rehabilitation assistance in a timely fashion.
C. The rehabilitation plan for the housing unit must, upon completion,
result in the elimination of all deficiencies and improve the unit to code
standards. The Construction Official will review the adequacy of the
plan before final approval and approve the rehabilitation upon
completion.
D. Any grant from the Housing Trust Fund shall be secured by a lien on the
rehabilitated property subject to the terms and conditions set forth in
Chapter 240, Housing Standards.
§ 105-2 WASHINGTON CODE § 105-3
105:252
§ 105-4. Terms of assistance.
Grants provided to eligible applicants under the housing program shall be
subject to the following terms and conditions:
§ 105-5. Affordability controls for owner-occupied single-family
units.
For rehabilitation assistance for owner-occupied single-family housing
units, the applicant shall consent to a deed restriction and mortgage lien
to be recorded, requiring that the dwelling unit be sold only to low- and
moderate-income households. This deed restrictions shall be a real
covenant running with the land and shall bind the applicant and all
successors in interest for a period of six years from the date of closing on
the deferred-payment loan. The deed restriction shall be termed the "sales
E. The provisions of this article shall apply to all housing units which
receive assistance through the Housing Trust Fund. The applicant shall
agree, in writing, to comply with its terms.
A. The maximum amount of assistance per applicant shall be $15,000.
B. Owner-occupied housing. Rehabilitation assistance for owner-occupied
housing shall be in the form of a non-interest-bearing, deferredpayment
loan with a term of six years, which is secured by a mortgage
on the property. Such loan shall convert to a full grant, and the lien shall
be discharged at the end of the six-year term, so long as the owner has
not vacated the premises or transferred title to the property prior to the
expiration of said term. An owner who conveys or vacates the property
shall be required to repay the loan in full at such time as the owner
conveys title or ceases to occupy the property unless said conveyance is
to another low- or moderate-income household at an affordable sales
price. In the event of conveyance of the dwelling unit to another low- or
moderate-income household during said six-year term, such
conveyance shall be subject to the mortgage lien which shall remain in
effect for the balance of the six-year term.
C. Rental housing. Rehabilitation assistance for rental housing shall be in
the form of a non-interest-bearing, deferred-payment loan with a term
of 10 years, which is secured by a mortgage on the property. Said lien
shall secure the full amount of the loan and shall require compliance
with the rental affordability controls set forth hereinafter. The deferredpayment
loan shall convert to a full grant, and the lien shall be
discharged at the expiration of said ten-year term. The full amount of
the deferred-payment loan shall be paid to the Housing Trust Fund
upon any leasing or occupancy of the housing unit by a non-lowerincome
household.
D. Any applicant receiving assistance shall be subject to and shall consent
to the recording of a deed restriction and mortgage lien on the real
property in accordance herewith.
§ 105-3 HOUSING § 105-5
105:253
affordability control" and shall be in a form satisfactory to the Township
Attorney and shall comply with all the following requirements:
§ 105-6. Affordability controls for rental housing.
For rehabilitation assistance for rental housing, the applicant shall consent
to a deed restriction requiring that the dwelling unit may only be leased
to or otherwise occupied by a low- or moderate-income household at a
rental amount which does not exceed the affordable rent applicable to the
particular dwelling unit size. This deed restriction shall be a real covenant
running with the land and shall bind the applicant and all successors in
interest for a period of 10 years from the date of closing on the deferredpayment
loan. This deed restriction shall be termed the "rental affordability
control," shall be in a form satisfactory to the Township Attorney and shall
require compliance with all of the following requirements:
A. Prior to a sale of an owner-occupied single-family housing unit, the
owner shall apply for a certificate of affordable housing from the
Housing Officer. The application shall include a copy of the proposed
contract of sale and an affidavit by the owner that the affordable sales
restriction will be adhered to. Upon request, the Housing Officer will
assist the owner in locating an income-eligible purchaser. Any
prospective purchaser must submit adequate proof of household
income and household size. If the Housing Officer or designee
determines that the proposed sale will be in compliance with the
affordability control, then a certificate of affordable housing shall be
issued.
B. The sales price of a rehabilitated owner-occupied single-family housing
unit may increase annually based on the percentage increase in the
regional median income limit for the region as established by the
Council on Affordable Housing.
C. Owners of rehabilitated owner-occupied single family housing units
may apply to the Housing Officer for permission to increase the
maximum sales prices for eligible capital improvements which render
the unit suitable for a larger household, provided that the maximum
price of the improved housing unit does not exceed the limits of
affordability for the larger household.
A. Prior to any change in occupancy of a housing unit subject to a rental
affordability control, the owner shall apply for a certificate of affordable
housing from the Housing Officer. The application shall include a copy
of the proposed lease and an affidavit by the owner that the affordable
rent restriction will be adhered to. Upon request, the Housing Officer
will assist the owner in locating an income-eligible tenant. Any
prospective tenant must submit adequate proof of household income
and household size. If the Housing Officer or designee determines that
the proposed change in occupancy will be in compliance with the rental
affordability control, then a certificate of affordable housing shall be
issued.
§ 105-5 WASHINGTON CODE § 105-6
105:254
§ 105-7. Administration.
The Washington Township Housing Rehabilitation Program shall be
administered by the Township of Washington unless the township enters
into a separate agreement with an appropriate outside agency, such as the
Morris County Department of Community Development, to assume some
or all of the responsibilities noted herein. The township shall designate an
individual to serve as Housing Officer, who may be an elected or appointed
township official.
B. The permissible affordable rent may increase annually based on the
percentage increase in the housing consumer price index for the United
States, not to exceed 9% in any one year.
C. An owner of property subject to a rental affordability control may apply
to the Housing Officer for permission to increase the affordable rent for
capital improvements which render the unit suitable for a larger
household, provided that such change does not result in the
displacement of existing low- or moderate-income occupants. The new
rent shall not exceed the affordable rent permitted for such larger
household size.
A. The duties of the Housing Officer shall include:
(1) Publicizing the rehabilitation program through a combination of
some, though not necessarily all, of the following: brochures;
posters in prominent locations; radio announcements; notices in
municipal tax bills; notices in municipal publications; informational
meetings with welfare organizations, urban action community
groups, civic and religious leaders, senior citizen groups and
fraternal organizations; newspaper press releases; and providing
information and application packets to interested applicants.
(2) Identifying eligible homeowners and marketing the program to
potential applicants.
(3) Implementation of the program, including:
(a) Application review and eligibility determinations.
(b) Conducting client interviews and home inspections.
(c) Preparation of home inspection reports.
(d) Approval of construction contracts.
(e) Preparation of contract and lien agreements.
(f) Performance of ongoing and final inspections.
(g) Maintenance of files and preparation of quarterly status
reports to the Washington Township Committee.
§ 105-6 HOUSING § 105-7
105:255
§ 105-8. Application, review and approval procedures.
(4) Administering the Housing Trust Fund and preparing periodic
status reports on the program and available funding to the
Township Committee.
(5) Administering the rental affordability controls set forth in §§ 105-5
and 105-6 of this article.
B. The Washington Township Construction Official shall:
(1) Determine or assist in determining the deficiency of an applicant's
unit under the provisions of this article.
(2) Review and determine the adequacy of plans to rehabilitate a
housing unit in accordance with the rehabilitation program
established herein.
(3) Conduct initial and final inspections required in connection
herewith and issue certifications of rehabilitation upon completion
of work to the Housing Officer.
A. Interested homeowners will be able to secure information and
application packets regarding the rehabilitation program from the
Township Clerk at the Municipal Building during regular business
hours.
B. Once an application has been completed and filed with the Housing
Officer, a determination shall be made as to income eligibility.
C. Once a homeowner has been certified to be income-eligible, a home
inspection shall be conducted to determine the existence of a housing
deficiency requiring rehabilitation.
D. Once the home and the applicant have been certified as eligible, a home
inspection report shall be prepared which shall include specifications to
be used to obtain construction estimates.
E. It shall be incumbent upon the applicant to obtain at least two written
cost estimates for the rehabilitation work from qualified contractors. A
list of contractors will be supplied to applicants upon request.
F. Cost estimates shall be reviewed by the Housing Officer, and the lowest
responsible bidder will be selected.
G. The rehabilitation work may begin as soon as all necessary agreements,
including construction contract and lien documents, have been
executed.
H. Written progress reports shall be maintained and payments shall be
made to the appropriate parties as work progresses. After construction
has been completed, the Construction Official shall conduct a final
Inspection to certify that the required property improvements are
§ 105-7 WASHINGTON CODE § 105-8
105:256
complete and issue a final inspection report. Final payment for the
rehabilitation work will then be released and lien documents recorded.
§ 105-8 HOUSING § 105-8
105:257
Chapter 108
INSURANCE
§ 105-8 WASHINGTON CODE § 105-8
108:258
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 5-21-1979 by Ord. No. 51-79 (Ch. XXII of the Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 108-1. Payment of claims restricted.
Except as provided in § 108-2, no insurance company shall pay to a claimant
any claim in excess in the aggregate of $2,500 for fire damages on any
real property located within the Township of Washington pursuant to any
fire insurance policy issued or renewed after the adoption and filing of this
article with the State Commissioner of Insurance until such time as all taxes
and assessments and all other municipal liens or charges due and payable
appearing on the official certificate of search shall have been paid either
by the owner of such real property or by the insurance company from the
proceeds of the insurance policy.
§ 108-2. Exceptions.
The prohibition as contained in § 108-1 hereinabove shall be inapplicable in
the situation where the Township of Washington enters into an agreement
with the owner of the property in question to require payment of all
delinquent taxes, assessments and other municipal liens by installments if
the municipality is satisfied that the claim for fire damages is to be used to
restore or improve the fire-damaged property.
§ 108-3. Filing of changes.
No change in this article shall take effect until it is filed with the
Commissioner of Insurance.
§ 108-1 INSURANCE § 108-3
108:259
Chapter 111
LAND USE PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 92.
Geologic hazards — See Ch. 98.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 101.
Site plan review — See Ch. 159.
Soil removal — See Ch. 164.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 175.
Zoning — See Ch. 217.
§ 108-3 WASHINGTON CODE § 108-3
108:260
ARTICLE I
Planning Board
§ 111-1. Establishment. [Amended 2-18-1980 by Ord. No. 6-80]
There is hereby established pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 291, in the Township of
Washington, a Planning Board of nine members and two alternate members
consisting of the following four classes:
§ 111-2. Terms.
A. Class I: the Mayor or his/her designee as provided in a written
designation filed with the Municipal Clerk. [Amended 12-18-2000 by
Ord. No. 37-00]
B. Class II: one of the officials of the municipality other than a member of
the governing body to be appointed by the Mayor, provided that if there
is an Environmental Commission, the member of the Environmental
Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board, as required
by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, shall be deemed to be the Class II Planning Board
member if there are both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
and a member of the Board of Education among the Class IV members.
C. Class III: a member of the governing body to be appointed by it.
D. Class IV: eight other citizens of the municipality to be appointed by the
Mayor, six to be designated as "Member," one to be designated as
"Alternate Member No. 1," and one to be designated as "Alternate
Member No. 2." The members and alternate members of Class IV shall
hold no other municipal office, except that one member or alternate
member may be a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, and one
may be a member of the Board of Education. A member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning
Board, as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, shall be a Class IV Planning
Board member or alternate member, unless there are among the Class
IV members of the Planning Board both a member of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education, in which case
the member of the Environmental Planning Board. Alternate members
may participate in discussions of the proceedings, but may not vote,
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member of any
class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may
vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be
made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall
vote. No alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter in
which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial
interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if he requests
one, be removed by the governing body for cause.
A. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his
official tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class
III shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of their
§ 111-1 INSURANCE § 111-2
108:261
§ 111-3. Vacancies. [Amended 2-18-1980 by Ord. No. 6-80]
If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term,
it shall be filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term.
This subsection shall apply to members and alternate members.
§ 111-4. Organization of Board.
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV and select a Secretary and an Assistant Secretary who
may be either a member of the Planning Board or a municipal employee
designated by it.
§ 111-5. Planning Board Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Planning Board Attorney. The Planning
Board may annually appoint, fix the compensation of or agree upon the rate
respective terms of office, whichever occurs first, except for a Class
II member who is also a member of the Environmental Commission.
The term of a Class II or a Class IV member or alternate member who
is also a member of the Environmental Commission shall be for three
years or terminate at the completion of his term of office as a member
of the Environmental Commission, whichever comes first. [Amended
2-18-1980 by Ord. No. 6-80]
B. The term of a Class IV member or alternate member who is also a
member of the Board of Adjustment or the Board of Education shall
terminate whenever he is no longer a member of such other body or at
the completion of his Class IV term, whichever occurs first. [Amended
2-18-1980 by Ord. No. 6-80]
C. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent
the expiration of such term shall be evenly distributed over the first four
years after their appointment as determined by resolution of the
governing body; provided, however, that no term of any member shall
exceed four years, and further provided that nothing herein shall affect
the term of any present member of the Planning Board, all of whom
shall continue in office until the completion of the term for which they
were appointed. Thereafter, all Class IV members shall be appointed for
terms of four years except as otherwise herein provided. All terms shall
run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment was made.
D. The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years, except that
the terms of the alternate members shall be such that the term of not
more than one alternate member shall expire in any one year; provided,
however, that in no instance shall the terms of the alternate members
first appointed exceed two years. [Added 2-18-1980 by Ord. No.
6-80]
§ 111-2 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-5
108:262
of compensation of the Planning Board Attorney who shall be an attorney
other than the Municipal Attorney.
§ 111-6. Experts and staff.
The Planning Board may also employ or contract for the services of experts
and other staff and services as it may deem necessary. The Board shall not,
however, exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by
the governing body for its use.
§ 111-7. Powers and duties generally.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply. It shall also have the following powers and
duties:
A. To make, adopt and from time to time amend a Master Plan for the
physical development of the municipality, including any areas outside
its boundaries, which in the Board's judgment bear essential relation to
the planning of the municipality, in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
B. To administer the provisions of Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land, and
Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, in accordance with the provisions of said
chapters and the Municipal Land Use Law, P.L. 1975, c. 291, (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.).
C. To approve conditional use applications in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 217, Zoning, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
D. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations.
E. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
F. To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement
projects projected over a term of six years, and amendments thereto,
and to recommend the same to the governing body.
G. To consider and make a report to the governing body within 35 days
after referral as to any proposed development regulations submitted to
it pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a, and also to pass
upon other matters specifically referred to the Planning Board by the
governing body, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26b.
H. When reviewing applications for the approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, to grant to the same extent and subject to the
same restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment:
§ 111-5 INSURANCE § 111-7
108:263
§ 111-8. Times.
(1) Variances pursuant to Subsection 57c of P.L. 1975, c. 291, (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70c) from lot area, lot dimensional, setback and yard
requirements, provided that such relief from lot area requirements
shall not be granted for more than one lot.
(2) Direction pursuant to Section 25 of said Act for the issuance of
permits for buildings or structures in the bed of a mapped street or
public drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved
pursuant to Section 23 of said Act.
(3) Direction pursuant to Section 27 of said Act for the issuance of a
permit for a building or structure not related to a street.
(4) Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, notice of
a hearing on the application for development shall include
reference to the request for a variance or direction for the issuance
of a permit, as the case may be.
I. To report on the Township Official Map pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
J. To report on amendments to Chapter 217, Zoning, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-64.
K. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the governing body for the aid and assistance of the
governing body or other agencies or officers.
A. Minor subdivisions. Minor subdivision approvals shall be granted or
denied within 45 days of the date of submission of a complete
application to the Planning Board or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Approval of a minor subdivision shall
expire 190 days from the date of Planning Board approval unless within
such period a plat in conformity with such approval and the provisions
of the Map Filing Law, or a deed clearly describing the approved minor
subdivision, is filed by the developer with the county recording officer,
the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal Tax Assessor. Any such plat
or deed must be signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning
Board before it will be accepted for filing by the county recording
officer.
B. Preliminary approval of major subdivisions. Upon submission of a
complete application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the Planning
Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the
date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Upon submission of a complete
application for a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the Planning Board
shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of
such submission or within such further time as may be consented to by
the developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have
granted preliminary approval for the subdivision.
§ 111-7 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-8
108:264
§ 111-9. Procedure for filing applications. [Amended 11-19-1984 by
Ord. No. 30-84]
C. Ancillary powers. Whenever the Planning Board is called upon to
exercise its ancillary powers before the granting of a variance as set
forth in § 111-7H, the Planning Board shall grant or deny approval of
the application within 95 days after submission by the developer of a
complete application or within such further time as may be consented
to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the
period prescribed shall constitute approval of the application, and a
certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning
Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant.
D. Final approval.
(1) Application for final subdivision of submission of a complete
application or within such further approval shall be granted or
denied within 45 days time as may be consented to by the
applicant.
(2) Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the
date of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall
have been duly filed by the developer with the county recording
officer. The Planning Board may, for good cause shown, extend the
period for filing for an additional period not to exceed 190 days
from the date of the signing of the plat.
A. Applications for development within the jurisdiction of the Planning
Board pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291, shall be filed with
the Secretary or Clerk of the Planning Board. The applicant shall file 15
copies of the plat for which review or approval is sought and four copies
of the application. At the time of filing the application, the applicant
shall also file all plot plans, maps or other papers required by said
application, by checklists adopted by ordinance and by any of the
provisions of this chapter or any rule of the Planning Board. The
applicant shall obtain all necessary forms from the Secretary or Clerk of
the Planning Board. The Secretary or Clerk of the Board shall inform
the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate applications and of the
regular meeting dates of the Board.
B. The following application forms and checklists are hereby established
and adopted, all as available on file in the office of the Township Clerk
for public examination and acquisition:41 [Amended 5-18-1987 by
Ord. No. 13-87; 8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 21-89; 2-19-1990 by Ord.
No. 5-90]
(1) Subdivision Application Form, Part A - General Information, Form
LS-A, Revised 4-1987.
41.Editor's Note: The application forms and checklists are included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 111-8 INSURANCE § 111-9
108:265
(2) Subdivision Application Form, Part B - Minor Approval Checklist,
Form LS-B1, Revised 10-1994. [Amended 8-19-1991 by Ord. No.
26-91; 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 23-94; 7-21-2003 by Ord. No.
23-03]
(3) Subdivision Application Form, Part B - Preliminary Approval
Checklist, Form LS-B2, Revised 10-1996. [Amended 8-19-1991
by Ord. No. 26-91; 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 23-94; 11-18-1996
by Ord. No. 30-96; 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 23-02; 7-21-2003 by
Ord. No. 23-03; 11-15-2004 by Ord. No. 25-04]
(4) Subdivision Application Form, Part B - Final Approval Checklist,
Form LS-B3, Revised 4-1992. [Amended 5-18-1992 by Ord. No.
6-92; 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 23-02; 7-21-2003 by Ord. No.
23-03; 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 14-04]
(5) Subdivision Application Form, Part C - Statement on Variances/
Waivers, Form LS-C, Revised 4-1989.
(6) Minor Site Plan Submission Checklist, Form 80-23.
(7) Site Plan Application Form, Part A - General Information, Form SPA,
Revised 6-1993. [Amended 6-21-1993 by Ord. No. 15-93;
7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 23-03]
(8) Site Plan Application Form, Part B - Preliminary Approval Checklist,
Form SP-B1, Revised 10-1996. [Amended 8-19-1991 by Ord. No.
26-91; 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 23-94; 11-18-1996 by Ord. No.
30-96; 7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 23-03; 11-15-2004 by Ord. No.
25-04]
(9) Site Plan Application Form, Part B - Final Approval Checklist, Form
SP-B2, Revised 4-1992. [Amended 5-18-1992 by Ord. No. 6-92;
6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 14-04]
(10) Site Plan Application Form, Part C - Statement on Variances/
Waivers, Form SP-C, Revised 4-1989.
(11) Affidavit of Compliance (Final Site Plans), Form SP-D, Revised
4-1989.
(12) Affidavit of Compliance (Final Subdivisions), Form LS-D, Revised
4-1989.
(13) Site Plan Application Form, Part B - Minor Checklist, Form SP-B3,
Revised 10-1996. [Added 6-21-1993 by Ord. No. 15-93;
amended 12-20-1993 by Ord. No. 33-93; 11-18-1996 by Ord.
No. 30-96; 7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 23-03]
(14) Affidavit in support of request of waiver of site plan/change of use,
Form WSP. [Added 5-16-1994 by Ord. No. 7-94; amended
11-20-2006 by Ord. No. 22-06]
§ 111-9 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-10
108:266
§ 111-10. Advisory Committee.
The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a Citizens' Advisory
Committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties, but
such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take other action
required of the Board. Such person or persons shall serve at the pleasure of
the Mayor.
§ 111-11. Environmental Commission.
Whenever the Environmental Commission has prepared and submitted to
the Planning Board an index of the natural resources of the municipality,
the Planning Board shall make available to the Environmental Commission
an informational copy of every application for development to the Planning
Board. Failure of the Planning Board to make such informational copy
available to the Environmental Commission shall not invalidate any hearing
or proceeding.
§ 111-12. Minor Subdivision Committee. [Added 8-18-1986 by Ord.
No. 26-86]
The Chairman may appoint a subdivision committee to be designated as
the "Minor Subdivision Committee," which may hear and determine
applications for minor subdivisions. It may grant approval or conditional
approval to developments which conform to the definition of "minor
subdivision" in Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land, § 175-25, Sketch plats.
The Committee shall consist of three Planning Board members. The
Committee may have two alternate members who must be regular or
alternate Planning Board members.
§ 111-13. Minor Site Plan Committee. [Added 7-19-1993 by Ord. No.
21-93]
The Chairman may appoint a Site Plan Committee to be designated as the
"Minor Site Plan Committee," which may hear and determine applications
for minor site plans. It may grant approval or conditional approval to
developments which conform to the definition of "minor site plan" in
Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land, § 175-25, Sketch plats. The Committee
shall consist of three Planning Board members. The Committee may have
two alternate members who must be regular or alternate Planning Board
members.
§ 111-10 INSURANCE § 111-13
108:267

ARTICLE II
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 111-14. Establishment; composition. [Amended 10-20-1980 by
Ord. No. 43-80]
A. A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq., as amended. Said Board shall consist of
seven regular members, who shall be residents of the Township of
Washington appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the governing
body of the Township of Washington. Said Board also may have not
more than two alternate members, who shall be residents of the
Township of Washington to be appointed in a similar manner. Alternate
members shall be designated at the time of appointment as "Alternate
No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms of all members, whether
regular of alternate, shall run from January 1 of the year of their
appointment. The terms of the members first appointed shall be so
determined that, to the greatest practicable extent, the expiration of
such terms shall be distributed, in the case of regular members, evenly
over the first four years after their appointment and, in the case of
alternate members, evenly over the first two years after their
appointment, provided that the initial term of no regular members shall
exceed four years and that the initial term of no alternate members
shall exceed two years. Thereafter, the term of each regular member
shall be four years, and the term of each alternate member shall be two
years. Nothing in this chapter shall, however, be construed to affect the
term of any present member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, all of
whom shall continue in office until the completion of the term for which
they were appointed.
B. No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, whether regular or
alternate, may hold any elective office or position under the
municipality.
C. A member, whether regular or alternate, may, after public hearing if he
requests it, be removed by the governing body for cause.
D. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
only for the unexpired term by appointment by the Mayor with the
consent of the governing body.
E. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
and business of the Zoning Board of Adjustment but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote
shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of
an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to
which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
§ 111-14 INSURANCE § 111-15
108:269
§ 111-15. Officers. [Amended 10-20-1980 by Ord. No. 43-80]
The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from its
members and select a Secretary who may or may not be a member of the
Board of Adjustment or a municipal employee.
§ 111-16. Board of Adjustment Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Attorney to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may annually appoint, fix the
compensation of or agree upon the rate of compensation of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment Attorney, who shall be an attorney other than the
Municipal Attorney.
§ 111-17. Experts and staff.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or contract for and fix
the compensation of such experts and other staff and services as it may
deem necessary. The Board shall not authorize expenditures which exceed,
exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the governing body
for its use.
§ 111-18. Rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 111-19. Expenditures.
The Board shall not authorize expenditures which exceed, exclusive of gifts
or grants, the amount appropriated by the Township of Washington for its
use.
§ 111-20. Powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. The powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq. and amendments and supplements
thereto and with the provisions of this chapter.
B. It is further the intent of this chapter to confer upon the Zoning Board
of Adjustment as full and complete powers as may lawfully be conferred
upon such Board, including, not by way of limitation, the authority in
connection with any case, action or proceeding before the Board, to
interpret and construe the provisions of this chapter, or any term,
clause, sentence or word hereof, and the Zoning Map, in accordance
with the general rules of construction applicable to legislative
enactments.
§ 111-15 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-20
108:270
§ 111-21. Appeals and applications.
C. The Board may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards, grant variances from the terms of this
chapter in accordance with the general or specific rules contained
herein and with the general rules hereby laid down that equity shall be
done in cases where the strict construction of the provisions of this
chapter would work undue hardship. The powers and duties of the
Board having been delegated to and imposed upon it by statute, the
Board shall in all cases follow the provisions applicable to it in said P.L.
1975, c. 291, or subsequent statutes in such case made and provided,
and it shall, from time to time, furnish to any person requesting the
same a copy of its rules and information as to how appeals or
applications may properly be filed with the Board for its decision
thereon.
A. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested
party affected by any decision of an administrative officer of the
municipality based on or made in the enforcement of Chapter 217,
Zoning, or the Official Map. Each appeal; shall be taken within the 65
days prescribed by the statute by filing a notice of appeal with the
officer from whom the appeal was taken, together with three copies of
said notice with the Secretary of the Board of Adjustment. Said notice
of appeal shall specify the grounds for said appeal. The officer from
whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.
B. Applications addressed to the original jurisdiction of the Board of
Adjustment without prior application to an administrative officer shall
be filed with the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Copies of
the application, together with all other information required by the
application, by checklist adopted by ordinance and by any of the
provisions of this chapter or any rule of the Board of Adjustment, shall
be filed with the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Three
copies of the application shall be filed. At the time of filing the appeal or
application, but in no event less than 10 days prior to the date set for
hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot plans, maps or other papers
required by virtue of any of the provisions of this chapter or any rule of
the Board of Adjustment. The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms
from the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Secretary of
the Board shall inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate
proceedings and of the regular meeting dates of the Board. [Amended
7-15-1985 by Ord. No. 27-85]
C. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect
of which the decision appealed from was made, unless the officer from
whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the
notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that, by reason of facts
stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent
§ 111-20 INSURANCE § 111-21
108:271
§ 111-22. Power to reverse or modify decisions.
In exercising the above-mentioned power, the Board of Adjustment may, in
conformity with the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291, or amendments thereto
or subsequent statutes applying, reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from
and make such other requirement, decision or determination as ought to be
made and, to that end, have all the powers of the administrative officer from
whom the appeal was taken.
§ 111-23. (Reserved)43
§ 111-24. Powers granted by law.
The Board of Adjustment shall have such powers as are granted by law to:
peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the
Board of Adjustment or by the Superior Court of New Jersey on
application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and
on due cause shown.
D. The following application forms and checklists be and are hereby
established and adopted: [Added 7-15-1985 by Ord. No. 27-85]
(1) Washington Township Board of Adjustment Variance Application
Form, Part A - General Information.
(2) Washington Township Board of Adjustment Variance Application
Form, Part B - Variance Checklist.42
A. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there
is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by an
administrative official or agency based on or made in the enforcement
of Chapter 217, Zoning.
B. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Chapter 217, Zoning, or for decisions upon other special questions
upon which such Board is authorized by Chapter 217, Zoning, to pass.
C. Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a
specific piece of property or by reason of exceptional topographic
conditions or by reason of other extraordinary and exceptional
topographic conditions or by reason of other extraordinary and
exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property the strict
application of any regulation in Chapter 217, Zoning, would result in
peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and
42.Editor's Note: The Variance Application Forms, Part A and Part B, is included at the end of
this chapter.
43.Editor’s Note: Former § 111-23, Expiration of variance, was repealed 4-18-2011 by Ord.
No. 03-11.
§ 111-21 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-24
108:272
§ 111-25. Additional powers.
undue hardship upon, the owner of such property; grant upon an
application or an appeal relating to such property a variance from such
strict application so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship; provided,
however, that no variance shall be granted under this subsection to
allow a structure or use in a district restricted against such structure
or use, and further provided that the proposed development does not
require approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or
conditional use in conjunction with which the Planning Board shall
review a request for a variance pursuant to Subsection 47a of the
Municipal Land Use Law of 1975, P.L. 1975, c. 291.
D. Grant a variance to allow a structure or use in a district restricted
against such structure or use in particular cases and for special
reasons, but only by the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the full
authorized membership of the Board. (Five votes constitutes 2/3.)
(1) No variance or other relief may be granted under the provisions of
this chapter unless such variance or other relief can be granted
without substantial detriment to the public good and will not
substantially impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and
Chapter 217, Zoning. Any application under any subsection of this
chapter may be referred to any appropriate person or agency,
including the Planning Board, for its report, provided that such
reference shall not extend the period of time within which the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in addition to the powers
specified in § 111-24, have the power given by law to:
(1) Direct the issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved on the
Official Map.
(2) Direct the issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a
building or structure not related to a street.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to the same
extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board,
subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to Article 6 of P.L. 1975, c.
291, or conditional use approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67,
whenever the Board is reviewing an application for approval of a use
variance pursuant to § 111-24D of this chapter.
§ 111-24 INSURANCE § 111-26
108:273
§ 111-26. Time for decision. [Amended 7-15-1985 by Ord. No.
27-85]
The Board of Adjustment shall render its decision not later than 120 days
from the date of submission of the complete application to the Board
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 and this chapter.
§ 111-26 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-26
108:274
ARTICLE III
Provisions Applicable to both the Planning Board and the Zoning
Board of Adjustment
§ 111-27. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act
on any matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from
acting on a particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board
on the hearing of such matter nor participate in any discussion or decision
relating thereto.
§ 111-28. Meetings.
§ 111-29. Minutes.
The minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall
include the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board
and of the persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board,
the findings, if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall
thereafter be made available for public inspection during normal business
hours at the office of the Municipal Clerk. Any interested party shall have
the right to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any
legal proceeding concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such
interested party may be charged a fee for the reproduction of the minutes
for his use as provided for in the rules of the Board.
§ 111-30. Fees and deposits. [Amended 7-20-1981 by Ord. No.
29-81; 12-17-1984 by Ord. No. 34-84]
A. Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall be scheduled no less often than once a month and any meeting so
scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of
applications for development to process.
B. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on
the request of any two Board members, which meeting shall be held on
notice to its members and the public in accordance with all applicable
legal requirements.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
D. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum except as
otherwise required by any provision of P.L. 1975, c. 291.
E. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, P.L. 1975, c. 231,
N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 111-27 INSURANCE § 111-30
108:275
A. Fees and deposits for variance applications or the rendering of any
service by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, which is
not otherwise provided by ordinance, shall be as follows: [Amended
7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 12-92]
(1) An application fee of $500 for administration and overhead.
[Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 23-02]
(2) A review fee deposit of $500 to cover the cost of engineering, legal
and professional planner review and documentation fees and
disbursements.
B. Tabulation and appeal of review fees. [Amended 7-21-1986 by Ord.
No. 23-86; 2-19-1996 by Ord. No. 4-96]
(1) The Chief Financial Officer shall tabulate the costs of the Engineer,
Planner and Attorneys, their staffs and any outside consultants
required when an application is of a nature beyond the scope of the
expertise of the professionals normally utilized by the Township, for
a proper review and documentation pursuant to vouchers
submitted by the professionals, identifying the personnel
performing the service, and stating the date the services were
performed, the hours spent to one-fourth-hour increments, the
hourly rate and the expenses incurred. All charges and fees shall be
established by resolution of the governing body. Expenses shall be
actual out-of-pocket expenses of any such professionals or
consultants, including normal and typical expenses incurred in
processing applications. Vouchers shall be submitted monthly to
the Chief Financial Officer with a copy to the developer. These costs
shall be deducted from the engineering/planning/legal review fee
escrow deposit and paid to the professionals by the Chief Financial
Officer. Where the reasonable and necessary review costs exceed
or are anticipated to exceed the review fee deposit, the developer
shall pay the additional amount prior to the signing of any plat or
certificate of occupancy. Failure to remit the additional required
deposit within 15 days of the request shall render the application
incomplete, and no further proceedings or action shall be taken by
the Planning Board/Zoning Board of Adjustment until after
compliance.
(2) The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare and send to the developer
a statement which shall include an accounting of funds listing all
deposits, interest earnings, disbursements and the cumulative
balance of the escrow account. This statement shall be provided
quarterly if the monthly charges are $1,000 or less, or monthly if
the monthly charges exceed $1,000.
(3) After the final plat or certificate of occupancy has been signed, the
developer shall send written notice, by certified mail, to the Chief
Financial Officer, the Planning Board/Zoning Board of Adjustment,
the Township Engineer and other relevant professional that the
§ 111-30 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-30
108:276
§ 111-31. Hearings.
application is completed. After receipt of such notice, the Engineer
and/or other professional shall submit a final voucher to the Chief
Financial Officer within 30 days with a copy to the developer.
The Chief Financial Officer shall render a written final accounting
to the developer on the status of the escrow within 45 days of
receipt of the final bill, together with any balance remaining in
the account, including interest in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.1.
(4) Within 15 days of the tabulation of review costs and notification of
the developer by the Chief Financial Officer, the developer shall
have the right to appeal said tabulation by so notifying the
Township Committee, in writing, with copies to the Chief Financial
Officer, the Planning Board/Zoning Board of Adjustment and any
relevant professional, provided that any additional fees or amounts
required by the Planning Board/Zoning Board of Adjustment to be
paid prior to the signing of any plat or certificate of occupancy must
be paid by the developer prior to the bringing of any such appeal.
Upon receipt of any such appeal, the Planning Board/Zoning Board
of Adjustment shall review the same and make a recommendation
thereon to the Township Committee within 45 days. The Township
Committee shall then decide the proper review fee to be charged,
based upon information provided by both the developer and the
Planning Board/Zoning Board of Adjustment. If the matter is not
resolved to the satisfaction of the developer, the developer may
appeal to the County Construction Board of Appeals, established
under P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127), any charge to an
escrow account or a deposit by any municipal professional or
consultant pursuant to the procedure set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.2.
C. Simultaneous applications. If two or more applications are submitted
for the same development, e.g., use variance and minor subdivision, the
fee to be paid will be the sum of such fees as set forth in the applicable
section of the Township ordinances. The deposit required shall be the
highest of the review deposits established by the applicable section of
the Township ordinances.
D. Miscellaneous fees. [Added 12-16-2002 by Ord. No. 44-02]
(1) A fee of $50 shall be payable for a letter or certification from any
municipal official, required pursuant to a statute or regulation of
the State of New Jersey or other governmental agency, or
requested by any individual with regard to the status of a
development approval.
A. Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall make
rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies, which rules
§ 111-30 INSURANCE § 111-31
108:277
§ 111-32. Notice requirements for hearing.
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. or pursuant to the determination of the
municipal agency in question, the applicant shall give notice thereof as
follows:
shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
or of this chapter.
B. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have the power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas
to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties.
The provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law, P.L.
1953, c. 38 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
C. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and the number of witnesses.
D. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
E. Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographic, mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof on request to any interested party at his expense.
A. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of
the municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
B. Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on the
current tax duplicate or duplicates located within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing and
whether located within or without the municipality in which applicant's
land is located. Such notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on
the owner as shown on said current tax duplicate or his agent in charge
of the property or by mailing a copy thereof, by certified mail or
registered mail, to the property owner at his address as shown on said
current tax duplicate. A return receipt is not required. Notice to a
partnership owner may be made by service upon any partner. Notice to
a corporate owner may be made by service upon its president, a vice
president, secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by
law to accept service on behalf of the corporation.
C. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be
§ 111-31 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-32
108:278
§ 111-33. List of property owners furnished.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, the Township Clerk shall,
within seven days after receipt of a request therefor and upon receipt
of payment of a fee of $10, make and certify a list from the current tax
duplicate of names and addresses of owners to whom the application is
required to give notice pursuant to § 111-32B.
given, by personal service or certified mail, to the Clerk of such
municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the notice required to
be given pursuant to Subsection B of this section to the owners of lands
in such adjoining municipality which are located within 200 feet of the
subject premises.
D. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown on
the Official County Map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining other
county land or situate within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
E. Notice shall be given, by personal service or certified mail, to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
F. Notice shall be given, by personal service or certified mail, to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to Section 6b of
P.L. 1975, c. 291.
G. All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at least
ten days prior to the date fixed for hearing and the applicant shall file
an affidavit of proof of service with the Board holding the hearing on the
application for development.
H. Any notice made by certified or registered mail as hereinabove required
shall be deemed complete upon mailing in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
I. Form of notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of
this chapter shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the
nature of the matters to be considered and identification of the property
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to
lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the
Municipal Tax Assessor's office and the location and times at which any
maps and documents for which approval is sought are available as
required by law.
J. Notice and public hearing shall not be required for minor subdivisions
unless relief is requested pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60.
§ 111-32 INSURANCE § 111-34
108:279
§ 111-34. Decisions.
§ 111-35. Publication of decision. [Amended 10-20-1980 by Ord. No.
44-80]
§ 111-36. Payment of taxes.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65,
every application for development submitted to the Planning Board or to
the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no
taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the
property which is the subject of such application, or, if it is shown that
taxes or assessments are delinquent on said property, any approvals or
other relief granted by either Board shall be conditioned upon either the
prompt payment of such taxes or assessments or the making of adequate
provision for the payment thereof in such a manner that the municipality
will be adequately protected.
A. Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth in
writing as a resolution of the Board which shall include findings of fact
and legal conclusions based thereon.
B. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of decision to the applicant or, if represented, then to his attorney,
without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed to
all persons who have requested it and who have paid the fee prescribed
by the Board for such service. A copy of the decision shall also be filed
in the office of the Municipal Clerk, who shall make a copy of such filed
decision available to any interested party upon payment of a fee
calculated in the same manner as those established for copies of other
public documents in the municipality.
A. A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality.
B. In all Planning Board applications, such publication shall be arranged
by the applicant and paid for by the applicant within 10 days of said
decision.
C. In all Zoning Board of Adjustment applications, such publication shall
be arranged by the applicant and paid for by the applicant within 10
days of said decision. [Amended 7-15-1985 by Ord. No. 27-85]
D. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as preventing the Planning
Board from arranging such publication if it so decides, in which case it
shall charge the applicant $10, plus the costs of publication.
§ 111-34 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-36
108:280
ARTICLE IV
Appeals
§ 111-37. Appeals to Zoning Board of Adjustment.
An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by any
interested party affected by any decision of the administrative officer of the
municipality based on or made in the enforcement of Chapter 217, Zoning,
or the Official Map. Such appeal shall be taken within 65 days by filing a
notice of appeal in the manner set forth in § 111-20A and in accordance with
the provisions of Article 9 of the Municipal Land Use Law of 1975.
§ 111-38. Appeals from Zoning Board of Adjustment to governing
body.
An appeal from any decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment granting a
use variance pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d may be taken
to the governing body, provided that such appeal shall be made within 10
days of the date of the publication of such final decision of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment.
§ 111-37 INSURANCE § 111-38
108:281

ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 111-39. Definitions.
Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in P.L. 1975, c. 291,
such term is intended to have the meaning set forth in the definition of such
term found in said statute, unless a contrary intention is clearly expressed
from the context of this chapter.44
§ 111-40. Repealer.
All sections of Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, Chapter 175, Subdivision of
Land and Chapter 217, Zoning, or any other ordinance of the Township
of Washington which contains provisions contrary to the provisions of this
chapter shall be and are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
§ 111-41. Ordinances continued.
Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291, Section 81, the substantive
provisions of Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, Chapter 175, Subdivision of
Land and Chapter 217, Zoning,45 of the Township of Washington and the
development regulations set forth therein shall continue in full force and
effect and shall be read in conjunction with this chapter.
§ 111-42. Pending applications.
All applications for development filed prior to the effective date of this
chapter may be continued, but any appeals arising out of decisions made on
any such application shall be governed by the provisions of Article IV.
§ 111-43. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Use Procedures
Ordinance of the Township of Washington."
§ 111-44. Copy to be filed with County Planning Board.
Immediately upon adoption of this chapter, the Municipal Clerk shall file a
copy of this chapter with the County Planning Board as required by law.
The Clerk shall also file with said County Planning Board copies of all
other ordinances of the municipality relating to land use, such as Chapter
159, Site Plan Review, Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land and Chapter 217,
Zoning.
44.Editor's Note: See also Article VI of this chapter.
45.Editor's Note: See also Article VI of this chapter.
§ 111-39 INSURANCE § 111-44
108:283

ARTICLE VI
Definitions
[Added 10-15-1990 by Ord. No. 34-90]
§ 111-45. Word usage.
Unless the context otherwise indicates, the following definitions shall be
used in the interpretation and construction of the chapter:
§ 111-46. Terms defined.
Certain words and phrases used in the chapter are defined for the purpose
hereof as follows:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A self-contained residential dwelling unit with
a kitchen, sanitary facilities, sleeping quarters and a private entrance,
which is created within an existing home or through the conversion of an
existing attached accessory structure on the same site or by an addition
to an existing home or accessory building.[Added 3-18-1996 by Ord. No.
6-96]
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure subordinate to the
principal use of a building or structure on the same zone lot and serving a
purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal building. Where
an accessory building is attached in a substantial manner, by a wall or roof,
to a principal building or structure, it shall be considered a part of said
principal structure or roof.
ACRE — Forty-three thousand five hundred sixty square feet.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Zoning Officer.
ADULT DAY-CARE FACILITY — A facility in which adults may engage in
recreational, educational and social activities on a daily basis. Such a
facility may include meal service for patrons, although no overnight
A. Words used in the present tense include the future.
B. The singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular.
C. The word "person" includes the corporation as well as an individual.
D. The word "occupied" includes the words "designed or intended to be
occupied."
E. The word "used" shall include the words "arranged, designed,
constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased or intended to be used."
F. The word "abut" shall include the words "directly across from,"
"adjacent" and "next to."
G. The word "shall" is mandatory and not optional, and the word "may"
indicates a permissive action.
§ 111-45 INSURANCE § 111-46
108:285
visitations or residential use is permitted. [Added 2-21-2000 by Ord. No.
3-00]
AFFORDABLE — Having a sales price or rent within the means of a low- or
moderate-income household as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4, or for housing
developed in accordance with the third-round rules of the New Jersey
Council on Affordable Housing, as defined by N.J.A.C. 5:94-7.[Added
7-18-2005 by Ord. No. 26-05; amended 9-19-2005 by Ord. No. 35-05]
AGENT — One or more persons designated to represent the applicant
before the Planning Board. All agents of corporations representing said
corporation before the Planning Board shall be attorneys licensed to
practice in the State of New Jersey.
AGRICULTURE — [Amended 7-18-1994 by Ord. No. 15-94]
ALLEY — A minor way which is used primarily for vehicular service access
to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
AMUSEMENT ARCADE — A place where the floor area occupied and
devoted to coin-operated amusement devices exceeds 15% or 300 square
feet, whichever is less, of the floor area of the structure housing the use
which is open to the public. The floor area devoted to the amusement
devices shall include the area occupied by the device in an area sufficient
to accommodate players and bystanders, but in no event shall this area be
less than 25 square feet per device. Rest rooms shall not be included in
computing the floor area of the structure which is open to the public.
ANIMAL FEEDLOT OPERATIONS — Any structure, pen or corral whose
primary use is to maintain cattle, horses, sheep, goats or swine in close
quarters for the purpose of fattening such livestock for final shipment to
market. [Added 6-21-1993 by Ord. No. 17-93]
COMMERCIAL AGRICULTURE — - The production, principally for the
sale to others, of plants, animals or their products, including but not
limited to forage, grain and feed crops; dairy animals and dairy
products; livestock, including beef cattle, poultry, sheep, swine, horses,
ponies, mules and goats, including the breeding and grazing of all
such animals; bees and apiary products; fruits of all kind, including
grapes, nuts and berries; vegetables; and nursery, floral, ornamental
and greenhouse products. Commercial agriculture does not include
intensive poultry or hog farming or extensive animal feedlot operations.
A.
HOME AGRICULTURE — - The production, principally for home use or
consumption, of plants, animals or their products and for sale to others
where such sales are incidental, including but not limited to gardening,
fruit production and poultry and livestock products for household use
only.
B.
The extraction of minerals, ores, water, etc., for sale or use off site
shall not be considered to be agriculture. Commercial composting of
vegetative materials and exporting the finished product off site shall not
be considered to be agriculture under this definition.
C.
§ 111-46 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-46
108:286
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — Any establishment where four or more animals are
given medical or surgical treatment. Use as a kennel shall be limited to
short-term boarding and shall be incidental to such hospital use.
ANTENNA, DISH-TYPE — An apparatus not exceeding 12 feet in diameter
or 113 square feet of reflector area designed for the purpose of receiving,
for private noncommercial use only, television, radio, microwave or other
similar signals from a satellite.
APARTMENT — One or more rooms with private bath and kitchen facilities
comprising an independent self-contained dwelling unit occupied by a
single family in a building containing more than one dwelling unit.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to Section 25
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34) or Section 27 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36) of the Municipal
Land Use Law.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board of the municipality, unless
a different agency is designated by ordinance.
AREA OF PROTECTION — That portion of the property in front of the
proposed development area which naturally screens the development
improvements from the public traveled way or public area or public open
space opposite the proposed development area.[Added 12-19-2005 by
Ord. No. 44-05]
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility which is licensed by the New
Jersey Department of Health to provide apartment-style housing and
congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services are available
when needed for four or more adult persons, age 55 years and older,
unrelated to the proprietor. Apartment units offer, at a minimum, one
unfurnished room, a private bathroom and a kitchenette and a lockable door
on the unit entrance. [Added 2-21-2000 by Ord. No. 3-00]
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION OR GASOLINE STATION — A place
where gasoline, kerosene or any other motor fuel or lubricating oil or grease
for operating motor vehicles is offered for sale to the public and deliveries
are made directly into motor vehicles, including the sale of accessories,
greasing, oiling and light motor service on the premises.
BASEMENT — A story, partly below grade level, having 1/2 or more of
its floor-to-ceiling height above the average level of the adjoining ground.
A basement shall be counted as a story if used for business or dwelling
purposes.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST INN — A private single-family residence which
provides overnight lodging for transient guests and provides breakfast for
registered guests in the forenoon of each day.[Added 11-18-1991 by Ord.
No. 30-91]
§ 111-46 INSURANCE § 111-46
108:287
BEDROOM — A private room planned and intended for sleeping, separable
from other rooms by a door.[Added 6-21-1993 by Ord. No. 17-93]
BLOCK — The area bounded by one or more streets or a municipal
boundary of sufficient size to accommodate a lot or lots of the minimum size
required in Chapter XVII, Zoning, and as further specified herein.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Board established pursuant to Chapter
217, Zoning, Article XI, Zoning Board of Adjustment.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
BUILDING COVERAGE — That area of a lot which is occupied by a building
or structure, but not including uncovered walkways, steps, patios or a
parking lot or area or any similar improvements thereto.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the average of the
finished grade measured at the corners of a building to the highest point of
the roof, provided that the maximum height at any corner may not exceed
the average height by more than 20%, but not including chimneys, spires,
towers, silos, elevators, satellite dishes, tanks, antennas, air-conditioning
equipment and similar projections that are usual and customary
appurtenances to the subject building; provided, however, that such
projections shall not cover more than 5% of the roof area, nor extend more
than 10 feet beyond the maximum permitted height in the zone and, where
appropriate, shall be shielded by a parapet wall. [Amended 8-21-1995 by
Ord. No. 27-95]
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A structure in which is conducted the principal
use of the site on which it is situated.
BUY DOWN — Paying down the cost of market-rate units and offering
them in sound condition at affordable prices to low- and moderate-income
households to address all or a portion of the municipal share of affordable
housing.[Added 2-19-2007 by Ord. No. 6-07]
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — A governmental acquisition of real property or
major construction project.
CARPORT — A roofed structure providing space for the parking of motor
vehicles and enclosed on not more than three sides.
CATEGORY ONE WATERS or C1 — Those waters designated in N.J.A.C.
7:9B-1.15.[Added 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 43-05]
CELLAR — A story, partly above grade level, having more than 1/2 of its
floor-to-ceiling height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A
cellar shall not be used as a dwelling unit.
CENTRAL SEWAGE TREATMENT FACILITY — A public sewer system or
community sewer system which satisfies local and state codes and
regulations.[Added 6-21-1993 by Ord. No. 17-93]
§ 111-46 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-46
108:288
CENTRAL WATER FACILITY — A public water system or community water
system which satisfies local and state codes and regulations.[Added
6-21-1993 by Ord. No. 17-93]
CHANGE OF USE — Any alteration, substitution, conversion or
intensification of a use on any property that will require greater parking
requirements as prescribed by § 159-39 of the code of the Township of
Washington.[Added 7-19-1999 by Ord. No. 21-99]
CHILD-CARE CENTER — An establishment licensed and approved by the
Division of Youth and Family Services maintained for the care, development
or supervision of six or more children under six years of age who attend for
less than 24 hours per day.[Added 11-18-1991 by Ord. No. 31-1991]
CIRCULATION — Systems, structures and physical improvements for the
movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage or power by such means
as streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers, airways, pipes and
conduits, and the handling of people and goods by such means as terminals,
stations, warehouses and other storage buildings or transshipment points.
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any amusement machine or
device operated by means of the insertion of a coin, token or similar object
for the purpose of amusement or skill and for the playing of which a fee
is charged. Specifically included within this definition are pinball machines
and electronic games.
COLLOCATION — Use of a common wireless telecommunications tower or
a common site by two or more wireless license holders or by one wireless
license holder for more than one type of communications technology and/or
placement of a wireless telecommunications tower on a structure owned or
operated by a utility or other public entity.[Added 3-15-1999 by Ord. No.
4-99]
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES — Includes, but shall not be limited to, tractors,
backhoes, front-end loaders, hauling trailers, trucks, buses, school buses
and the like. Pickup trucks having a maximum carrying capacity of one
ton and camping or other recreational vehicles for the personal use of the
property owner shall not be included.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to a
site designated as a development and designed and intended for the use
or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Common open
space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as
are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents and
owners of the development.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as
contained in this chapter and upon the issuance of an authorization therefor
by the Planning Board.
CONFERENCE CENTER — A building or combination of buildings with
meeting rooms, dining facilities and guest rooms and accessory uses such
§ 111-46 INSURANCE § 111-46
108:289
as recreation areas, pools and spas, in which the guest rooms are occupied
only by those who are attending the conference(s) or using the meeting
rooms.[Added 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 5-99]
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — The municipal official specified in the
Building Code46 and designated as such by the governing body previously
known as the "Building Inspector."
CONTIGUOUS — Next to, abutting or touching and having a boundary,
or portion thereof, which is coterminus.[Added 6-21-1993 by Ord. No.
17-93]
CONVENTIONAL — Development other than planned development.
COUNTY MASTER PLAN — A composite of the Master Plan for the physical
development of the county in which the Township is located, with the
accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive and explanatory matter
adopted by the County Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-2.and
40:27-4.County Planning Board. The Planning Board of the county in which
the land or development is located.
COURT — Any open unoccupied area which is bounded by three or more
attached building walls.
CUL-DE-SAC or DEAD-END STREET — A street or portion of a street in
which accessibility is limited to only one ingress and egress.
CUTOFF LIGHT FIXTURE — A light fixture with cutoff optics that allows
no direct light emissions above a vertical cutoff angle of 80° above nadir
(straight down at perfect vertical), through the light fixture's lowest light
emitting part when the mounting height is 16 feet or less. Any structural
part of the light fixture providing this cutoff angle must be permanently
affixed.[Added 8-19-2002 by Ord. No. 32-02]
DAYS — Calendar days.
DENSITY, MAXIMUM GROSS — The total number of dwelling units on a
tract divided by the total area of the tract, except as noted in Chapter 217,
Zoning, § 217-61D(1)(a) and (b). The resulting ratio is expressed as dwelling
units per acre (du/ac).
DENSITY, NET — The total number of dwelling units within a designated
residential land use parcel divided by the net land area of the designated
residential land use parcel. The net land area is the total land area, less
major recreational facilities, streets and public facilities within the parcel.
The resulting ratio is expressed as dwelling units per acre (du/ac).
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
46.Editor's Note: See Chapter 56, Article II, Uniform Construction Codes.
§ 111-46 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-46
108:290
relocation or enlargement of any use or change in the use of any building
or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.[Amended 7-18-2005 by Ord. No. 26-05; 9-19-2005 by
Ord. No. 35-05]
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — Chapter 217, Zoning, Chapter 175,
Subdivision and Land Development, Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, Official
Map Ordinance, this chapter or other Township regulation of the use and
development of land, or amendments thereto.
DIRECT GLARE SOURCE — Any direct glare source visible above a height
of five feet at the the subject property line.[Added 8-19-2002 by Ord. No.
32-02]
DISTURBANCE OF STEEP SLOPES — Any physical activity that results
in removal of vegetation, modification of topography by cutting or filling,
stripping of topsoil and/or placing of physical structures or improvements
thereon.[Added 8-21-1995 by Ord. No. 29-95]
DIVISION — The Division of State and Regional Planning in the Department
of Community Affairs.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means, and includes control of runoff during and
after construction or development to minimize erosion and sedimentation,
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges, to
induce water recharge into the ground where practical, to lessen nonpoint
pollution and to maintain the integrity of stream channels for their
biological functions as well as for drainage, and the means necessary for
water supply preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — A building where food and/or beverages are
sold in a form ready for consumption and where all or a portion of the
consumption of the same takes place or is designed to take place outside
the confines of the building but on the building lot.
DWELLING — A structure or portion thereof which is used exclusively for
human habitation.
DWELLING, ATTACHED — A one-family dwelling attached to two or more
one-family dwellings by common vertical walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED — A dwelling which is completely surrounded by
permanent open spaces and which is not a trailer or mobile home.[Added
6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 09-14]
DWELLING, DUPLEX — A structure on a single lot containing two dwelling
units, each of which is totally separated from the other by an unpierced wall
extending from ground to roof or an unpierced ceiling and floor extending
from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a common stairwell exterior
to both dwelling units.
§ 111-46 INSURANCE § 111-46
108:291
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building occupied or intended for
occupancy as separate living quarters for more than two families or more
than two households, with direct access from the outside for each family
or household or through a common hall, and further provided that separate
cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities are provided for the exclusive use
of the occupants of each dwelling unit. Certain features of a multiple-family
dwelling may be provided in common, such as off-street parking, yards and
open space. Multiple-family dwellings may include buildings in cooperative
or leasehold ownership or in condominium ownership.
DWELLING, PATIO HOUSE — A one-family dwelling on a separate lot with
open space setbacks on three sides and with a court (also known as "zerolot-
line homes").
DWELLING, QUADRUPLEX — Four attached dwellings in one structure in
which each unit has two open space exposures and shares one or two walls
with adjoining unit or units.
DWELLING, SEMIDETACHED — A one-family dwelling attached to one
other one-family dwelling by a common vertical wall, and each dwelling is
located on a separate lot.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A building occupied or intended for
occupancy exclusively for one family or one household with direct access
from the outside and further provided with cooking, sleeping and sanitary
facilities for the exclusive use of the occupants of the unit and which is not
a trailer or mobile home.[Added 6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 09-14]
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A dwelling which is designed
for and occupied by not more than one family and surrounded by open space
or yards and which is not attached to any other dwelling by any means.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A one-family dwelling in a row of at least
three such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the
outside, no unit is located over another unit and each unit is separated from
any other unit by one or more common fire-resistant walls.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms occupied or intended for
occupancy as separate living quarters by one family or household and for
which separate cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities are provided within
the dwelling for the exclusive use of the occupants thereof.
DWELLING UNITS, MARKET-RATE — Housing units not restricted to lowand
moderate-income households that may sell at any price determined by
a willing seller and a willing buyer.[Added 7-18-2005 by Ord. No. 26-05;
amended 9-19-2005 by Ord. No. 35-05]
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — A Township advisory body created
pursuant to P.L. 1968, c. 245 (N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1.et seq.).
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice and gravity.
ESSENTIAL SERVICE — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies
§ 111-46 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-46
108:292
of underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water storage
or transmission systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers,
pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals,
light stations, telephone lines, hydrants, tanks and other similar equipment
and accessories herewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of
adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies or for the public health, safety or general welfare. Requirements
for underground utilities shall be subject to the requirements of the Public
Utility Commission, as well as other municipal ordinances, where
appropriate. This term does not include antennas or towers for
communications, such as cellular telephones, radios, beepers or the like,
unless it is owned and operated exclusively by a municipal or other
government agency.[Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 10-92; 8-21-1995
by Ord. No. 27-95]
FAMILY — Any number of persons related by blood, marriage or adoption or
unrelated persons living together as a single housekeeping unit and using
certain rooms and housekeeping facilities in common. A family also includes
foster children placed with a family in such dwelling by the Division of Youth
and Family Service or a duly incorporated child-care agency.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — Any private residence in which child care
services are regularly provided to no less than three and no more than
five children for no less than 15 hours per week. A child being cared for
under the following circumstances is not included in the total number of
children receiving child care services:[Added 11-18-1991 by Ord. No.
31-91; amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 9-92]
FARM — An area of land made up of single or multiple joining or nonjoining
parcels which is organized as a management unit actively devoted to
agricultural or horticultural use, including but not limited to cropland,
pasture, idle or fallow land, woodland, wetlands, farm ponds, farm roads
and under-farm buildings and other enclosures related to agricultural
pursuits, which occupies no fewer than five acres, exclusive of the land upon
which the farm house is located and such additional land as may actually be
used in connection with the farmhouse, as provided by N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.2,
54:4-23.4, 54:4-23.5 and 54:4-23.11.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Planning Board taken on
a preliminary approved major subdivision or site plan after all conditions,
engineering plans and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled
and the required improvements have been installed or guaranties properly
posted for their completion, or approval conditioned upon the posting of
such guaranties.
A. The child being cared for is legally related to the provider; or
The child is being cared for as part of a cooperative agreement between
parents for the care of their children by one or more of the parents,
where no payment for the care is being provided.
B.
§ 111-46 INSURANCE § 111-46
108:293
FLAG LOT — A lot in the shape of a flag or other configuration contiguous to
the top or side of a mast. The lot area, exclusive of the mast, shall conform
to the minimum lot size of its zone, but not lot frontage.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of a building measured from the exterior walls in a building. Floor area shall
not include areas devoted to mechanical equipment serving the building,
areas devoted exclusively to off-street parking and loading space for motor
vehicles and to any space where the floor-to-ceiling height shall be less than
seven feet.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The ratio of total floor area to lot area.
FLY ASH — Particles of airborne matter, not including process material,
resulting from the combination of solid fuel, such as coal or wood.
FOOTCANDLE (fc) — A unit of illuminance on a surface one square foot in
area onto which there is a uniform flux of one lumen.[Added 8-19-2002 by
Ord. No. 32-02]
FOOTLAMBERT (fL) — A unit of luminance of a surface reflecting or
emitting light at the rate of one lumen per square foot. The average
luminance of any reflecting surface in footlamberts is the product of the
illuminance in footcandles striking the surface times the reflectance of the
surface.[Added 8-19-2002 by Ord. No. 32-02]
FORESTRY — The management of timber tracts, tree farms, forest
nurseries, the harvesting of forest products or the performance of forest
services.[Added 6-21-1993 by Ord. No. 17-93]
GARAGE — A detached building or structure containing no more than three
bays used for the storage of vehicles maintained for the resident occupant
of the premises, and no service is rendered to the public or business
conducted therein. No door providing access to a garage bay shall exceed
eight feet in height.[Amended 6-18-2001 by Ord. No. 14-01; 4-21-2008
by Ord. No. 02-08]
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A comprehensive plan for the
development of a planned development, as provided in P.L. 1987, c. 129
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.2).
GEOLOGIC HAZARDS — Solution channels, collapse sinkholes, subsidence
sinkholes, disappearing streams, closed depressions and caves.47[Added
4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 4-98]
GLARE — The sensation produced by luminance within the visual field that
is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted
to cause annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual performance and
visibility.[Added 8-19-2002 by Ord. No. 32-02]
GOLF COURSE — A tract of land improved with at least 18 holes for playing
the game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways and hazards,
practice facilities and a clubhouse (which may include such accessory uses
47.Editor's Note: The Phase I Geologic Investigation Checklist is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 111-46 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-46
108:294
as dining facilities, a bar with liquor license, if qualified, a pro shop, kitchen,
locker rooms, an exercise room, racquet courts and administrative offices,
but not a swimming pool) and customary accessory buildings and structures
for the maintenance and operation of the facility.[Added 3-20-2000 by
Ord. No. 2-00]
GOVERNING BODY — The Township Committee of Washington Township.
GREENHOUSE — A building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass
or other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature
and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of delicate or out-ofseason
plants for subsequent sale or for personal enjoyment. See
"nursery."[Added 6-21-1993 by Ord. No. 17-93]
HISTORIC BUILDING — Any building which has been formally designated
in the Master Plan as being of historical, archaeological, cultural, scenic or
architectural significance.[Added 4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 7-98]
HISTORIC DISTRICT — One or more historic sites and intervening or
surrounding property significantly affecting or affected by the quality and
character of the historic site or sites.
HISTORIC INN — An historic building which provides overnight lodging for
transient guests which may include, in a nonresidential zone only, public
dining facilities for guests and other patrons.[Added 4-20-1998 by Ord.
No. 7-98]
HISTORIC SITE — Any real property, man-made structure, natural object
or configuration or any portion or group of the foregoing which have been
formally designated in the Master Plan as being of historical,
archaeological, cultural, scenic or architectural significance.
HOME OCCUPATION — Commercial endeavors than are located on the
same lot as residential uses and are compatible with the property and
neighborhood in which they are located and do not impair the underlying
use of the property and neighborhood, as defined by the restrictions in
Chapter 217, Zoning, § 217-41A(11).[Amended 4-17-1995 by Ord. No.
12-95]
HORTICULTURAL USES — The cultivation of flowers, fruits, vegetables or
ornamental plants.[Added 6-21-1993 by Ord. No. 17-93]
HOTEL, MOTOR HOTEL OR MOTEL — A building designed for occupancy
as a temporary residence of one or more persons who are lodged with or
without meals.
HOUSEHOLD — A family or unrelated persons living together as a single
housekeeping unit.
HOUSE OF WORSHIP — A building, together with its accessory buildings
and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which
building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained
and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public
worship.[Amended 7-15-1991 by Ord. No. 19-91]
§ 111-46 INSURANCE § 111-46
108:295
IESNA — Illuminating Engineering Society of North America. An
organization that recommends standards for the lighting industry.[Added
8-19-2002 by Ord. No. 32-02]
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any structure, surface or improvements that
reduces or prevents absorption of stormwater into land, including, but
not limited to, porous paving, paver blocks, gravel, crushed stone, decks,
patios, elevated structures, and other similar structures, surfaces or
improvements.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 03-11]
IMPROVABLE LOT AREA — A contiguous area located on a residential
lot within the minimum required setbacks that is free of areas of existing
conservation easements, bodies of water, area of floodplains, wetlands,
stream, corridor and open water buffers; areas of slopes 20% and greater
as measured and calculated between two-foot-contour intervals, NJDEP
required wetland transition areas; and Highlands Special Resource
Protection Areas, except that the improvable lot area may contain a total of
1,000 square feet of area of slopes 20% and greater.[Added 12-18-1995
by Ord. No. 40-95; amended 7-18-2005 by Ord. No. 27-05; 9-19-2005
by Ord. No. 36-05; 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 43-05; 7-17-2006 by Ord.
No. 15-06]
IMPROVED LOT COVERAGE — That portion of one or more than one
lot which is improved with impervious surfaces (see § 111-46), including
but not limited to principal and accessory buildings and structures, any
concrete, asphalt or stoned parking area, driveway, road or sidewalk, pools,
brick or concrete pavers, decks, balconies, patios and any other man-made
impervious surfaces on the ground surface.[Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord.
No. 03-11]
INTENSIVE HOG FARMING — The use of the land with the raising of large
quantities of hogs for market as its main purpose.[Added 6-21-1993 by
Ord. No. 17-93]
INTERESTED PARTY —
INTERGENERATIONAL CHILD-CARE FACILITY — A child care center as
defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6 and regulated in § 217-54, in which senior
citizens may be the care givers.[Added 2-21-2000 by Ord. No. 3-00]
INTERMITTENT STREAM — Surface water drainage channels with definite
bed and banks in which there is not a permanent flow of water. Most
In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any citizen of the State of
New Jersey.
A.
In the case of a civil proceeding in any court or in an administrative
proceeding before a municipal agency, any person, whether residing
within or without the municipality, whose right to use, acquire or enjoy
property is or may be affected by any action taken under this chapter
or whose rights to use, acquire or enjoy property under this chapter
or under any other law of this state or of the United States have been
denied, violated or infringed by an action or a failure to act under this
chapter.
B.
§ 111-46 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-46
108:296
intermittent streams are shown on Soil Conservation Service county soil
surveys and/or as watercourses shown on USGS quadrangle maps. These
are portrayed as a dashed line on a USDA Soil Survey Map of the most
recent edition, or as state open water identified in a letter of interpretation
issued by the NJDEP Land Use Regulation Program, whichever is more
inclusive.[Added 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 43-05]
KENNEL — Any establishment, except a pet shop, where the keeping,
boarding, training, selling or breeding of four or more dogs that are more
than seven months old is carried on. The keeping of four or more dogs more
than seven months old, regardless of ownership, on any lot shall constitute
a kennel.
LAND — A defined area which may include improvement and structures on,
above or below the surface.
LIGHT INDUSTRY — Those type, class or particular establishments which,
within the confines of the building or buildings, assemble marketable
products or provide a service.
LIGHT TRESPASS — Any form of artificial illuminance emanating from a
light fixture or illuminated sign that penetrates other property and creates a
nuisance, as specified in § 159-41A.[Added 8-19-2002 by Ord. No. 32-02]
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as
a unit. A street passing through land shall be considered as having divided
the land into lots. A building lot shall be one meeting the minimum area and
dimension requirements as specified in Chapter XVII, Zoning, and fronting
on an approved street.
LOT AREA — The computed area contained with the lot lines, but not
including any road rights-of-way.
LOT AVERAGING — A subdivision technique whereby the areas of some lots
within a subdivision are reduced in return for an increase in the area of
another lot or lots, where the resulting development does not exceed the
number of lots that would be otherwise permitted.[Added 3-19-2001 by
Ord. No. 5-01]
LOT COVERAGE — See "building coverage."
LOT DEPTH — The average of the three horizontal distances between the
front lot line and the rear lot line, measured perpendicular to the front lot
line at either end and at the midpoint of the front lot line.
LOT FRONTAGE — The length of the front lot line.
LOT LINE — A line of record bounding the lot.
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT — An exchange of land which does not create an
additional building lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line separating the lot from the road right-ofway.
§ 111-46 INSURANCE § 111-46
108:297
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot
line or the point at which the two side lot lines meet, as the case may be.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A side lot
line separating a lot from a road is called a "side road lot line."
LOT WIDTH — The distance between the side lot lines measured parallel to
the front lot line at the minimum front yard setback line.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security, other than cash, which may
be accepted by the Township for the maintenance of any improvements
required by this chapter.
MAJOR SITE PLAN — Any site plan not classified as a minor site
plan.[Amended 7-19-1993 by Ord. No. 21-93]
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision by the Planning Board.
MAP FILING LAW — The law describing map filing requirements, Chapter
141 of the Laws of 1960 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9).
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals
for the development of the municipality as set forth in and adopted pursuant
to Section 19 of the Municipal Land Use Law.48
MAYOR — The chief executive of Washington Township.
MINOR SITE PLAN — A site plan which does not have a significant impact
on the immediate neighborhood or community, by the fact that there will
be no significant increase in traffic, noise, impervious coverage or change
in character of the use. Specifically, a minor site plan is a site plan
which:[Amended 7-19-1993 by Ord. No. 21-93; 7-19-1999 by Ord. No.
17-99]
A. Does not involve planned unit development.
Does not involve or include any new street or extension of any off-tract
improvement which is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42.
B.
C. No more than 5,000 square feet of land will be disturbed.
D. Adds or changes no more than four parking spaces.
Complies with the off-street parking regulations in Chapter 159, Site
Plan Review, § 159-39A.49
E.
Involves or adds no more than 600 square feet of floor area or 5% of the
existing floor area, whichever is greater.
F.
48.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
49.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection F, regarding the creation of variances, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 03-11. This
ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections G through J as
Subsections F through I, respectively.
§ 111-46 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-46
108:298
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision containing not more than two
lots, exclusive of the remaining lot or parcel, fronting upon an existing
street, not involving any new street or the extension of municipal facilities
and not adversely affecting the development of the remainder of the parcel
or adjoining property and not in conflict with any provision or portion of an
adopted Master Plan, Official Map, Chapter XVII, Zoning, or of this chapter.
MOBILE HOME — A mobile home (sometimes colloquially referred to as
a "trailer") is a unit of housing which is built on a permanent chassis and
is designed to be used, when connected to utilities, as a dwelling.[Added
6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 09-14]
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Washington.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING — A building which does not conform to
one or more of the regulations of this chapter for the zone in which it is
located.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter but
which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it
is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure, the size, dimension or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment
of this chapter but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located by reasons of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter but which fails to conform
to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reasons
of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NURSERY — A place where young trees or other plants are raised for
transplanting or sale.[Added 6-21-1993 by Ord. No. 17-93]
NURSERY SCHOOL — A school designed to provide daytime care or
instruction for two or more children from two to six years of age, inclusive,
and operated on a regular basis.
NURSING HOME — A building providing shelter and/or supplemental
health for the elderly or infirm and meeting the standards of the New Jersey
State Department of Institutions and Agencies to operate as a nursing
home.
Does not create the need for additional stormwater management
facilities pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 175, Subdivision of
Land, § 175-49, Surface water management standards.
G.
Does not involve a prohibited or conditional use with the exceptions of
a bed-and-breakfast and home occupations.
H.
Is determined to be a minor site plan by the Minor Site Plan Committee
based upon the information provided by the applicant.
I.
§ 111-46 INSURANCE § 111-46
108:299
OFFICIAL COUNTY MAP — The map, with changes and additions therein,
adopted and established, from time to time, by resolution of the Board of
Chosen Freeholders of the county pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-5.Official Map.
A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to Article 5 of the Municipal Land
Use Law.50
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within
the property of which the lot is a part, which is the subject of a development
application or contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD LINE — The area adjacent to the stream
that is inundated by the one-hundred-year storm event as calculated per
NJDEP accepted methods unless a Federal Emergency Management Act
(FEMA) flood line (i.e., limits of the One-Hundred-Year Flood Hazard Area)
or NJDEP flood line has previously been calculated, in which case the FEMA
flood line, NJDEP flood line, or the more recently calculated of these two
will be the standard.[Added 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 43-05]
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OPEN LANDS — That portion or portions of a lot or lots that are deed
restricted for agricultural use or natural resource conservation or open
space in order to qualify for lot averaging according to the requirements of
Chapter 217, Zoning.[Added 3-19-2001 by Ord. No. 5-01]
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designed or reserved for public or private use or
enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land
adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided that such areas may
be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street
parking and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land.
OUTDOOR ENCLOSED LIGHT FIXTURE — An electrically powered
illuminating device which is either temporarily or permanently installed
outdoors, including but not limited to, devices used to illuminate any site,
architectural structure or sign. The face of lamp must be recessed within
the enclosure and any glass/plastic protective or diffusing device cannot
extend beyond that enclosure.[Added 8-19-2002 by Ord. No. 32-02]
OWNER — An individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership or
corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be
subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to develop the same
under this chapter.
50.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq.
§ 111-46 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-46
108:300
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE — Any open area, other than a road or other
public way, used for the temporary storage of automobiles and other
vehicles for private use of the owners or occupants of the lot on which the
area is located.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC — Any open area, other than a road or other public
way, used for the temporary storage of automobiles and other vehicles and
available to the public, whether for a fee or without compensation or as an
accommodation for clients, customers or employees.
PARK, PUBLIC — An open, improved or enclosed tract of land owned by
a local, municipal, county, state or federal government, devoted to the
purposes of providing light, air and open space and areas for active and
passive recreation, pleasure, conservation, ornament and play for the
general public.[Added 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 10-92]
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — For purposes of notice, any
applicant for development, the owners of the subject property and all
owners of property and government agencies entitled to notice under
Chapter 217, Zoning, § 217-117, Hearing on appeals or application; notice
of hearing and service.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by
the Township, including cash, provided that the Township shall not require
more than 10% of the total performance guaranty in cash.
PLANE — The surface where the exterior walls of a structure are parallel to
any straight line and constitute a facade.[Added 6-21-1993 by Ord. No.
17-93]
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum
contiguous size, as specified by this chapter, to be developed according to a
plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with appurtenant
common areas to accommodate commercial or office uses, or both, and any
residential and other uses incidental to the predominant use as may be
permitted by this chapter.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Planned unit development, planned unit
residential development, residential cluster, planned commercial
development or planned industrial development.
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum
contiguous size, as specified by this chapter, to be developed according to a
plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with appurtenant
common areas to accommodate industrial uses and any other uses
incidental to the predominant use as may be permitted by this chapter.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — An area with a specified minimum
contiguous acreage of 100 acres or more, to be developed as a single
entity according to a plan, containing one or more residential clusters or
planned unit residential developments and one or more public, quasi-public,
commercial or industrial area in such ranges of ratios of nonresidential uses
to residential uses as specified in this chapter.
§ 111-46 INSURANCE § 111-46
108:301
PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area with a specified
minimum contiguous acreage of 100 acres or more, to be developed as a
single entity according to a plan, containing one or more residential clusters
which may include appropriate commercial or public or quasi-public uses,
all primarily for the benefit of the residential development.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of Washington Township.
PLAT — The map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PLAT, FINAL — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision which
is presented to the Planning Board for final approval in accordance with
these regulations and which, if approved, shall be filed with the Clerk of
the County of Morris for recording in accordance with law. A plat that
receives final approval shall have been prepared by a New Jersey licensed
professional engineer or land surveyor in accordance with all of the
provisions of Chapter 141 of the Laws of 1960.51
PLAT, SKETCH — The sketch map of a major subdivision of sufficient
accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification and
which meets the requirements of Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land, Article
V, Plat Details.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights pursuant to
Sections 34, 36 and 37 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46, 40:55D-48, and 40:55D-49) of
the Municipal Land Use Law prior to final approval after specific elements
of a development plan have been agreed upon by the Planning Board and
the applicant.
PRELIMINARY FLOOD PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Architectural
drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of the design of a
project illustrating in a schematic form, its scope, scale and relationship to
its site and immediate environs.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The plat indicating the proposed layout of the
development which is submitted to the Planning Board for consideration
and tentative approval and meets the requirements of Chapters XVI and
XVII.
PUBLIC AREAS —
PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL — A Master Plan, capital
improvement program or other proposal for land development adopted by
the appropriate public body, or any amendments thereto.
A. Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreation areas.
B. Other public open spaces.
C. Scenic and historic sites.
D. Sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
51.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 111-46 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-46
108:302
PUBLIC DINING FACILITIES — A dining room(s), open to all members of
the public, whether or not registered as guests of the facility providing
overnight lodging.[Added 4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 7-98]
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along
a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the biological as well as
drainage function of the channel and providing for the flow of water to
safeguard the public against flood damage, sedimentation and erosion and
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges, to
induce water recharge into the ground, where practical, and to lessen
nonpoint pollution.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to the Township or a Township agency, board of education, state
or county agency or other public body for recreational or conservational
uses.
PUBLIC TRAVELED WAY — All rights-of-way within the Township of
Washington irrespective of the manner in which they have been created
and including paths, trails or easements over which public access is
permitted.[Added 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 44-05]
PUBLIC VIEW — Visible from a public thoroughfare, public lands or
buildings, public pathways, trails or bicycle paths and navigable
waterways.[Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97]
QUORUM — The majority of the full authorized membership of a municipal
agency.52
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — An area to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing residential housing units which have a
common or public open space area as an appurtenance.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per gross acre of
residential land area, including streets, easements and open space portions
of a development.
RESUBDIVISION —
RIDING ACADEMIES — Establishments for equestrian studies and
instruction.[Added 6-21-1993 by Ord. No. 17-93]
The further division or relocation of lot lines of any lot or lots within
a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded according to
law; or
A.
The alteration of any streets or the establishment of any new streets
within any subdivision previously made and approved or recorded
according to law, but does not include conveyances so as to combine
existing lots by deed or other instrument.
B.
52.Editor's Note: The definitions of "recreation, commercial," "recreation, commercial
private" and "recreation, noncommercial private," which immediately followed this
definition, were repealed 3-20-2000 by Ord. No. 2-00.
§ 111-46 INSURANCE § 111-46
108:303
RIDGELINE — The line along a mountainside or hillside, which when
viewed from any public traveled way or public areas or public open space
appears to be the highest elevation of the mountain chain or line of hills
and represents a line marking or following that ridge top as it appears
when viewed from any public traveled way, public area or public open
space.[Added 9-21-1998 by Ord. No. 30-98; amended 10-15-2001 by
Ord. No. 30-01; 4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 15-03; 5-19-2003 by Ord. No.
19-03; 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 44-05]
RIDGELINE, MOUNTAINSIDE, HILLSIDE AND VIEWSHED PROTECTION
AREA — The area between the toe of slope and the edge of the plateau,
where there is one, or between the toe of slope and that point of the
mountain chain or line of hills which appears to be the highest elevation
when viewed from the public traveled way and/or public areas or public
open space.[Added 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 44-05]
ROADSIDE AGRICULTURAL STAND — A structure, such as a booth, used
for the sale of agricultural, forestry or horticultural products, the majority
of which are produced on the premises.[Added 6-21-1993 by Ord. No.
17-93]
ROOMING HOUSE — A dwelling unit containing rooms for rent providing
lodging and/or boarding of individuals.
SEASONAL HOUSING — Structures used to house seasonal agricultural
workers complying with applicable state and local codes and
regulations.[Added 6-21-1993 by Ord. No. 17-93]
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of soil that has been transported from
its site or origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means as a
product of erosion.
SENIOR CITIZEN DWELLING UNIT — Housing units provided for the the
benefit of no more than two permanent residents per household who are
persons 55 years of age or older. Nothing herein shall prohibit a spouse
from residing in such a development who is under the age of 55 years,
provided that such spouse is married to a person who is a minimum of 55
years of age. No person under the age of 18 is permitted to be a permanent
resident with this zone.[Added 2-21-2000 by Ord. No. 3-00]
SHOPPING CENTER — Two or more retail commercial establishments
located in one building or structure designed as a planned commercial
development, as defined herein.
SIGN — Any device for visual communication that is used for the purpose of
bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public.
SIGN, ADVERTISING — A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or other facility conducted, sold or offered elsewhere
than on the premises where the sign is located.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or other facility conducted, sold or offered upon the
premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
§ 111-46 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-46
108:304
SIGN, ELECTION — A sign or placard having reference to the election
of a particular candidate to public office or to the adoption or rejection
of any public question or referendum at a special, primary or general
election.[Added 12-17-1990 by Ord. No. 37-90]
SIGN, FLASHING — A sign in which the artificial light is not maintained
constant in intensity, color or frequency at all times when such sign is in
use.
SIGN, GROSS ADVERTISING AREAS OF — The entire space within a single
continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of a sign.
SIGN, POLITICAL — A sign or placard bearing a noncommercial message
or expression of political, governmental or public interest, but which does
not concern the election of a particular candidate to public office or the
adoption or rejection of any public question or referendum at a special,
primary or general election.[Added 12-17-1990 by Ord. No. 37-90]
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown:
SKY GLOW — Luminance in the atmosphere caused by dust, water vapor,
and other particles that reflect and scatter any stray lighting that is
reflected or emitted into the atmosphere.[Added 8-19-2002 by Ord. No.
32-02]
STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE — Standards:
STATE OPEN WATERS — Those waters of the United States within the
boundary of the state or subject to its jurisdiction that are not
wetlands.[Added 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 43-05]
STEEP SLOPE — Slopes of 15% or greater in gradient as measured utilizing
a two-foot contour interval.[Added 8-21-1995 by Ord. No. 29-95]
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not
necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes and waterways.
A.
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures, signs, lighting devices and
screening.
B.
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed review and approval.
C.
Adopted by Chapter 217, Zoning, regulating noise levels, glare,
earthborn or sonic vibrations, heat, electronic or atomic radiation,
noxious odors, toxic matters, explosive and inflammable matters, smoke
and airborne particles, waste discharge, screening of unsightly objects
conditions and such other similar matters as may be reasonably
required by the Township; or
A.
B. Required by applicable federal or state laws or municipal ordinances.
§ 111-46 INSURANCE § 111-46
108:305
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor above
it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF — A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall
plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than
four feet above the floor of such story.
STREAM CHANNEL — The bed and banks of a stream that confine and
conduct continuously or intermittently flowing water. Stream channels shall
include all watercourses shown on USGS quadrangle maps and/or the
Morris County Soil Survey; watercourses identified as state open waters
by the NJDEP (e.g., during the course of a wetlands delineation LOI or
stream encroachment permit process); or any flow path with a definable
bed and banks regardless of the size of the contributory drainage.[Added
12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 43-05]
STREAM CORRIDOR — The stream channel and all the lands within the
one-hundred-year flood line on either side of that portion of the designated
stream or tributary. In cases where slopes greater than 20% abut the onehundred-
year flood line, the area of such slopes shall be included in the
stream corridor.[Added 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 43-05]
STREAM CORRIDOR AND OPEN WATER BUFFER — For all Category 1
streams, a width of 300 feet on each side of all stream corridors and open
waters, measured perpendicular to the edge of the stream corridor or open
water, provided that if the width of the stream corridor on a side of the
designated stream, tributary or open water exceeds 300 feet, no additional
buffer area shall be required on that side of the designated stream, tributary
or open water. For all other streams, a width of 100 feet on each side
of all stream corridors and open waters, measured perpendicular to the
edge of the stream corridor or open water, provided that if the width of
the stream corridor on a side of the designated stream, tributary or open
water exceeds 100 feet, no additional buffer area shall be required on that
side of the designated stream, tributary or open water. For streams located
within the preservation area, as defined in the Highlands Water Protection
and Preservation Act, buffers as required under the act will apply.[Added
12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 43-05]
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway; or
which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law; or which
is approved by official action as provided by the Municipal Land Use Law;
or which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the
county recording officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and
the grant to such Board of the power to review plats; and includes the
land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may
comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and
other area within the street lines.
STREET, ARTERIAL — A street carrying traffic from collector streets.
§ 111-46 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-46
108:306
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street which carries traffic from local streets to
other collector streets or to arterial streets. Collector streets shall include:
STREET, LOCAL — A street used primarily or access to the abutting
properties.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS — A street which is parallel to and adjacent
to an arterial street or highway and which provides access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
STREET, MINOR — See "street, local."
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation whether installed on, above or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
STRUCTURE HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the average of the
finished grade measured at the corners of a structure to the highest point
of the structure, provided that the maximum height at any corner may not
exceed the average height by more than 20%.[Added 8-21-1995 by Ord.
No. 27-95]
SUBDIVIDER — Commencing proceedings to effect a subdivision.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of
this chapter, if no new streets are created: divisions of land formed by
the Planning Board or Subdivision Committee thereof appointed by the
Chairman to be for agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five
acres or larger in size; divisions of property by testamentary or intestate
provisions; divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited
to judgments of foreclosure; consolidation of existing lots by deed or other
recorded instrument; and the conveyance of one or more adjoining lots,
tracts or parcels of land, owned by the same person or persons and all
of which are found and certified by the administrative office to conform
to the requirements of the municipal development regulations and are
shown and designed as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the Tax Map or
atlas of the municipality. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term
"resubdivision."
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — A Committee of at least three Planning
Board members appointed by the Chairman of the Board for the purpose
of reviewing subdivisions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and having such duties relating to land subdivision which may be conferred
on this Committee by the Board.
A. Collector streets as designated in the Township Master Plan.
Streets which serve as principal access streets to existing or potential
subdivisions having an aggregate development potential of more than
100 dwelling units.
B.
Streets which serve as principal access streets to existing or potential
substantial commercial or industrial facilities.
C.
§ 111-46 INSURANCE § 111-46
108:307
TOWNHOUSE — A building designed for or occupied by no more than one
family or household and attached to other similar buildings or structures by
common fire-resistant walls extending from the foundation to the roof and
providing two direct means of access from the outside and provided with
separate cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities and separate facilities for
electric service heating facilities and gas service. For the purpose of this
chapter, a townhouse may include a building in fee simple, condominium or
cooperative ownership or any combination thereof.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — The municipal official designated by the
governing body as the "Township Engineer."53
TRAILER — Every vehicle with or without motive power designed for
carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so
constructed that either:[Added 6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 09-14]
TRANSCRIPT — A type or printed verbatim record of the proceedings or
reproduction thereof.
TRANSITIONAL GRADING — The disturbance in that area of land between
the original grade and the finished grade, adjacent to buildings, roads,
driveways, parking areas, septic systems, retaining walls and other like
improvements.[Added 8-21-1995 by Ord. No. 29-95]
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of a zoning
ordinance pursuant to Section 47 and Subsections 29.2b, 57c and 57d
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60, 40:55D-40b, 40:55D-70c and 40:55D-70d) of the
Municipal Land Use Law.
VEHICULAR SALES AREA — An open area, other than a right-of-way or
public parking area, used for display, sale or rental of new or used vehicles
in operable condition and where no repair work is done.
VETERAN'S MICRO HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit, not exceeding 300
square feet and 13.5 feet in height, designed and constructed specifically
for year-round occupancy by a United States veteran, which is not
permanently erected upon a lot and is constructed with wheels to facilitate
mobility and relocation within the community as may be necessary and
desirable from time to time.[Added 9-17-2018 by Ord. No. 14-18]
VIEWSHED — The ridgeline and/or that portion of the ridgeline,
mountainside and hillside protection area that is visible or which may
Some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by
another vehicle; or
A.
B. No part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
53.Editor's Note: The former definition of "trailer or mobile home," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 09-14. See now the respective
individual definitions for "trailer" and "mobile home."
§ 111-46 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-46
108:308
be seen from the public traveled way and/or public areas or public open
space.[Added 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 44-05]
WELL-DEFINED WATERCOURSE — A flow path which conveys surface
water runoff which has a defined bed and banks.[Added 3-21-2005 by
Ord. No. 8-05]
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS, EQUIPMENT AND/OR
TOWERS — Buildings and/or structures for the delivery of low power
wireless radio telecommunications through a network.[Added 3-17-1997
by Ord. No. 9-97]
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT COMPOUND — A
fenced-in area which houses wireless telecommunications buildings,
antennas, equipment and/or towers.[Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97]
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A vertical structure
designed to support wireless telecommunications antennas, which may be
of monopole or self-supporting or guyed-lattice construction.[Added
3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97]
WOODLOT — The portion of a farm which is generally unsuitable for
cultivation and largely covered with trees or other noncultivated
vegetation.[Added 6-21-1993 by Ord. No. 17-93]
YARD — An open space which lies between the principal or accessory
building or buildings and the nearest lot line, unoccupied and obstructed
from the ground upward except as herein permitted. Yards shall also be the
open space extending between structures. The minimum distance between
buildings in developments where there is more than one building on a lot
shall be the sum of the two yards of the structures, and in no event shall two
structures be closer to one another than the sum of both side yards.
YARD, MINIMUM FRONT — An open space extending across the full width
of the lot, measured from and at right angles to the front lot line,
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be
specified elsewhere in this chapter. For a new principal building, the front
yard setback shall be measured from the front lot line or the existing front
street sideline or the nearest existing edge of the front street pavement and
the nearest line of any building on said lot, whichever results in the greatest
setback from the street.[Amended 9-16-2013 by Ord. No. 16-13]
YARD, MINIMUM REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the
lot measured from and at right angles to the rear lot lines, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be specified in this
chapter.
YARD, MINIMUM SIDE — An open, unoccupied space measured from and
at right angles to the side line of the lot and extending from the minimum
front yard to the minimum rear yard.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the administrative officer which:
§ 111-46 INSURANCE § 111-46
108:309
Is required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the
commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or building.
A.
Acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with the
provisions of Chapter 217, Zoning, or variance therefrom duly
authorized by a municipal agency pursuant to Sections 47 and 57
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 and 40:55D-70) of the Municipal Land Use Law.
B.
§ 111-46 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-46
108:310
ARTICLE VII
Development Fee and Affordable Housing Contribution
[Added 7-17-1995 by Ord. No. 22-95]
§ 111-47. Purpose.
The New Jersey Supreme Court, in Holmdel Builders Association v. Holmdel
Township, 121 N.J. 550 (1990), determined that mandatory development
fees are both statutorily and constitutionally permissible. The Court further
anticipated that the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH) would
promulgate appropriate development fee rules specifying, among other
things, the standards for these development fees. The purpose of this
chapter is to provide such rules pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.1 et seq., which
establishes standards for the collection, maintenance and expenditure of
development fees. Fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used for
the sole purpose of providing low- and moderate-income housing.
§ 111-48. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COUNCIL or COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the Fair Housing Act of 1985.54
DEVELOPMENT FEES — Money paid by an individual, person, partnership,
association, company or corporation for the improvement of property as
permitted in COAH's rules.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The value of a property determined by
the Township Tax Assessor through a process designed to ensure that all
property in the Township is assessed at the same assessment ratio or ratios
required by law. Estimates at the time of building permit may be obtained
by the Tax Assessor utilizing tax estimates for construction cost. Final
equalized assessed value will be determined at project completion by the
Township Tax Assessor.
SUBSTANTIVE CERTIFICATION — A determination by the Council
approving a municipality's housing element and fair share plan in
accordance with the provisions of the Fair Housing Act and the rules and
criteria as set forth herein. A grant of substantive certification shall be
valid for a period of six years in accordance with the terms and conditions
contained therein.
§ 111-49. Development fee schedule.
A. Residential development.
(1) Residential development fees shall be 1.5% (0.015) of the equalized
assessed value for residential development, provided that no
54.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
§ 111-47 INSURANCE § 111-49
108:311
increased density is permitted. [Amended 3-21-2005 by Ord. No.
9-05; 8-18-2008 by Ord. No. 14-08]
(2) If a “d” variance is granted for an increase in residential density
pursuant to N.J.S.A 40:55D-70d(5), then the additional residential
units realized (above what is permitted by right under the existing
zoning) will incur a bonus development fee of 6% rather than the
development fee of 1%. However, if the zoning on a site has
changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of the “d”
variance application, the base density for the purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest density
permitted by right during the two years preceding the filing of the
“d” variance application. [Added 12-20-1999 by Ord. No.
34-9955; amended 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 9-05]
(3) The Township may allow developers of sites zoned for inclusionary
development to pay a fee in lieu of building low- and moderateincome
units, provided that the Council determines that the
Township's housing element and fair share plan provides a realistic
opportunity for addressing the Township's fair share obligation.
The fee may equal the cost of subsidizing the low- and moderateincome
units that are replaced by the development fee. For
example, an inclusionary development may include a twentypercent
set-aside, no set-aside and a fee that is the equivalent of a
twenty-percent set-aside or a combination of a fee and set-aside
that is the equivalent of a twenty-percent set-aside.
(4) The Township may collect fees exceeding those permitted in this
section, provided that the Township enters into agreements with
developers that offer a financial incentive for paying higher fees.
The financial incentive may be in the form of a tax abatement. No
agreement may provide for a voluntary development fee without
also providing for a comparable off-setting incentive. All
agreements are subject to Council approval.
B. Nonresidential development.
(1) Nonresidential development fees shall be 2.5% (0.025) of the
equalized assessed value for nonresidential development.
[Amended 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 9-05; 8-18-2008 by Ord. No.
14-08]
(2) If A “d” variance is granted for an increase in floor area pursuant to
N.J.S.A 40:55D-70d(4), then the additional floor area realized
(above what is permitted by right under the existing zoning) will
incur a bonus development fee of 6% rather than the development
fee of 2%. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of the “d” variance application,
the floor area for purposes of calculating the bonus development
55.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsection
A(2) and (3) as Subsection A(3) and (4), respectively.
§ 111-49 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-49
108:312
§ 111-50. Eligible exaction, ineligible exaction and exemptions.
§ 111-51. Collection of fees.
fee shall be the highest permitted by right during the two years
preceding the filing of the “d” variance application. [Added
12-20-1999 by Ord. No. 34-9956; amended 3-21-2005 by Ord.
No. 9-05]
(3) The Township may collect fees exceeding those permitted in this
section, provided that it enters into agreements with developers
that offer a financial incentive for paying higher fees. Such
agreements may include, but are not limited to, a tax abatement,
increased commercial/industrial square footage, increased
commercial/industrial lot coverage and/or increased commercial/
industrial impervious coverage in return for an increased
development fee. The development fee negotiated must bear a
reasonable relationship to the additional commercial/industrial
consideration to be received. All agreements are subject to
approval by the Council.
A. Except as provided for in § 111-49 above, developers of low- and
moderate-income units shall be exempt from paying development fees.
In addition, developers of houses of worship shall be exempt from
paying development fees. All other forms of new construction are
subject to the development fee. [Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No.
30-05]
B. Developers that expand or increase the intensity of use of an existing
structure shall not be required to pay a development fee.
C. Developers that have received preliminary or final approval prior to the
effective date of this chapter shall be exempt from paying a
development fee unless the developer seeks a major change in the
approval. Examples of a major change in the approval include a
substantial alteration in site layout, development density or types of
uses within the development.
A. The Township shall collect 50% of the calculated development fee at the
time of issuance of the building permit. The development fee shall be
estimated by the Tax Assessor prior to the issuance of a building permit.
B. The Township shall collect the remaining portion of the fee at the time
of issuance of a certificate of occupancy. At the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy, the Tax Assessor shall calculate the equalized assessed
value and the appropriate development fee. The developer shall be
responsible for paying the difference between the fee calculated at the
56.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsection
B(2) as Subsection B(3).
§ 111-49 INSURANCE § 111-51
108:313
§ 111-52. Housing Trust Fund.
All development fees shall be deposited in a separate interest-bearing
Housing Trust Fund. In establishing the Housing Trust Fund, the Township
shall provide whatever express, written authorization that may be required
by the bank utilized by the Township in order to permit the Council to direct
the disbursement of development fees pursuant to § 111-55. No money shall
be expended from the Housing Trust Fund unless the expenditure conforms
to a spending plan approved by COAH.
§ 111-53. Use of funds.
issuance of the certificate of occupancy and the amount paid at the
issuance of the building permit.
A. The Township shall use revenues collected from development fees for
any activity approved by the Council for addressing the Township's fair
share obligation. Such activities include, but are not limited to,
rehabilitation, new construction, regional contribution agreements,
purchase of land for low- and moderate-income housing, improvement
of land to be used for low- and moderate-income housing, extensions
and/or improvements of roads and infrastructure to low- and moderateincome
housing sites, assistance designed to render units to be more
affordable and administrative costs necessary to implement the
Township's housing element. The expenditure of all money shall
conform to a spending plan approved by the Council.
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Township for housing
activities that preceded substantive certification.
C. At least 30% of the revenues collected from development fees other
than those collected pursuant to § 111-49A(4) for inclusionary
developments shall be devoted to render units more affordable.
Examples of such activities include, but are not limited to, down
payment assistance, low-interest loans and rental assistance. This
requirement may be waived in whole or in part when the Township
demonstrates the ability to address the requirement of affordability
assistance from another source. [Amended 12-20-1999 by Ord. No.
34-99]
D. The Township may contract with a private or public entity to administer
the implementation of any part of its housing element, including the
requirement for affordability assistance.
E. No more than 20% of the revenues collected from development fees
shall be expended on administration, including but not limited to
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a rehabilitation program, a new
construction program, a regional contribution agreement, a housing
element and an affirmative marketing program. Administrative funds
may be used for income qualification of households, monitoring the
§ 111-51 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-53
108:314
§ 111-54. Monitoring.
The Township shall complete and return all monitoring forms related to
the collection of fees, expenditure of revenues and implementation of the
plan certified by the Council or approved by the court. Quarterly financial
reports and annual program implementation and auditing reports shall be
completed on forms designed by the Council.
§ 111-55. Penalties; expenditure of fees.
turnover of sale and rental units and compliance with the Council's
monitoring requirements. Development fees may not be used to defray
the costs of existing staff, except that the Council shall consider
permitting fees to defray the cost of staff whose sole responsibility is to
implement a housing element.
A. In the event that any of the conditions set forth in Subsection B below
occur, the Council shall be authorized, on behalf of the Township, to
direct the manner in which all development fees collected pursuant to
this chapter shall be expended. Such fees shall be used only for the
Township's affordable housing program, and accounting shall be
provided therefor. Should any such condition occur, such revenues shall
immediately become available for expenditure at the direction of the
Council upon the Township Clerk's receipt of written notification from
the Council that such a condition has occurred. In furtherance of the
foregoing, the Township shall, in establishing a bank account pursuant
to § 111-52 of this chapter, ensure that the Township has provided
whatever express written authorization which may be required by the
bank to permit the Council to direct the disbursement of such revenues
from the account following the delivery to the bank of the
aforementioned written notification provided by the Council to the
Township Clerk and the Township's Chief Financial Officer.
B. Occurrence of the following may result in the Council taking an action
pursuant to Subsection A above:
(1) Failure to submit a spending plan pursuant to § 111-53 above
within the time limits imposed by the Council;
(2) Failure to meet deadlines for information required by the Council in
its review of this chapter, the Township's housing element or
spending plan;
(3) Failure to proceed through the Council's administrative process
toward substantive certification in a timely manner;
(4) Failure to address the Council's conditions for approval of a plan to
spend development fees within the deadlines imposed by the
Council;
(5) Failure to address the Council's conditions for substantive
certification within deadlines imposed by the Council;
§ 111-53 INSURANCE § 111-55
108:315
§ 111-56. Expiration of chapter.
This chapter shall expire if:
(6) Failure to submit accurate monitoring reports within the time limits
imposed by the Council;
(7) Failure to implement the spending plan for development fees within
the time limits imposed by the Council or within reasonable
extensions granted by the Council;
(8) Expenditure of development fees on activities not permitted by the
Council;
(9) Revocation of the Township's substantive certification; or
(10) Other good cause demonstrating that the revenues are not being
used for their intended purpose.
A. COAH dismisses or denies the Township's petition for substantive
certification.
B. COAH revokes substantive certification or its certification of this
chapter.
C. Substantive certification expires prior to the Township's filing of an
adopted housing element with COAH, petitioning for substantive
certification and giving COAH's approval of this chapter.
§ 111-55 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-56
108:316
ARTICLE VIII
Affordable Housing Buy-Down Program
[Added 2-19-2007 by Ord. No. 6-07]
§ 111-57. Program enacted.
An Affordable Housing Buy-Down Ordinance is hereby enacted for the
purpose of providing additional opportunities for low- and moderate-income
housing in the Township of Washington, County of Morris. The purpose
of the program is to buy down the cost of a previously owned or new
market-rate unit and offer it in sound condition at an affordable price to a
low- or moderate-income household. The Township of Washington received
substantive certification from the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH)
of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, including a ten-unit buy-down
program, on January 10, 2007.
§ 111-58. Conditions.
All buy-down units shall meet the following conditions pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:94-4.10 and in accordance with the Township of Washington's Fair Share
Plan.
A. The Township of Washington may subsidize the cost of a for-sale unit
that will be purchased by a low- or moderate-income buyer at an
affordable sales price subject to the following:
(1) The Township of Washington has demonstrated that there are
sufficient for-sale market-rate units within the municipality on the
multiple listing service for this program to be deemed viable by
COAH;
(2) Eligible units may be new, pre-owned, or vacant;
(3) The unit shall be certified to be in sound condition as a result of an
inspection performed by a licensed building inspector;
(4) The minimum subsidy shall be $25,000 per unit, with additional
subsidy depending on the market prices in the Township of
Washington.
(5) Funding for the program is being provided by development fees
and will be maintained in a separate interest-bearing account;
(6) Sale prices shall conform to the standards in N.J.A.C. 5:94-7;
(7) The Township of Washington is limited to ten (10) units in its Fair
Share Plan until the viability of the program is documented. Upon
completion of the total approved number of units, the Township of
Washington shall receive approval from COAH before proceeding
to buy down additional units;
§ 111-57 INSURANCE § 111-58
108:317
(8) The program is exempt from bedroom distribution requirements
pursuant to the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth at
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26;
(9) The program will be affirmatively marketed in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:94-7;
(10) The Township of Washington has demonstrated that the units will
have the appropriate controls on affordability in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:94-7; and
(11) The Township of Washington has demonstrated the capability to
administer the program in accordance with the Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26. The Township of
Washington has designated the Municipal Housing Liaison and the
Housing Partnership for Morris County to administer the program
The administrator shall:
(a) Maintain an up-to-date inventory of units that meet the
requirements of a buy down program;
(b) Qualify and place income eligible households in low- and
moderate-income units upon initial occupancy;
(c) Place income eligible households in low- and moderate-income
units as they become available during the term of affordability
controls;
(d) Enforce the terms of the thirty-year deed restriction and
mortgage lien;
(e) Set up a separate interest-bearing escrow account for the buy
down funds; and
(f) Sponsor a home ownership counseling program and postpurchase
session for prospective purchasers.
B. Because this buy-down program will be used in conjunction with other
programs identified in the Township's Fair Share Plan that provide
housing for mainly low-income households, buy down units are exempt
from the low-/moderate-income split pursuant to the Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26, and shall all be set aside for
moderate-income households.
§ 111-58 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-58
108:318
ARTICLE IX
Highlands Area Plan Conformance Guidelines Application for
Development
[Added 5-21-2012 by Ord. No. 09-12; amended 8-18-2014 by Ord.
No. 13-14]
§ 111-59. Applicability.
§ 111-60. Administrative Completeness.
A. This article shall apply to any application for development involving
lands located within (or partially within) the Township Highlands Area
(as illustrated in Exhibit 1, "Washington Township Highlands Area")57
that seeks approval of a site plan, subdivision, or change in use, where
approval of such application would:
(1) Result in the ultimate disturbance of one acre or more of land;
(2) Produce a cumulative impervious surface area of one-quarter acre,
or more;
(3) In the case of residential development, create three or more
dwelling units; or
(4) Introduce or expand on any of the following land uses/facilities:
(a) Landfills;
(b) Permanent storage or disposal of hazardous wastes, industrial
or municipal sludge or radioactive materials, including solid
waste landfills;
(c) Collection and transfer facilities for hazardous wastes, solid
wastes that contain hazardous materials, and radioactive
materials;
(d) Industrial treatment facility lagoons; or
(e) Any major or minor potential contaminant source (as identified
in Appendix A and Appendix B of this article, respectively)58 on
lands located within 200 feet of the wellhead of any public
community well or public non-community well, as these are
defined at § 111-62 below.
B. For purposes of this article, the phrases "application for development,"
"Highlands Area," "residential development," "ultimate disturbance,"
and "cumulative impervious surface area" shall be defined as provided
at § 111-62 below.
57.Editor's Note: Said Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
58.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 111-59 INSURANCE § 111-60
108:319
A. Consistency determinations required. No application for development
included in § 111-59 above shall be deemed complete or considered for
review by the applicable Township Land Use Board until and unless the
applicant has obtained and provided a copy of:
(1) A consistency determination from the Highlands Council indicating
that the application is consistent with the Highlands Regional
Master Plan; or
(2) A consistency determination from the Highlands Council indicating
that the application is not consistent with the Highlands Regional
Master Plan, accompanied by a certification, as detailed in
§ 111-60B below, by the applicant's professional(s) that the
application has been revised since review by the Highlands Council
to achieve consistency with the Highlands Regional Master Plan.
B. Findings of inconsistency. Where a Highlands Council consistency
determination indicates that an application for development is
inconsistent with the Highlands Regional Master Plan, no such
application shall be deemed complete or considered for review by the
applicable Township Land Use Board, until or unless the applicant has
obtained from the professional(s) responsible for preparation of the
applicant's plans, a certification indicating that to the best of the
knowledge and abilities of such professional(s), the application has
been revised to achieve consistency with the Highlands Regional
Master Plan and specifically describing the revisions made to achieve
such consistency.
C. Checklist waiver. Washington Township may issue a waiver from the
provisions of this § 111-60 where it can be established by the applicant
and can be verified by the designated representative(s) of Washington
Township that:
(1) The activity, improvement or development proposed by the subject
application for development has not yet been formally determined
to be exempt from the Highlands Act (see § 111-61B, below), but
eligibility for an exemption has been sufficiently established by the
applicant; or
(2) The activity, improvement or development proposed in the
application for development will neither encroach upon a
Highlands Resource or Highlands Resource Area, nor be of
detrimental impact to any Highlands Resource or Highlands
Resource Area as these are identified and delineated in the
Highlands Regional Master Plan. The applicant's professional(s)
responsible for preparation of the applicant's plan shall establish
compliance of the above through a formal certification specifically
addressing the Highlands Resources and Resource Areas and
related policies and objectives as identified in Chapter 4 of the
Highlands Regional Master Plan.
§ 111-60 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-60
108:320
§ 111-61. Exclusions and exemptions.
D. Highlands Council call-up. All municipal waivers or findings of
application completeness issued pursuant to this § 111-60 shall be
issued in writing, inclusive of a statement indicating the rationale for
the determination. All such determinations shall be subject to
Highlands Council call-up review, and shall include conditions requiring
same consistent with this subsection. The municipality shall, within five
calendar days of issuance of all such determinations, provide a copy of
the decision to the applicant and to the Highlands Council. The
Highlands Council call-up review period shall expire 15 calendar days
following its receipt of same. Upon determining to exercise this
authority for call-up review, the Highlands Council shall transmit notice
to the applicant and the municipality. Absent any such notification from
the Highlands Council within that timeframe, the application shall be
considered complete, with the date of the waiver or finding of
application completeness to be as of the date of first issuance by the
municipality.
A. Exclusions. The following specific improvements and related
applications shall be excluded from the provisions of this article:
(1) The reconstruction, within the same footprint, of any building or
other structure lawfully existing as of the effective date of this
article, in the event of its destruction or partial destruction by fire,
storm, natural disaster, or any other unintended circumstance.
(2) Any improvement or alteration to a building or other structure
lawfully existing as of the effective date of this article, where such
improvement or alteration is necessary for compliance with the
provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act, or to otherwise
provide accessibility to the disabled.
(3) Any agricultural or horticultural use or development that would not
result in either:
(a) An increase, since the date of enactment of the Highlands Act
(August 10, 2004), either individually or cumulatively, of new
agricultural impervious cover of greater than 3% to the total
land area of a farm management unit. Solar panels shall not be
included in any calculation of agricultural impervious cover (all
terms as defined in § 111-62, below); or
(b) Construction of three or more residential dwelling units
(including accessory dwelling units) served by individual onsite
septic system(s).
B. Exemptions. Any activity, improvement or development project listed
and demonstrated to constitute a Highlands Act exemption shall be
exempt from the provisions of this article. Formal demonstration of a
Highlands Act exemption for an application for development involving
§ 111-60 INSURANCE § 111-61
108:321
§ 111-62. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
AGRICULTURAL IMPERVIOUS COVER — Agricultural or horticultural
buildings, structures or facilities with or without flooring, residential
buildings and paved areas, but not meaning temporary coverings.
AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT — Construction
for the purposes of supporting common farmsite activities, including but
not limited to the production, harvesting, storage, grading, packaging,
processing, and the wholesale and retail marketing of crops, plants,
animals, and other related commodities and the use and application of
techniques and methods of soil preparation and management, fertilization,
weed, disease, and pest control, disposal of farm waste, irrigation, drainage
and water management, and grazing.
AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL USE — The use of land for common
farmsite activities, including but not limited to the production, harvesting,
lands located (or partially located) in the Highlands Area shall consist
of one of the following:
(1) State agency determination. State agency determinations shall
include either a Highlands applicability determination (HAD)
issued by the NJDEP for a Preservation Area proposal, or a
Highlands exemption determination issued by the Highlands
Council for a Planning Area proposal, in either case, indicating that
the proposal qualifies as a Highlands Act exemption.
(2) Municipal determination. Pursuant to Washington Township
Ordinance #RO-12-14, entitled "Township of Washington
Highlands Area Exemption Ordinance,"59 effective as of the same
date as this article, for any application under this article involving
Highlands Act Exemption Nos. 4, 6, 7, or 8, the applicant may
request and shall be deemed to have satisfied the evidentiary
requirement by obtaining a municipal exemption determination
issued by the municipal exemption designee(s), provided such
determination indicates that the proposal qualifies as a Highlands
Act exemption. The applicant may rely upon the findings of a
municipal exemption determination to the same extent and with the
same protections as would apply in the case of a Highlands
exemption determination issued by the Highlands Council, or of a
HAD issued by the NJDEP.
59.Editor's Note: See Ch. 103, Highlands Area Exemptions.
§ 111-61 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-62
108:322
storage, grading, packaging, processing, and the wholesale and retail
marketing of crops, plants, animals, and other related commodities and
the use and application of techniques and methods of soil preparation and
management, fertilization, weed, disease, and pest control, disposal of farm
waste, irrigation, drainage and water management, and grazing.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance, or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to Section 25 or
Section 27 of P.L. 1975, c.291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36).
DISTURBANCE — The placement of impervious surface, the exposure or
movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
DISTURBANCE, ULTIMATE — The total existing or proposed area of
disturbance of a lot, parcel, or other legally designated (or otherwise legally
recognized) tract or subdivision of land, for the purpose of, and in
connection with, any human activity, property improvement, or
development, including the surface area of all buildings and structures,
all impervious surfaces, and all associated land disturbances such as
excavated, filled, and graded areas, and all lawn and landscape areas.
Ultimate disturbance shall not include areas of prior land disturbance which
at the time of evaluation: a) contain no known man-made structures
(whether above or below the surface of the ground) other than such features
as old stone rows or farm field fencing; and b) consist of exposed rock
outcroppings, or areas which, through exposure to natural processes (such
as weathering, erosion, siltation, deposition, fire, flood, growth of trees
or other vegetation) are no longer impervious or visually obvious, or
ecologically restored areas which will henceforth be preserved as natural
areas under conservation restrictions.
FARM MANAGEMENT UNIT — A parcel or parcels of land, whether
contiguous or noncontiguous, together with agricultural or horticultural
buildings, structures and facilities, producing agricultural or horticultural
products, and operated as a single enterprise.
HIGHLANDS COUNCIL — The New Jersey Highlands Water Protection and
Planning Council.
HIGHLANDS ACT — The Highlands Water Protection and Planning Act, P.L.
2004, c.120, as amended, codified in part at N.J.S.A. 13:20-1 et seq.
HIGHLANDS APPLICABILITY DETERMINATION (HAD) — The
determination made by the NJDEP of whether a project proposed for the
Preservation Area is a major Highlands development, whether any such
major Highlands development is exempt from the Highlands Act, and
whether the project is consistent with the applicable Areawide Water
Quality Management Plan.
§ 111-62 INSURANCE § 111-62
108:323
HIGHLANDS AREA — That portion of the municipality for which the land
use planning and regulation are in conformance with, or are intended or
proposed to be in conformance with, the Highlands Regional Master Plan.
HIGHLANDS REGION — All that area within the boundaries of the
municipalities listed in Subsection a of Section 7 of the Highlands Act.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any structure, surface, or improvement that
reduces or prevents absorption of stormwater into land, including, but
not limited to, porous paving, paver blocks, gravel, crushed stone, decks,
patios, elevated structures, and other similar structures, surfaces, or
improvements.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES, CUMULATIVE — The total area of all existing or
proposed impervious surfaces situated or proposed to be situated within the
boundary lines of a lot, parcel, or other legally recognized subdivision of
land, expressed either as a measure of land area such as acreage, or square
feet, or as a percentage of the total lot or parcel area.
MAJOR POTENTIAL CONTAMINANT SOURCES (PCS) — Land uses and
activities determined by the Highlands Council to pose a major risk of
ground water contamination (see Appendix A).60
MINOR POTENTIAL CONTAMINANT SOURCES (PCS) — Land uses and
activities determined by the Highlands Council to pose a minor risk of
ground water contamination (see Appendix B).61
MUNICIPAL LAND USE LAW (MLUL) — The New Jersey Municipal Land
Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
NJDEP — New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
NJDEP PRESERVATION AREA RULES — The regulations established by the
NJDEP to implement requirements of the Highlands Act, titled "Highlands
Water Protection and Planning Act Rules," and codified at N.J.A.C. 7:38-1 et
seq.
PLANNING AREA — Lands within the Highlands Region not within the
Preservation Area (N.J.S.A. 13:20-7).
PLAN CONFORMANCE — The process by which a municipality revises the
Master Plan, development regulations and other regulations related to the
development and use of land to conform them with the goals, requirements,
and provisions of the Regional Master Plan in accordance with the
Highlands Plan Conformance Guidelines.
PUBLIC COMMUNITY WELL — A well that provides water to a public water
system serving at least 15 service connections used by year-round residents
or regularly serving at 25 year-round residents.
PUBLIC NON-COMMUNITY WELL — A well that is not a public community
well and that provides water to a public water system regularly serving at
least 25 individuals for at least 60 days in any given calendar year.
60.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
61.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 111-62 WASHINGTON CODE § 111-62
108:324
PRESERVATION AREA — That portion of the Highlands Region so
designated by Subsection b. of Section 7 of the Highlands Act.
REGIONAL MASTER PLAN (RMP) — The Highlands Regional Master Plan
or any revision thereof adopted by the Highlands Council pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 13:20-8.
SOLAR PANEL — An elevated panel or plate, or a canopy or array thereof,
that captures and converts solar radiation to produce power, and includes
flat plate, focusing solar collectors, or photovoltaic solar cells and excludes
the base or foundation of the panel, plate, canopy, or array. (As defined by
the Highlands Act, N.J.S.A. 13:20-1 et seq, as amended.)
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
§ 111-62 INSURANCE § 111-62
108:325
Chapter 114
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 101.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 137.
Solid waste — See Ch. 168 and Ch. 250.
§ 114-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which has
been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper or
other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof, including
but not limited to any bottle, jar or can or any top, cap or detachable
tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or any
flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish,
grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers, magazines,
glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packages or construction
material.
PUBLIC PLACE — All streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, beaches or
other public ways, and all public parks, squares, spaces, docks, grounds and
buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except body
wastes) including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial waste.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery
and similar materials.
VEHICLES — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively on stationary rails or tracks.
§ 114-2. General prohibitions.
No person shall sweep, throw or dump litter in or on any property, whether
occupied, open or vacant and whether owned by that person, or in a
public place or pond, lake or stream or other body of water within the
Township, except in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles
for collection.
§ 111-62 WASHINGTON CODE § 114-3
114:326
§ 114-3. Receptacles.
§ 114-4. Improper disposal of waste. [Amended 3-21-2005 by Ord.
No. 13-05]
A. Requirements for placement and service. Litter receptacles and their
servicing shall be required at the following public places within the
Township: sidewalks used by pedestrians in active retail commercially
zoned areas, such that, at a minimum, there shall be no single linear
quarter-mile without a receptacle; buildings held out for use by the
public, including schools, government buildings, parks, self-service
refreshment, construction sites, gasoline service stations, shopping
centers and parking lots, and at public events to which the public is
invited, including sporting events, parades, carnivals, circuses and
festivals. The proprietors of these places or the sponsors of these events
shall be responsible for providing and servicing the receptacles, such
that adequate containerization is available and that the containers are
not allowed to overflow.
B. Placing litter in receptacles. Persons placing litter in public receptacles
or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in a manner which
prevents the litter from being carried or deposited by the elements
upon a public place or upon private property.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prohibit the spilling, dumping
or disposal of materials other than stormwater to the municipal
separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of Washington
so as to protect public health, safety and welfare and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this section clearly demonstrates a
different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number
include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) and is designed and used for collecting
and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
§ 114-3 LITTERING § 114-4
114:327
§ 114-5. Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter in or upon any public or private property. No person shall cast, shoot
or throw anything at, against or into any vehicle, railroad car, airplane
or other facility of transportation or shall place any stick, stone or other
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
C. Prohibited conduct. No person shall spill, dump, or dispose of materials
other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system or
spill, dump or dispose of materials other than stormwater in such a
manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the municipal
separate storm sewer system.
D. Exceptions.
(1) Waterline flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
(2) Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
(3) Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and non-contact
cooling water).
(4) Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn-watering runoff).
(5) Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
(6) Residential car-washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges.
(7) Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
(8) Flows from fire-fighting activities.
(9) Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(a) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use
for their intended purposes; and
(b) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing
materials immediately following salt and de-icing material
applications. Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt
and de-icing materials must be removed from equipment and
vehicles to the maximum extent practicable using dry cleaning
methods (e.g., shoveling and sweeping). Recovered materials
are to be returned to storage for reuse or properly discarded.
Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation, is
limited to exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does
not apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 114-4 WASHINGTON CODE § 114-5
114:328
substance upon any railroad track with intent to injure any car passing
thereon or the passengers therein.
§ 114-6. Transportation from outside Township.
No person shall being, cart, remove, transport or collect any litter from
outside the Township and bring it into the Township for the purpose of
dumping or disposing thereof except in an established sanitary landfill. No
truck or other vehicle containing litter which has been transported into the
Township shall be parked or allowed to remain standing on any street in the
Township or on any public property for a period in excess of two hours.
§ 114-7. Handbills.
Advertisements, handbills, circulars and papers may be distributed in the
Township only if they are so securely placed at each dwelling that they
will not be blown away by the wind; otherwise, no person shall place
any advertisement, handbill, circular or paper on or in any public street,
sidewalk, building or vehicle within the Township.
§ 114-8. Storage of certain items prohibited.
In residential zones, no person, firm or corporation shall store or permit
the storage of any out-of-service bulky items such as appliances, furniture,
mattresses or tires, except in a fully enclosed structure. A farm, as defined
in Chapter 217, Zoning, § 217-3, Definitions, shall be exempt from this
prohibition, provided that the outdoor storage of any such item is in
furtherance of a legitimate farm-related purpose.
§ 114-9. Establishing dumps prohibited; dumping of garbage and
trash prohibited.
A. Except in accordance with a permit issued pursuant to the New Jersey
Solid Waste Management Act,62 it shall be unlawful for any person,
persons, firm, association or corporation, whether as principal or agent,
servant or employee, clerk or otherwise to use or permit to be used any
land, road, alley, lane or street as a dumping ground for garbage, ashes,
trash, debris, rubbish, wastepaper, motor vehicle junk or other refuse
matter or to establish a dump within the Township limits of the
Township of Washington.
B. No person, persons, firm, association or corporation, whether as
principal or agent, servant or employee, clerk or otherwise, shall throw
garbage, ashes, trash, debris, rubbish, wastepaper, motor vehicle junk
or other refuse matter upon the public streets, roads or avenues or the
lands directly abutting the public streets, roads or avenues within the
limits of the Township.
62.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq.
§ 114-5 LITTERING § 114-9
114:329
§ 114-10. Litter from commercial vehicles.
Any person, corporation, partnership or other organization which drives or
moves or causes to be driven or moved any commercial vehicle or truck with
wheels or tires which carry onto or deposit mud, dirt, sticky substances,
construction debris or foreign matter of any kind in any street or other
public place so as to cause a health or safety problem shall immediately
remove said materials from the public street or other public place.
§ 114-11. Enforcement, violations and penalties. [Amended
3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 13-05]
Chapter 117
(RESERVED)
Chapter 121
MOBILE HOME PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 46.
Building construction — See Ch. 56.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 87.
Recycling — See Ch. 168.
Zoning — See Ch. 217.
§ 121-1. License required; fees.
C. Any materials unlawfully dumped within the limits of the Township may
be examined in order to establish their point of origin. If their point of
order can be established, the person, firm or corporation from which
such materials originated shall be required to demonstrate that said
materials were disposed of in a lawful manner.
A. Enforcement. All police officers of the Township, regular and special,
the Department of Public Works Superintendent or his/her duly
authorized designee, the Health Officer or his/her duly authorized
designee, the Zoning Officer and/or his/her duly authorized designee
and the Township Engineer and/or his/her duly authorized designee,
are hereby given full power and authority and are charged with the
duty to enforce all provisions of this article. [Amended 5-16-2005 by
Ord. No. 17-05]
B. Penalties. Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject, upon
conviction, to the penalties provided in § 1-3 of this Code. [Amended
4-16-2007 by Ord. No. 9-07]
§ 114-9 WASHINGTON CODE § 121-1
117:330
§ 121-2. Application for license.
§ 121-3. Water supply.
An adequate water supply of pure water for drinking and domestic purposes
shall be supplied to meet the park's requirements in accordance with all
state and local rules and regulations.
§ 121-4. Maintenance of buildings and grounds.
All buildings and the grounds of the park shall be maintained in a clean
sightly condition and kept free of any condition that will menace the health
of any occupant or the public or constitute a nuisance.
§ 121-5. Garbage receptacles.
Tightly covered metal garbage cans shall be provided in quantities adequate
to permit disposal of all garbage and rubbish. Garbage cans shall be located
not further than 200 feet from any mobile home space. Garbage cans shall
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate within the
township any mobile home park unless that person first obtains a
license.
B. The license fees for a mobile home shall be as follows:
(1) An annual charge of $500, payable for the period from January 1
through December 31.
(2) A weekly fee of $3 for each occupied site, but for any space
occupied for three days or less, the fee shall be $2.50.
C. Fees shall be payable to the Township Clerk by the 10th day of the
following month.
A. Applications for a mobile home park license shall be filed with and
issued by the Township Committee, shall be in writing and signed by the
applicant and shall contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The location and legal description of the mobile home park.
(3) A complete copy of the approved site plan for the park.
(4) Such further information as may be requested by the Township
Committee to enable it to determine if the proposed park will
comply with legal requirements.
B. If the proposed mobile home park is in compliance with all provisions of
this chapter and all other applicable ordinances and statutes, the
Township Committee shall approve the application and, upon
completion of the park according to the plans, shall issue the license.
§ 121-1 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 121-5
121:331
be kept upon a concrete slab in a screened enclosure containing a selfclosing
door or equivalent suitable facilities to be approved by the Board
of Health. Cans and enclosures shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all
times. Garbage and rubbish shall be collected and disposed of as frequently
as may be necessary to ensure that the garbage cans shall not overflow.
§ 121-6. Fire protection.
Every park shall be equipped at all times with one fire extinguisher in good
working order for every five mobile home spaces, located no farther than
200 feet from each mobile home space. No open fires shall be permitted at
any place which would endanger life or property, and no fires shall be left
unattended at any time.
§ 121-7. Animals and pets.
No owner or person in charge of any dog, cat or other pet animal shall
permit it to run at large or commit any nuisance within the limits of any
mobile home park.
§ 121-8. Removal of wheels.
It shall be unlawful for the licenser to remove or cause to have removed
or permit the removal of the wheels of any mobile home or to otherwise
permanently fix it to the ground in a manner that would prevent the ready
removal. Any alteration to a mobile home shall be deemed as removing it
from the requirements of this chapter and converting it into a dwelling, and
it shall thereupon be subject to the requirements of Chapter 217, Zoning, or
any Building Code now or hereafter in effect.63
§ 121-9. Register for occupants.
§ 121-10. Revocation of license.
The Township Committee may revoke any license to maintain and operate
a park when the licensee has been found guilty by a court of competent
A. It shall be the duty of the licensee to keep a register containing a record
of all mobile home owners and occupants located within the park. The
register shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of each occupant.
(2) The dates of arrival and departure of each mobile home.
B. The park shall keep the register available for inspection at all times by
law enforcement officers, public health officials and other officials
whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the
register. The register records shall not be destroyed for a period of
three years following the date of registration.
63.Editor's Note: See Ch. 56, Building Construction, Art. II, Uniform Construction Codes.
§ 121-5 WASHINGTON CODE § 121-10
121:332
jurisdiction of violating any provision of this chapter. After conviction, the
license may be reissued if the circumstances leading to conviction have
been remedied and the park is being maintained and operated in full
compliance with the law.
§ 121-11. State Sanitary Code.
The provisions of Chapter IX of the State Sanitary Code, Mobile Home
Parks, promulgated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:1A-7, shall apply to this chapter
to the extent not inconsistent with the provisions herein.
Chapter 125
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Habitual barking by dogs — See Ch. 46,
§ 46-11.
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 137.
Noise by peddlers and solicitors — See Ch.
143.
Noise by motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 207.
Zoning — See Ch. 217.
Nuisances — See Ch. 243.
§ 125-1. Noise prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for a person to make, continue or cause to be made or
continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which does
or is likely to annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of others.
§ 125-2. Definition of noise.
A. Without intending to limit the generality of § 125-1, the following acts
are hereby declared to be examples of loud, disturbing and unnecessary
noise in violation of this chapter:
(1) Radios; televisions; phonographs. The playing, use or operation of
any radio receiving set, television, musical instrument, phonograph
or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of
sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of
neighboring inhabitants or with louder volume than is necessary
for convenient hearing for persons who are in the room, vehicle or
chamber in which the machine or device is operated and who are
voluntary listeners. The operation of such a set, instrument,
phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m., so that it is clearly audible at a distance of 100 feet
from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located, shall
be prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter.
§ 121-10 NOISE § 125-2
125:333
(2) Yelling; shouting. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on
the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m., or at any time or place, which annoys or disturbs the
quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel,
motel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity.
(3) Animals; birds. The keeping of animals or birds which, by causing
frequent or long-continued noise, disturbs the comfort or repose of
any person in the vicinity; but nothing herein contained is intended
to apply to a dog pound or kennel licensed in accordance with
Chapter 46, Article I, of this Code.
(4) Horns. The sounding of a horn or warning device on an automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle except when required by law or
when necessary to give timely warning of the approach of the
vehicle or as a warning of impending danger to persons driving
other vehicles or to persons on the street. No person shall sound a
horn or warning device on an automobile, motorcycle, bus or other
vehicle which emits an unreasonably loud or harsh sound or for an
unnecessary or unreasonable period of time.
(5) Exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of a steam
engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicles,
except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises.
(6) Defect in vehicle or load. The use of an automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair or so loaded that it creates loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
(7) Construction or repair. The carrying on of excavation, demolition,
construction, repair or alteration work other than between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.; the carrying on of construction,
repair or alteration work by a homeowner on his own dwelling or
property, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
In case of urgent necessity or in the interest of public health or
safety, the Superintendent of Public Works may grant a permit for
excavation, demolition, construction, repair or alteration work for a
period not to exceed three days, by the terms of which permit such
work may be carried on between 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(8) Schools; courts; churches; hospitals. The creation of excessive
noise on a street adjacent to a school, institution of learning,
church or court while in use or adjacent to a hospital, which
unreasonably interferes with the working of the institution or
which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided
that conspicuous signs are displayed in such a street indicating that
it is a school, hospital or court street.
B. The above enumeration is intended to give typical illustrations of
prohibited noise and shall not be construed as exclusive.
§ 125-2 WASHINGTON CODE § 125-3
125:334
§ 125-3. Exceptions.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply to:
§ 125-4. Sound trucks.
Sound trucks may be operated in accordance with the following regulations
upon the issuance of a permit by the Township Committee for each occasion
and each location:
Chapter 129
OCCUPANCY PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 56.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 87.
Housing — See Ch. 105, Ch. 240.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 121.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 148.
A. The use of bells, chimes or sound amplifiers by churches engaged in
church activities.
B. Activities of municipal departments in the performance of their duties,
drills or public demonstrations.
C. Activities in public parks, playgrounds or public buildings under
permission or authority of municipal officials.
D. The playing by a band or orchestra in a hall or building or in the open
air, where duly authorized.
A. Sound trucks shall not be operated in residential zones in the township
before 9:00 a.m. and after 7:00 p.m.
B. Sound trucks shall not be operated in commercial zones in the township
before 9:00 a.m. and after 9:00 p.m.
C. Moving sound trucks shall keep to the extreme right-hand side of the
road and shall proceed at a speed of not less than 10 miles per hour.
D. Stationary sound trucks shall be prohibited in all residential zones in
the township, but may be operated in commercial zones during the
hours referred to above.
E. For the purposes of this section, "residential zones" shall mean the
zones so designated in Chapter 217, Zoning, and "commercial zones"
shall mean and include all parts of the township other than residential
zones.
§ 125-3 NOISE § 129-1
125:335
§ 129-1. Certificate of habitability required.
The owner of any multiple dwelling unit, rooming unit other than in a hotel
or motel or apartment shall hereafter not cause or permit the initial rental
or lease or subsequent change in occupancy of an individual dwelling unit
therein without requesting and obtaining a certificate of habitability for said
dwelling unit.
§ 129-2. Inspection and issuance of certificate of habitability.
A. Filing statement.
(1) Every owner of a multiple dwelling, rooming unit, other than in a
hotel or motel, or apartment shall file with the Construction Official
a statement under oath containing the following information:
(a) The name and address of the premises.
(b) The name, address and telephone number of the owner and the
managing agent and/or superintendent, if any.
(c) The number of dwelling units in said multiple dwelling,
rooming unit, other than in a hotel or motel, or apartment.
(d) Identification of the dwelling units by number or letter and the
name of the tenant in each such unit as of the date of said
statement.
(e) The term of the lease or occupancy of each tenant.
(2) Within 30 days after the change in any tenancy, the owner shall
furnish the Construction Official with the name of the new tenant,
the unit occupied and the term of the lease or occupancy.
B. Procedures. The following procedures shall govern the requesting and
issuance of a certificate of habitability:
(1) At least 15 days prior to the expected vacancy of a dwelling unit by
a tenant, the owner of said premises shall notify the Construction
Official, in writing, of the anticipated date of said vacancy and
request the Construction Official to make an inspection and issue a
certificate of habitability.
(2) In the event that the dwelling unit is vacated without prior notice to
the owner, the owner shall promptly notify the Construction
Official, in writing, of the vacancy and request the Construction
Official to make an inspection and issue a certificate of habitability.
(3) In cases of tenancies for a term of less than three months, the
notice requirement of the above subsections shall not apply.
However, if one or more such short-term changes in occupancy
occur within a calendar year and the dwelling unit involved has not
been inspected under the other provisions of this section during
§ 129-1 WASHINGTON CODE § 129-2
125:336
§ 129-3. Fees.
The fee for a certificate of habitability shall be paid in full at the time the
request for inspections is made by the landlord in accordance with the
following schedule:
§ 129-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-15-1984 by Ord. No.
25-84; 4-16-2007 by Ord. No. 9-07]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject, upon conviction, to the penalties
provided in § 1-3 of this Code.
§ 129-5. Fee for certificate of firesafety. [Added 9-16-1991 by Ord.
No. 29-91]
The fee for a certificate of firesafety pursuant to P.L. 1991, c. 92,64 shall be
in the amount of $25 and shall be paid at the time that application is made
for certification.
§ 129-6. Certificate of smoke detector and carbon monoxide alarm
compliance. [Added 12-18-2017 by Ord. No. 13-17]
that calendar year, the owner shall, in the month of January of the
following year, notify the Construction Official of such tenancies
and request an inspection and the issuance of a certificate of
habitability.
C. Issuance of certificate of habitability. Within five working days of his
receipt of a request for an inspection, the Construction Official or a
member of his staff shall inspect the dwelling unit for compliance with
the provisions of Chapter 56 and all other applicable township
ordinances and shall either issue a certificate of habitability upon
determining that the dwelling unit is safe and fit for human habitation
or notify the owner of specific deficiencies which prevent such issuance.
Upon correction of the deficiencies, the owner shall request a
reinspection and the Construction Official shall issue a certificate of
habitability if he determines that the corrections have been made.
D. Posting of certificate of habitability. The owner shall post a copy of the
certificate of habitability in a prominent location in each dwelling unit.
A. For each inspection of a dwelling unit: $50.
B. For each requested reinspection to obtain a certificate or for the second
inspection in any calendar year: $25.
A. Before any existing single-family, two-family or multifamily dwelling, on
or after the effective date of this section, is sold, leased, or otherwise
made subject to a change of occupancy for residential purposes, the
64.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-198.1 et seq.
§ 129-2 NOISE § 129-6
125:337
Chapter 132
OPEN PITS AND TRENCHES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Geologic hazards — See Ch. 98.
Soil removal — See Ch. 164.
Street openings — See Ch. 172, Art. V.
Zoning — See Ch. 217.
§ 132-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED — Deserted, vacated, unused or untended.
OPENING — Includes the terms "hole, pit, excavation, cellar, foundation,
trench or other unnatural declivity."
STREET — Includes any private road, street, alley, right-of-way or easement
not under the control of Washington Township. (Openings in public roads,
streets, easements and rights-of-way are governed by Chapter 172.)
§ 132-2. Dangerous conditions prohibited.
No person shall, within the limits of the Township of Washington, suffer
or permit the existence, on any public or private land, of any abandoned
or unprotected hole, pit, excavation, foundation, cellar, trench or other
unnatural declivity in which stagnant water or debris is retained or which is
dangerous to any person, including but not by way of limitation children's
being or coming upon said land.
§ 132-3. Guarding, fencing and covering.
Any person, firm, partnership, utility or corporation or the owner or
occupant of any land contracting for or conducting the digging of any
opening or hole shall completely cover said opening with a suitable cover
capable of sustaining a weight of 500 pounds of pressure for each 10 square
feet or a weight of 40,000 pounds if said opening is located in a private
dwelling owner shall obtain a certificate of smoke detector and carbon
monoxide alarm compliance. No dwelling unit shall change occupancy
until one or more smoke detectors (or other approved fire alarm
system) are installed for each dwelling unit subject to changing of
occupancy in accordance with all the requirements of the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code and the Uniform Fire Code.
B. Any dwelling owner who fails to comply with the provisions of
Subsection A of this section shall be liable to a penalty of $250 for each
violation.
§ 129-6 WASHINGTON CODE § 132-3
132:338
street, road, alley or right-of-way unless the same is guarded by a person
over the age of 18 or is fenced and lighted in such a manner that children or
other persons will be properly restrained and safeguarded from falling into
said opening as required by the enforcing authority.
§ 132-4. Enforcing authority.
The Chief of Police, the Health Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer or
their duly authorized agents shall be responsible for the enforcement of this
chapter.
§ 132-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-15-1984 by Ord. No.
25-84]
Chapter 137
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 42.
Animals — See Ch. 46.
Littering — See Ch. 114.
Trees and shrubs — See Ch. 196.
§ 137-1. Prohibited acts.
While in a public park or recreational area, all persons shall conduct
themselves in a proper and orderly manner, and no person shall:
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject, upon conviction, to the penalties provided in § 1-3 of this Code.
[Amended 4-16-2007 by Ord. No. 9-07]
B. Each and every day in which a violation of this chapter exists shall
constitute a separate violation.
A. Willfully mark, deface, tamper with or deface or remove any public
property.
B. Except while using the Washington Township Community Garden in
accordance with the regulations set forth in § 137-7, dig or remove any
soil, shrubs, or plants or other wood materials. [Amended 5-20-2013
by Ord. No. 09-13]
C. Damage, remove or injure the flowers or seed of any tree or plant.
D. Hunt, harm or kill any animal life unless that person has been
specifically authorized or licensed to do so by the Township Committee.
[Amended 10-18-2010 by Ord. No. 20-10]
§ 132-3 OPEN PITS AND TRENCHES § 137-1
132:339
E. Discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any
fountain or other body of water in or adjacent to any park any substance
which may result in the pollution of the waters.
F. Dump any refuse or trash anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall
place refuse in the proper receptacle where these are provided. Where
receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish shall be carried away
from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly
disposed of elsewhere.
G. Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or set against trees or any other
place where other persons may trip over or be injured by such bicycle.
H. Swim or wade in any waters in or adjacent to any park, except in such
waters and at such places as are provided therefor, and except in
compliance with such regulations as are herein set forth or may be
hereinafter adopted.
I. Fish in any area where bathing is permitted.
J. Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and
before all trash is disposed of.
K. Set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of
overnight camping.
L. Have or bring alcoholic beverages or drink such at any time without a
permit from the Township. [Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 07-10]
M. Have in his possession or set, or otherwise cause to explode or
discharge or burn, any firecrackers or other fireworks.
N. Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private.
O. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying
any area or participating in any activity under the authority of a permit.
P. Post any sign or inscription whatever on any public lands or highways
or roads adjacent to a park.
Q. Have in his or her possession glass containers of any type. [Added
7-15-1985 by Ord. No. 26-85]
R. Except while at the Long Valley Dog Park in accordance with the
regulations set forth in § 137-6, allow, permit or suffer any dog owned
by them or under their control to enter upon park property, whether on
or off a leash. [Added 7-15-1985 by Ord. No. 26-85; amended
7-16-2007 by Ord. No. 18-07]
S. Play golf, drive, pitch, putt or chip any golf balls in other than
designated areas. [Added 7-15-1985 by Ord. No. 26-85]
§ 137-1 WASHINGTON CODE § 137-1
132:340
§ 137-2. Enforcement.
This chapter shall also be enforced by the Police Department.
§ 137-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-15-1984 by Ord. No.
25-84; 6-15-1998 by Ord. No. 25-98; 4-16-2007 by Ord. No. 9-07]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or any rule or
regulation promulgated pursuant hereto shall, upon conviction, be subject
to the replacement, repair or restoration of any damaged park property
and shall be subject, upon conviction, to the penalties provided in § 1-3 of
this Code. In addition, repeat offenders may lose the right to use Township
recreational facilities.
§ 137-4. Provisions to be supplemental.
This chapter is in addition to and not in derogation of any other ordinance
involving or affecting any of the subject matters contained in this chapter.
§ 137-5. Recreation fees; exemptions. [Added 3-16-1992 by Ord. No.
1-92; amended 6-15-1998 by Ord. No. 25-98]
T. Ride, drive, operate or park a motorized vehicle, except on clearly
defined roads, drives or parking areas [Added 7-15-1985 by Ord. No.
26-85]
U. Trespass on any park or recreational area temporarily closed for
maintenance and appropriately posted by the authority of the Township
Committee. [Added 4-18-1988 by Ord. No. 10-88]
V. Be present in a park after dusk or before dawn, either on foot or by
vehicle, unless in connection with an event authorized or sponsored by
the Township. [Added 10-17-2016 by Ord. No. 11-16]
A. 65 Fees for the use of Township recreation fields, other than Rock Spring
Park, shall be in accordance with the following: [Added 6-20-2011 by
Ord. No. 09-11]
(1) Township recreation fields, with the exception of Rock Spring Park,
shall be available for use only by resident groups/organizations/
leagues. For purposes of this section, "resident" shall mean that at
least 80% of the participants of a youth group/organization/league
and at least 50% of the participants of an adult group/organization/
league are residents of the Township of Washington, Morris County.
The percentage limitations set forth above shall not apply to
nonresident visiting groups/organizations/leagues who are
participating in a game with a resident group/organization/league.
65.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, concerning exemption from field usage fees, as
amended, was repealed 4-20-2009 by Ord. No. 04-09.
§ 137-1 OPEN PITS AND TRENCHES § 137-5
132:341
(2) All resident not-for-profit sports groups/organizations/leagues or
other resident not-for-profit sport entities desiring to use Township
recreation fields shall pay a field usage fee of $10 per participant
per season per sport due two weeks prior to the first field usage.
Refunds of any overpayment will be issued upon receipt of a
certified updated participant list. The field usage fees will be
placed in a dedicated trust account to be used only for field
maintenance or capital improvements to the recreation fields.
(3) If any group subject to Subsection A(2) above certifies to the
Township that it has waived the registration fee that it charges to a
participant based on a demonstrated hardship, the Township will
waive the fee set forth in Subsection A(2) above for each such
participant.
B. Fees for the use of Rock Spring Park shall be in accordance with the
following: [Amended 7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 24-03; 4-20-2009 by
Ord. No. 04-09; 6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 09-11]
(1) All resident (as defined in Subsection A(1) above) sport groups/
organizations/leagues or other sport entities desiring to use
Township recreation fields at Rock Spring Park shall pay a field
usage fee of $10 per participant per season per sport due two
weeks prior to the first field usage. All nonresident sport groups/
organizations/leagues or other sport entities desiring to use
Township recreation fields at Rock Spring Park shall pay a field
usage fee of $20 per participant per season per sport due two
weeks prior to the first field usage. Refunds of any overpayment
will be issued upon receipt of a certified updated participant list.
The field usage fees will be placed in a dedicated trust account to
be used only for field maintenance or capital improvements to the
recreation fields.
(2) If any group subject to Subsection B(1) above certifies to the
Township that it has waived the registration fee that it charges to a
participant based on a demonstrated hardship, the Township will
waive the fee set forth in Subsection B(1) above for each such
participant.
C. 66 All non-sports groups/organizations not subject to Subsection A(2) or
B(1) above, shall pay a field usage fee of $25 per hour for the use of
Township recreation fields. [Added 6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 09-11]
D. A fee of $50 for garbage removal shall be payable, in addition to any
other fee charged, for any tournament or special event, not sponsored
by the Township, which is attended by more than 100 individuals per
day. [Amended 7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 24-03]
66.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, concerning reservation fees, was repealed 4-20-2009
by Ord. No. 04-09.
§ 137-5 WASHINGTON CODE § 137-5
132:342
§ 137-6. Long Valley Dog Park. [Added 7-16-2007 by Ord. No. 18-07]
E. All requests by groups or organizations for use of township recreational
facilities shall be made in writing on a Washington Township Facility
Request Form.
F. The Recreation Director or Coordinator must be provided with a
complete list of registrants, including addresses, for all programs,
activities or events prior to the commencement of any program or
activity. [Amended 7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 24-03]
G. No later than two weeks prior to the start of the scheduled activity, all
groups and organizations using township recreation facilities shall pay
the required fee(s) and submit a certificate of insurance to the township
evidencing general liability coverage of a minimum $1,000,000 per
occurrence/$2,000,000 aggregate and naming the township as an
additional insured.
H. Use of the concession stand is at the discretion of the Recreation
Director or Coordinator and is contingent upon the representative from
the group or organization who will be in charge of concessions
completing a food handlers course administered or approved by the
Township Board of Health. The concession stand may be used only for
the preparation of food and for the storage of food, serving and cleaning
items. The concession stand must be left clean and undamaged when
the use is terminated. A fee of $50 per season shall be payable for the
use of the concession stand. [Amended 7-21-2003 by Ord. No.
24-03]
I. Pavilion rental shall be $150 per day for residents (including not-forprofit
youth groups/organizations based in Washington Township where
at least 60% of the participants are residents of the Township) and $250
per day for nonresidents and for-profit organizations. [Added
7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 24-03]
J. The fees for the use of the Long Valley Dog Park shall be as follows:
[Added 7-16-2007 by Ord. No. 18-07]
(1) Township residents: $10/year.
(2) Nonresidents: $15/year.
A. No person shall be permitted to bring a dog to the Long Valley Dog Park
unless a dog park pass tag has been issued for the dog and the
appropriate fees paid in accordance with § 137-5J. Long Valley Dog Park
tags will be issued by the Township upon proof of the following:
(1) Current dog license issued by a municipality of the State of New
Jersey.
(2) Proof of negative stool sample within the six months prior to
application for a dog park tag.
§ 137-5 OPEN PITS AND TRENCHES § 137-6
132:343
(3) Proof from veterinarian that the dog is current on rabies
vaccination and distemper, parvo virus, hepatitis, influenza and
bordetella inoculations.
(4) Execution of a release of liability form.
B. Dog park pass tags must be renewed annually and a fee paid as set
forth in § 137-5J. Dog park pass tags are not transferable to other dogs.
C. Rules and regulations. In addition to the rules and regulations
contained in this chapter, the following rules and regulations shall apply
to the use and operation of the Long Valley Dog Park:
(1) The park shall be open from 8:00 a.m. until dusk unless otherwise
posted. No person or dog shall be allowed on the premises when
the park is closed.
(2) No animals, other than dogs, are permitted.
(3) Dogs must wear collars with a valid New Jersey dog registration
tag and a Long Valley Dog Park pass tag on the collar. No prong/
spike collars are allowed in the park.
(4) All dogs must be under the control of an individual at least 18 years
of age at all times while at the dog park (hereinafter "handler"). No
more than three dogs are permitted per handler.
(5) All dogs must be leashed in their cars prior to entering the parking
lot and must be on a leash when entering and exiting the main
double-gate enclosure.
(6) Dogs that become aggressive towards other dogs or people or
uncontrollable must be leashed immediately and removed from the
park. This behavior will result in the dog park pass tag being taken
away. Dogs with a history of dangerous or aggressive behavior are
prohibited from the park.
(7) Female dogs in heat are not permitted in the park.
(8) Dogs under the age of four months are not permitted. Dogs over
the age of six months must be spayed or neutered.
(9) Handlers must stay in the park at all times with leash in hand,
unless another handler agrees to maintain control over the dog.
(10) Handlers must clean up any fecal matter deposited by their dog.
Waste bags will be provided.
(11) Dog bites must be reported immediately to the Police Department,
the Washington Township Board of Health and the Animal Control
Officer.
§ 137-6 WASHINGTON CODE § 137-6
132:344
§ 137-7. Washington Township Community Garden. [Added
5-20-2013 by Ord. No. 09-13]
(12) Children under the age of 10 are not permitted in the fenced-in
area. All children must be accompanied by an adult and closely
supervised.
(13) Access gates must be properly secured upon entering/leaving the
off-leash area.
(14) No food of any kind is permitted inside the fenced area.
(15) Handlers must provide water and water bowls, if desired, for their
dogs.
(16) The Township shall not provide any supervision of the Long Valley
Dog Park. Handlers are responsible for the actions and behavior of
their dogs and are strictly liable for any incidents that occur in the
park. All persons using the Long Valley Dog Park assume any and
all risks associated with the use of the park. Parking lot and paths
will not be cleared during snow events.
A. Establishment. A permanent community garden is hereby established
within the Township of Washington to be located at Palmer Park on
Bartley Road in the Township and shall be designated as the
Washington Township Community Garden. The community garden may
be expanded or relocated from time to time on Township property as
designated by the Township Committee.
B. The Washington Township Community Garden Committee. The
community garden shall be managed by the Washington Township
Community Garden Committee, who shall enforce the rules and
regulations set forth in this ordinance under the direction of the
Recreation Director. The Washington Township Garden Committee may
require gardeners to sign a use agreement to supplement the rules and
regulations set forth in this ordinance, provided that the Township
Administrator has approved the terms of the use agreement.
C. Use of garden. The community garden is available to all residents of the
Township age 14 and over, on a first-come, first-served basis for the
purpose of growing fruits and vegetables, flowers and herbs. The
community garden is also available to nonresidents provided there are
plots available after registration has been open to residents for 30 days,
except that for calendar year 2013, the registration waiting period for
nonresidents will be waived. Nonresidents may rent for only one year at
a time. Each person renting a plot shall be required to enter into an
agreement governing the use of the plot(s) with the Washington
Township Community Garden Committee as well an agreement with the
Township of Washington pursuant to Subsection F of this section.
§ 137-6 OPEN PITS AND TRENCHES § 137-7
132:345
D. Fees. No person shall be permitted to maintain a plot in the Washington
Township Community Garden unless they have registered for the plot,
signed the required agreements and paid the applicable fee.
(1) The annual fee for rental of an eight-foot by eight-foot plot shall be
$20 for a resident and $30 for a nonresident. The fee for a threeyear
rental shall be $50.
(2) The annual fee for rental of an eight-foot by sixteen-foot plot shall
be $35 for residents and $45 for nonresidents. The fee for a threeyear
rental shall be $80.
(3) Fees are payable to the Township of Washington, are
nonrefundable and must be paid at the time of registration for the
plot.
(4) No more than two plots may be rented by a household.
(5) Veterans must register for a plot but will not be required to pay the
annual rental fee.
E. Rules and regulations. The use of the Washington Township Community
Garden will be subject to the following rules and regulations:
(1) Hours: Dawn to dusk. Gates must be kept closed and locked at all
times.
(2) Season: May 1 through November 15 or as otherwise established
by the Washington Township Community Garden Committee.
Cultivation and planting must be started by June 1 and plots must
be tended through the time of fall cleanup. Persons renting plots
are expected to spend at least four hours per week on plot
maintenance in order to cultivate a productive and attractive
garden plot.
(3) Parking: In designated areas only.
(4) Structures: Elaborate garden structures, fountains or the use of
multiple decorative items is prohibited. The Washington Township
Garden Committee must approve any structures or decorative
items used in an individual plot to be sure that such structures do
not shade adjacent plots.
(5) Weeds: All waste, weeds, etc shall be disposed of off-site except for
compostable matter which may be disposed of in areas designated
by the Washington Township Garden Committee.
(6) Water: Water from the watering spigots provided in the community
garden is nonpotable and is for use in the garden only. Hoses are
not permitted. Water must be securely turned off after each use.
(7) Fertilizers and pesticides. The use of nonorganic pesticides,
fungicides, herbicides and fertilizers is prohibited.
§ 137-7 WASHINGTON CODE § 137-7
132:346
Chapter 140
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 39.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 42.
Curfew — See Ch. 74.
Littering — See Ch. 114.
Loitering — See Ch. 117.
Noise — See Ch. 125.
Defacing park property — See Ch. 137.
Tobacco sales — See Ch. 189.
§ 140-1. (Reserved).67
(8) Pets: Pets and other animals are prohibited at all times.
(9) Smoking: Smoking is prohibited at all times.
(10)No invasive species or corn may be planted in the community
garden without the consent of the Washington Township
Community Garden Committee.
(11) Rules of conduct: All gardeners and their visitors shall observe the
rules of conduct established by the Washington Township
Community Garden Committee as well as the rules and regulations
for the use of Township parks and recreation areas set forth in
§ 137-1.
F. Indemnification: All persons using the Washington Township
Community Garden assume any and all risks associated with the use of
the community garden. Prior to use of the community garden, each
person shall execute and deliver to the Township a hold harmless and
indemnification agreement.
G. Violations: Use of the community garden is a privilege. The Township
reserves the right to revoke the use of the community garden by any
person for failure to observe the rules and regulations established in
this Ordinance or by the Washington Township Garden Committee.
Upon violation of any rule or regulation, a written notice will be issued
and the violator will be given a reasonable opportunity to correct the
violation. If the violation does not cease or is not cured within 14 days, a
second written notice will be issued. If the violation has not ceased or
been cured within 14 days of the second notice, the use of the
community garden for the remainder of the season may be revoked and
the plot may be reassigned. Any person whose permission to use a plot
is revoked may appeal the decision to the Recreation Director, who shall
hold a hearing on the matter within 15 days of the revocation.
67.Editor's Note: Former § 140-1. Intoxication, was repealed 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 2-99.
§ 137-7 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 140-2
140:347
§ 140-2. Disturbing proceedings of official bodies.
No person shall interfere with, hinder, disturb or obstruct the proceedings,
functions or deliberations of the Township Committee, the Board of Health
or any school or other official body of the township, nor shall any person
molest, obstruct, hinder or interfere with any municipal officer, school
official or teacher or official engaged in the performance of his duty or
knowingly resist or oppose any person authorized by law to make arrests or
to serve any writ, bill, order or process when the person so authorized is
acting in the performance of his duty.
§ 140-3. (Reserved).68
§ 140-4. Obstruction of streets.
No person shall unnecessarily obstruct any street, avenue, road, highway,
alley or public place with any kind of vehicle or box, lumber, wood or any
other thing. The provisions of this subsection shall not prevent persons
who are building from occupying, until notified by a township official to
cease such occupancy, 1/2 of the street in front of the place where they
are building, unless another person is building on the opposite side of the
street, in which case neither shall occupy more than 1/4 of the street. No
person who is building shall continue such occupancy of any street after
notice from a township official or police officer to discontinue the same.
§ 140-5. (Reserved).69
§ 140-6. (Reserved).
§ 140-7. Removal of notices.
No person shall willfully or maliciously remove, deface or alter any notice
posted pursuant to law and forbidding trespassing, with intent to destroy
the notice.
§ 140-8. (Reserved).70
§ 140-9. (Reserved).
§ 140-10. (Reserved).
§ 140-11. (Reserved).
68.Editor's Note: Former § 140-3, Obscene or indecent writing on any property, was repealed
3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 2-99.
69.Editor's Note: Former §§ 140-5, Damage to property, as amended 5-21-1979 by Ord. No.
45-79, and 140-6, Use of false coins or slugs, were repealed 3-13-1999 by Ord. No. 2-99.
70.Editor's Note: Former §§140-8, Repeated telephoning, 140-9, Prostitution and disorderly
houses, 140-10, Sale of indecent objects and performance of lewd acts, 140-11, Nudity,
140-12, Possession of tools or weapons with intent to commit unlawful act, 140-13, Sale of
cigarettes or tobacco to minors, and 140-14, Assault and battery, were repealed 3-15-1999
by Ord. No. 2-99.
§ 140-2 WASHINGTON CODE § 140-12
140:348
§ 140-12. (Reserved).
§ 140-13. (Reserved).
§ 140-14. (Reserved).
§ 140-15. Permitting minors in taverns or dance halls.
No person owning, keeping or having the management or control of any
public dance hall where alcoholic beverages are sold or any tavern, whether
licensed as such or not, or any agent or servant of such person, shall admit
thereto or permit or suffer to be or remain therein any child under the age
of 16 years unaccompanied by a parent, guardian or adult friend.
§ 140-16. (Reserved).71
§ 140-17. (Reserved).
§ 140-18. (Reserved).72
§ 140-19. (Reserved).73
§ 140-20. (Reserved).
§ 140-21. Trespassing.
No person shall trespass upon the property of another without the
permission of the owner, occupant or lessee of the property.
§ 140-22. (Reserved).74
§ 140-23. Interfering with Fire, Police or First Aid Departments
during an emergency.
A. No person during an alarm of fire or other emergency shall willfully
hinder, prevent or deter in any manner or by any device whatsoever any
fireman, policeman or other person from rendering lawful assistance in
abating or quelling such fire or assisting in any other emergency or
willfully hinder or interfere with any fireman or policeman or official
from going to or returning from any fire or emergency.
B. No person shall hinder or obstruct the passage of any fire engine, police
car or emergency vehicles in going to or from a fire or other emergency.
71.Editor's Note: Former §§ 140-16, False emergency alarm report, and 140-17, Failure to
relinquish telephone in an emergency, were repealed 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 2-99.
72.Editor's Note: Former § 140-18. Abandoned refrigerators; violations and penalties,was
repealed 4-16-2007 by Ord. No. 9-07.
73.Editor's Note: Former §§ 140-19, Possession of alcoholic beverage by minor; exception, and
140-20, Gambling, were repealed 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 2-99.
74.Editor's Note: Former § 140-22, Peeping Toms, was repealed 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 2-99
§ 140-12 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 140-23
140:349
§ 140-24. (Reserved)75
§ 140-25. Damage to roadways. [Added 5-21-1979 by Ord. No.
45-79]
No person shall:
Chapter 143
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 27. Noise — See Ch. 125.
C. No person shall follow an emergency vehicle to an emergency with the
intention of sightseeing.
A. Mutilate, alter or remove any notice or damage, destroy or remove any
warning sign or signal or remove any barricade placed or posted on any
property within the Township of Washington.
B. Drive any vehicle over or upon the closed portion of any roadway.
C. Violate any rule or regulation for the use of any roadway.
D. Drive, move or operate any track-type or non-rubber-wheeled
construction vehicle or equipment on any township road, except where
such vehicles or equipment are being operated in accordance with a
street opening permit issued pursuant to Chapter 172, Article V.
Nothing herein shall be construed as limiting the right to operate any
farm tractors, traction equipment or farm machinery which is
authorized to travel on public highways pursuant to State Motor
Vehicles and Traffic Regulations, N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq., or the right to
operate a self-propelled unregistered vehicle pursuant to a crossing
permit issued by the Director of Motor Vehicles. [Added 6-20-1983 by
Ord. No. 12-83]
75.Editor's Note: Former § 140-24, Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages on
school property, was repealed 3-15-2004 by Ord No. 5-04.
§ 140-23 WASHINGTON CODE § 140-25
140:350
ARTICLE I
Solicitation
[Adopted 12-20-1971 as Sec. 7-1 of the Revised General Ordinances;
amended in its entirety 9-20-2004 by Ord. No. 24-04]
§ 143-1. License required.
Unless otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person
to engage in solicitation activities, as defined in § 143-2 of this article,
within the Township, without first obtaining a license as provided herein.
§ 143-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MERCHANDISE — Any goods or other property capable of being the object
of a sale but shall not include items of nominal value given in exchange
for a contribution to any political, religious, charitable, civic, educational
or philanthropic organization or society or service club or any organization
recognized as tax-exempt under the United States Internal Revenue Code.
SOLICITOR — A canvasser, hawker or peddler and shall include any person
who engages in the practice of going from place to place, house to house,
door to door, or person to person, including an employee or agent of
another, traveling either by foot, truck, automobile or other conveyance.
§ 143-3. Exemptions.
COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION—Selling or taking orders for
commercial purposes, including offering to sell or take orders for
goods, merchandise, wares or other articles for future delivery or for
services to be performed in the future.
A.
NONCOMMERCIAL SOLICITATION—Requesting contributions of
funds, property or anything of value or the pledge of any type of
future donation or selling or offering for sale any type of property,
including but not limited to goods, tickets, books and pamphlets for
political, charitable, religious, civic, philanthropic, educational or other
noncommercial purposes; conducting surveys, opinion polls and any
such similar work; proselytizing; soliciting participation in or support of
any group, individual or organization; or distributing circulars or other
complimentary material.
B.
A. Any veteran or exempt fireman who holds a license issued pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and 45:24-10 shall be exempt from the licensing
requirements of this article but shall be required to file a registration
form with the Township Clerk containing the information set forth in
Subsection C(1)(a) through (f) below.
B. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following persons:
§ 143-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 143-3
140:351
(1) Officers or employees of the Township, county, state or federal
government when on official business.
(2) Employees of any public utility which is subject to the regulation of
the Board of Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey; provided,
however, that such employee shall display the identification badge
or card issued by his employer.
(3) Any person selling fruits and farm products grown by himself with
or without the help of others.
C. All noncommercial solicitation. Any person engaging in any
noncommercial solicitation activity, as defined in § 143-2, whether or
not such activity involves solicitation of funds or donations, is exempt
from the licensing requirements of this article but must register with
the Township Clerk as follows:
(1) Any such person shall, at least 24 hours prior to the
commencement of such noncommercial canvassing or solicitation,
present himself to the office of the Township Clerk and shall
provide said Township Clerk with the following written information:
(a) Nature and anticipated duration of such canvassing or
solicitation.
(b) The number of persons who will be canvassing or soliciting.
(c) Name and address of the person in charge of such canvassing
or solicitation.
(d) Full name and address of the political, charitable, religious,
educational, civic or philanthropic organization or service club
on behalf of which such solicitation or canvassing is to be
conducted and a letter from such organization authorizing the
applicant to act as its representative.
(e) The names and addresses of the officers and directors of the
organization.
(f) The names of persons who are expected to go from door to
door or to distribute materials within the Township, including
their address, driver's license number and social security
number. This requirement shall not apply to persons under the
age of 18 years. [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 03-17]
(2) The purpose of such registration is that the identity of persons
going door to door or distributing materials within the Township
may be established for the protection and maintenance of the
health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Township and of
those going door to door.
(3) Each representative or agent of the organization, except persons
under the age of 18 years, shall carry proper identification
§ 143-3 WASHINGTON CODE § 143-3
140:352
§ 143-4. Application for license.
Every applicant for a license under this article shall file with the Township
Clerk a sworn written application, in duplicate on a form to be furnished by
the Clerk, which shall give the following information:
indicating the name of the organization and his own name and
address and shall be prepared to display it upon request and,
in addition, shall display the registration number issued by the
Township. [Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 03-17]
(4) The registration number shall be surrendered to the Township
Clerk when the canvassing or solicitation is completed. [Amended
3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 03-17]
(5) All persons and organizations subject to this Subsection C shall
comply with all other applicable provisions of this article.
(6) The Township Clerk shall maintain a record of all registrations and
registration numbers issued pursuant to this Subsection C.
(7) If the solicitation activity exceeds 90 days, each person and
organization subject to this Subsection C shall be required to reregister
with the Township Clerk.
A. Full name, including middle initial, and physical description, including
height, weight, hair color and eye color, of the applicant.
B. Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant and
proof of same (plus addresses for last three years).
C. Full date of birth and place of birth.
D. Social security number.
E. A brief statement of the nature of the business or organization
conducting the solicitation activities and a description of the
merchandise or service, if any, to be sold or distributed.
F. If employed by or representing another, the name, business address and
telephone number of the employer, sponsor or organization being
represented, together with a letter with original signatures from such
employer, sponsor or organization authorizing the applicant to act as its
representative.
G. Licenses shall be effective from the date of issuance and shall expire
December 31 of the calendar year unless issued for a shorter term.
[Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 03-17]
H. If a vehicle is to be used, a description of such vehicle and its license
number.
I. The state of issuance and number of the driver's license.
§ 143-3 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 143-4
140:353
§ 143-5. Fees. [Amended 5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 10-09; 5-15-2017 by
Ord. No. 08-17]
§ 143-6. Investigation and issuance of license.
J. The place where the goods or property to be sold or offered for sale are
manufactured or produced, where such goods or property are located
at the time such application is filed and the proposed method of
delivery.
K. Two photographs of the applicant taken within 60 days immediately
prior to the date of the application, which photograph shall clearly show
the head and shoulders of the applicant and shall measure two inches
by two inches.
L. Two business references.
M. A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature
of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
N. Applicants shall obtain a criminal history background check. The
appropriate ORI number and additional information may be obtained by
the applicant from the Township Police Department. Applicants should
follow the instructions for obtaining a criminal background check which
includes making an appointment to be fingerprinted by the state
contract vendor. Results will be sent to the Washington Township Police
Department. Applicants who fail to obtain a criminal history
background check or otherwise refuse to consent to or cooperate in
securing a criminal history check shall not be considered for a peddler/
solicitor license. [Amended 5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 10-09;
5-15-2017 by Ord. No. 08-17]
A. Administrative fee. At the time the application is filed, a fee of $25 per
solicitor shall be paid to the Township Clerk to cover the cost of
processing the application and investigating the facts stated therein.
B. License fee. The license fee, which shall be charged by the Township
Clerk for the issuance of a license hereunder, shall be $5 per day per
solicitor, $10 per week per solicitor, $25 per month per solicitor, and
$100 per year per solicitor.
C. Where an organization has several agents engaged in solicitation
activities, each agent shall be licensed separately, and each shall pay
the appropriate fees.
A. When the aforesaid application is properly filled out and signed by the
applicant, the original and duplicate thereof shall be filed with the
Township Clerk; the Clerk shall refer the duplicate to the Chief of Police
who shall make, or cause to be made, an investigation to ascertain that
the applicant has not been convicted of a crime (and is not subject to
any outstanding criminal warrants or indictments) relating to fraud,
§ 143-4 WASHINGTON CODE § 143-6
140:354
§ 143-7. Identification.
deception, theft or assault, and that he is selling or soliciting for a
project free from fraud or other criminal purpose. The duplicate shall
be kept on file in the Police Department upon completion of the
investigation. The investigation shall include a criminal history name
search identification check and fingerprint check pursuant to N.J.S.A.
53:1-20.5 et seq. The criminal history check shall be kept confidential.
For the purposes of this check, the Washington Township Police
Department is hereby authorized to have access to the Criminal History
Record Information file through the State Bureau of Investigation.
B. As a result of such investigation, the Chief of Police shall note on the
application his recommendation and his reasons therefor and return
the application to the Township Clerk. Such recommendation shall be
returned to the Township Clerk within 10 days of the Police
Department's receipt of the duplicate application.
(1) Any recommendation by the Chief of Police that a license should
not be issued to the applicant shall be based on one or more of the
following findings with respect to the applicant:
(a) Conviction of a crime adverse to solicitation activities pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-1. In determining whether a conviction
relates adversely to solicitation activities, the following factors
shall be considered:
[1] Nature of solicitation activities.
[2] Nature and seriousness of the crime.
[3] Circumstances under which the crime occurred.
[4] Date of the crime.
[5] Age of the person when the crime was committed.
[6] Whether the crime was an isolated or repeated incident.
[7] Social conditions which may have contributed to the
crime.
[8] Any evidence of rehabilitation.
(b) Record of breaches of solicited contracts.
(c) Unethical business practices adverse to solicitation activities.
(d) Conclusive evidence that the applicant has, within four months
of the application, been addicted to the habitual use of drugs or
intoxicating liquors pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-4.
(2) In the absence of any such findings, the Chief of Police shall
recommend that the license be granted.
§ 143-6 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 143-7
140:355
§ 143-8. Rules and regulations.
A. The Township Clerk shall issue to each licensee at the time of delivery
of his license a badge which shall, during the time such licensee is
engaged in solicitation activities, be worn constantly by the licensee on
the front of his outer garment in such a way as to be visible to a person
facing him. If the badge becomes damaged or obscured, the solicitor
shall return it to the Township Clerk and receive another badge.
B. The badge shall be used only by the person to whom it was issued and
may not be transferred to any other person. The badge shall be
surrendered to the Township Clerk at the time the license expires.
C. Every holder of a solicitor's license issued by the Township Clerk, or by
the Morris County Clerk under the authority of N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and
45:24-10, shall be required to carry his or her license while engaged in
the business or activity licensed within the corporate limits of the
Township. He or she shall produce such license at the request of any
official of the Township or of any resident of the Township with whom he
or she wishes to conduct his or tier business or activity.
A. Any person engaging in any commercial or noncommercial solicitation
or canvassing activities is required to review the No Solicitation List
maintained by the Township Clerk pursuant to § 143-14 and available at
the Township Clerk's office during normal business hours.
B. Every solicitor shall restrict his solicitation activity within the Township
to the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., prevailing time, on
Mondays through Saturdays, unless specifically having been invited to
a dwelling by an occupant thereof or having previously made an
appointment with an occupant.
C. No solicitor or canvasser shall call attention to his business or to his
merchandise by crying out, blowing a horn or by any other loud or
unusual noise.
D. No solicitor or canvasser shall approach any residence or property
listed on the No Solicitation List maintained by the Township Clerk
pursuant to § 143-14 and available for inspection during normal
business hours.
E. No solicitor shall conduct, or attempt to conduct, his business at any
residence or on any property on which is posted a sign indicating that
solicitors are not welcome or not invited.
F. No licensee shall allow any other person to use the license issued
hereunder and the use of such license by any person other than the
licensee shall constitute grounds for revocation of the license.
G. No solicitor shall refuse to leave any private dwelling or property after
having been once requested to do so by the owner or occupant thereof.
§ 143-7 WASHINGTON CODE § 143-8
140:356
§ 143-9. Records.
The Township Clerk shall maintain a record of all licenses issued under
the provisions of this article and shall record therein all convictions for
violations of this section and other pertinent circumstances and incidents
reported by the Chief of Police.
§ 143-10. Expiration of license. [Amended 5-15-2017 by Ord. No.
08-17]
Licenses shall be issued on a daily, weekly, monthly or annual basis and shall
expire as indicated on the license.
§ 143-11. Revocation of license or registration number.
Licenses and registration numbers issued under the provisions of this
article may be revoked by the Township Committee, after notice and
hearing, for any of the following causes:
§ 143-12. Notice of hearing.
H. No solicitor shall engage in solicitation activities regulated under this
article on public property without first producing special authorization
from the Township Committee. [Amended 9-21-2009 by Ord. No.
23-09]
I. No license or registration number shall issue where any person who
would use the proposed license is under 16 years of age, with the
exception of youth-oriented charitable organizations such as Girl
Scouts, Boy Scouts, Little League, etc. so long as all youth engaging in
noncommercial solicitation are accompanied by an adult.
J. All badges shall be surrendered to the Township Clerk at the time the
license expires. [Added 5-15-2017 by Ord. No. 08-17]
A. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
B. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement by the licensee in the
course of conducting solicitation activities.
C. Any violation of this article.
D. Conviction of any crime adverse to soliciting, peddling, canvassing or
hawking pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-1.
E. Conducting the solicitation activities contrary to the conditions of the
license or registration or in such a manner as to create a public
nuisance or constitute a danger to the health, safety or general welfare
of the public and of those going door to door.
A. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license or registration number
shall be given in writing by the Township Clerk. Such notice shall set
§ 143-8 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 143-12
140:357
§ 143-13. Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Township Clerk in the denial
of a license, as provided in § 143-7, shall have the right of appeal to
the Township Committee. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the
Township Committee, within 14 days after the notice of the action
complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a
written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The
Township Committee shall set a time and place for hearing on such appeal,
and notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant in the same
manner as provided in § 143-12 for notice of hearing on revocation. The
decision of the Township Committee on such appeal shall be final and
conclusive.
§ 143-14. No solicitation list.
§ 143-15. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Township to enforce the
provisions of this article and require any person seen engaging in
solicitation activities who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed
or registered to produce his solicitor's license or registration number. Any
forth the specific grounds of complaint and the time and place of
hearing and shall be sent by registered mail to the licensee or
registrant at his last known address at least five days prior to the date
set for the hearing or shall be delivered by the agent of the Township in
the same manner as a summons at least three days prior to the date set
for the hearing.
B. In the event the Chief of Police shall determine that there has been a
violation of § 143-8 or any other part of this article, then and in that
case he shall immediately notify the Township Committee of the
violation and shall order the licensee or registrant to suspend further
operation until a hearing is held in accordance with the provisions of
this section. Upon revocation, the license or registration number and all
badges shall be surrendered to the Township Clerk.
A. The Township Clerk shall prepare a list of addresses of those premises
where the owner and/or occupant has notified the Clerk that canvassing
or soliciting is not permitted on the premises. The list shall specify
whether the owner and/or occupant prohibits all solicitation or only
commercial solicitation. Notification shall be by completion of a form
available at the Township Clerk's office during normal business hours.
The list shall be updated on January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of
each year.
B. The Township Clerk shall submit the No Solicitation List to the Chief of
Police quarterly to be distributed to applicants for license to canvass or
solicit pursuant to the provisions of this article, and to registrants
defined in § 143-3C.
§ 143-12 WASHINGTON CODE § 143-15
140:358
violation of any provision of this article shall be a punishable offense as
well as cause for revocation of any sales license or registration pursuant to
§§ 143-11 and 143-12.
§ 143-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-16-2007 by Ord. No.
9-07]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject, upon
conviction, to the penalties provided in § 1-3 of this Code.
§ 143-15 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 143-16
140:359

ARTICLE II
Highway Solicitation
[Adopted 6-19-2006 by Ord. No. 12-06]
§ 143-17. Coin tosses authorized.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4.60, the Township does hereby authorize charitable
organizations, upon an application made to the Township Committee to
conduct solicitation campaigns, commonly referred to as "coin tosses,"
within roadways in the Township of Washington. Where the coin tosses are
to be conducted on a county road, the authorization of the Board of Chosen
Freeholders must also be obtained before the Township can authorize coin
tosses. Applications for coin tosses shall specify the roadway, date and time
for such activity.
§ 143-17 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 143-17
140:361

ARTICLE III
Temporary Mobile Merchants and Concessionaires
[Adopted 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 04-17]
§ 143-18. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate commercial sales within the
Township that are temporary or seasonal in nature and not subject to
site plan approval by an administrative agency. Because such activities
have an impact upon the Township's zone plan but are not subject to the
more rigorous provisions contained in the Township's Site Plan Review
Ordinance76 and Zoning Ordinance, the Township Committee finds it
necessary to impose certain conditions to protect the health, welfare and
safety of its residents.
§ 143-19. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONCESSIONAIRE — A person selling goods or services at a special event
as a vendor.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICAL — The Township Zoning Officer shall be the
enforcement official. Authority to issue violation notices shall also rest
with the Township Health Officer and any member of the Township Police
Department.
SPECIAL EVENT — A sale, exhibit, festival, sports tournament or other
event conducted at a location in the Township by an organization devoted
exclusively to not-for-profit purposes.
TEMPORARY MOBILE MERCHANT — A merchant or vendor who chooses
a specific location within the Township upon which to erect a tent or stand
or park a cart, wagon, car, truck, or other type of vehicle from which
to engage in merchandising for a special event or at a specific site on a
periodic basis. This category shall include temporary, off-premises roadside
stands established for the purpose of selling vegetables, fruit or other
farm products, Christmas trees and any nonperishable goods. A temporary
mobile merchant or concessionaire must not have a vested interest in the
location and must have the written permission from the owner(s) of the
location to conduct the sale of the intended products.
§ 143-20. Licensing; permits.
No permit shall be issued to conduct sales as a temporary mobile merchant
or concessionaire unless the applicant satisfies the conditions of this article
and secures a temporary merchant certificate from the Township Clerk.
§ 143-21. Performance regulations.
76.Editor's Note: See Ch. 159.
§ 143-18 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 143-21
140:363
§ 143-22. Exemptions.
All exemptions contained in Chapter 143, Article I, of this Code shall apply
to this article.
§ 143-23. Appeals.
Any applicant denied a permit to operate as a temporary mobile merchant
or concessionaire may appeal to the Township Committee, which shall have
the authority to approve said permit upon suitable findings.
§ 143-24. Compliance required.
All temporary mobile merchants or concessionaires shall be subject to the
provisions of this article.
§ 143-25. Violations and penalties.
Any party who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall
be notified in writing by the enforcement official and shall remedy the
violation within 24 hours of receipt of the written complaint. Any person
A. A fire prevention application for permit form must be completed for any
public gathering event to insure that the event and the facility are in
compliance with Fire Code ordinances [N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.7(a)].
B. All applicants proposing to sell food items shall be required to obtain a
retail food establishment license from the Board of Health pursuant to
Chapter 239, Food Establishments, Retail, of this Code.
C. Locations shall be restricted to established off-street parking areas
within nonresidential zoning districts. Said locations shall be paved in
accordance with Township standards and designed to provide
regulation-size parking spaces.
D. Temporary mobile merchants or concessionaires shall be prohibited
from conducting business on municipal property unless authorized by
the Township Committee.
E. The area to be occupied by a single temporary merchant, including a
stand, tent, wagon, truck, other type of vehicle, sign and trash
receptacle, shall not exceed 200 square feet.
F. One freestanding sign per temporary mobile merchant shall be
permitted. Signs must be constructed of durable material and
maintained in presentable condition. Flashing lights or lights using the
colors red, yellow or green shall be prohibited. No sign shall be placed
within 15 feet of a property line or within an established sight-triangle
for interior lanes or access driveways. All freestanding signs must be
removed and properly secured during nonoperating hours of the
temporary mobile merchant. Maximum sign face shall not exceed 16
square feet and shall not exceed four feet in height.
§ 143-21 WASHINGTON CODE § 143-25
140:364
who violates any provision of this article shall be subject, upon conviction,
to the penalties provided in § 1-3 of this Code.
§ 143-25 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 143-25
140:365
Chapter 148
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 53.
Littering — See Ch. 114.
Water on township roads — See Ch. 172, Art.
VII.
Housing standards — See Ch. 240.
Nuisances — See Ch. 243.
§ 148-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5 1, the BOCA Basic
Property Maintenance Code/1978 is hereby adopted as the standard
governing and establishing the minimum acceptable standards for the
maintenance of existing buildings, structures, premises and facilities to
protect the public health, safety and general welfare. A copy of this BOCA
Basic Property Maintenance Code/1978 is attached to and is hereby made a
part of this chapter without the text being included herein.
§ 148-2. Public record.
Three copies of the BOCA Basic Property Maintenance Code/1978 have
been placed on file in the Township Clerk's office for the use and
examination by the public.
§ 148-3. Enforcing authority. [Amended 3-21-2016 by Ord. No.
07-16]
The administrative and enforcing authority for the provisions of this chapter
shall be the public officer designated by the Township unless otherwise
specified herein.
§ 148-4. Amendments. [Amended 5-19-1980 by Ord. No. 23-80]
A. The BOCA Basic Property Maintenance Code/1978, Sections PM-110.2,
PM-110.2.1, PM-110.2.2. and PM-110.3 are hereby amended to read as
follows: [Amended 3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 07-16]
PM-110.2 Appeals Board: In order to protect existing structures in
the jurisdiction by vigorous enforcement of the provisions of this code,
there shall be and is hereby created a Property Maintenance Code
Appeals Board, hereafter referred to as the "Board," consisting of the
Township Committee.
PM-110.2.1 Membership: Said Board shall consist of five members
of the Township Committee. Their terms shall run concurrently with
their terms of office.
§ 143-25 WASHINGTON CODE § 148-4
140:366
§ 148-5. Demolition. [Added 12-17-1979 by Ord. No. 75-7977]
The BOCA Basic Property Maintenance Code/1978, Section PM-111.0 is
hereby amended to read as follows:
PM-110.2.2 Vote: The Board shall hear all appeals relative to the
enforcement of this code and, by a concurring vote of the majority
of its members present and voting, may reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the decision appealed from and shall make such
order or determination as, in its opinion, ought to be made. Failure to
secure such concurring votes shall be deemed a confirmation of the
decision of the public officer.
PM-110.3 Records: The Township Clerk shall keep a record of each
meeting of the Board so that the record shows clearly the basis for
each decision made.
B. The phrase "the Township of Washington, County of Morris, State of
New Jersey," is hereby inserted in the second line of Section PM-100.1
on page 1 of the code.
C. The dollar amounts of "$10" and "$1,000," respectively, are hereby
inserted in two places in the third line of Section PM-109.2 on page 7 of
the code. [Amended 10-15-1984 by Ord. No. 25-84]
D. The maximum imprisonment penalty of "90" days is hereby inserted in
the fourth line of Section PM-109.2 on page 7 of the code.
E. The number of days "30" is hereby inserted in the second line of Section
PM-111.4, on page 9 of the code.
77.Editor's Note: Section 3 of this ordinance provided as follows: "Nothing in this ordinance
is intended to limit the authority of the enforcing agency or Construction Official under
the State Uniform Construction Code Act, P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.) or
any rules or regulations adopted thereunder."
§ 148-4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 148-5
140:367
PM-111.1 General: If a preliminary investigation shall indicate to the
Construction Official that, in his judgment, any structure or part thereof is
so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary
or otherwise unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use, he shall issue
and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest on such
structure or part thereof a complaint which shall also contain a notice that
a hearing will be held before the Construction Official at a place therein
fixed not less than seven nor more than 30 days after the serving of the
complaint.
PM-111.1.1 Manner of serving complaint orders: Complaints and
orders issued by the Construction Official pursuant to this section shall
be served upon persons either personally or by registered mail. If the
whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same cannot be
ascertained by the Construction Official in the exercise of reasonable
diligence and the Construction Official shall make an affidavit to that effect,
then the serving of such complaint, notice or order upon such persons
may be made by publishing the same once in a newspaper printed and
published in the township. A copy of such complaint or order shall be duly
recorded or logged for record with the County Clerk of Morris County.
PM-111.2 Order: Subsequent to any hearing conducted pursuant to this
section, the Construction Official may order the owner of premises upon
which such structure or part thereof is located to raze and remove it; or,
if it can be made safe by repairs, to repair and make sale and sanitary
or to raze and remove, at the owner's option; or, where there has been
a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of more
than two years, to raze and remove the structure or part thereof. The order
shall specify a time in which the owner shall comply therewith and specify
repairs, if any. The order shall be served according to the provisions of
PM-111.1.1 of this section.
PM-111.3 Unreasonable repairs: Whenever the Construction Official
determines that the cost of such repairs would exceed 100% of the current
value of such structure, such repairs shall be presumed unreasonable, and
it shall be presumed for the purpose of this section that such structure is a
public nuisance which may be ordered razed without option on the part of
the owner to repair.
PM-111.4 Restraining actions: Anyone affected by any such order shall,
within 30 days after service of such order, apply to a court of record for an
order restraining the Construction Official from razing and removing such
structure or parts thereof. The court shall determine whether the order of
the Construction Official is reasonable, and, if found reasonable, the court
shall dissolve the restraining order, and, if found not reasonable, the court
shall continue the restraining order or modify it as the circumstances may
require.
§ 148-5 WASHINGTON CODE § 148-5
140:368
PM-111.5 Failure to comply with order: Whenever the owner of a
property fails to comply with a demolition order within the time prescribed,
the Construction Official shall cause the structure or part thereof to be
razed and removed, either through an available public agency or by
contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such razing
and removal, including the clearance and, if necessary, the leveling of the
site, shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is
located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
PM-111.6 Salvage materials: When any structure has been ordered
razed and removed, the Township Committee or other designated officer
under said contract or arrangement aforesaid shall sell the salvage and
valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of
such sale shall be credited against the cost of removal or demolition
thereof, including the clearance and, if necessary, leveling of the site and
all items enumerated in P.L. 1979, c. 43. If the total credits exceed such
costs, the balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court of
New Jersey, Chancery Division, by the Construction Official and shall be
secured in such a manner as may be directed by such Court and shall
be disbursed by final order or decree of such Court. Any owner or party
in interest may, within 30 days from the date of the filing of the lien
certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the Superior Court to contest
the reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set forth in
the municipal lien certificate.
PM-111.7 Additional powers of Construction Official: If any actual and
immediate danger to life is posed by the threatened collapse of any firedamaged
or other structurally unsafe building, the Construction Official
may, after taking such measures as may be necessary to make such
building temporarily safe, seek a judgment in summary proceedings for
the demolition thereof. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair
or limit in any way the power of the municipality to define and declare
nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary
proceedings or otherwise.
§ 148-6. Numbering of buildings. [Added 11-17-1980 by Ord. No.
60-80; amended 3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 07-16]
The BOCA Basic Property Maintenance Code/1978, Article 3,
Environmental Requirements, is hereby amended and supplemented by the
addition of PM-301.12 to read as follows:
§ 148-5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 148-6
140:369
PM-301.12 Numbering of buildings: All principle structures located on
separate lots shall be identified by their designated number as issued by
the Construction Official. Such numbers shall be displayed so as to be
clearly seen and identified from the road. This shall not be construed to
limit the locations of the numbers to be on the structure itself; however,
they shall be so located that they will reasonably indicate the building so
intended to be identified. Business signs and/or mailboxes are examples
of acceptable locations, provided that such signs or mailboxes are located
on the same side of the road and next to the entrance of the lot.
Notwithstanding the above, said numbers shall be at least three inches in
height.
§ 148-7. Grass and weeds on residential premises. [Added
6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 10-11]
§ 148-8. Vacant and abandoned properties. [Added 12-15-2014 by
Ord. No. 17-14; amended 11-19-2018 by Ord. No. 16-18]
A. All residential premises shall be maintained free from weeds, grass or
lawn growth in excess of 10 inches, except that this requirement shall
not apply to farmland or to areas of natural growth that are not
ordinarily maintained, including, but not limited to, areas containing
wetlands or marshes, conservation easement areas or densely wooded
areas. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited.78
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ABANDONED PROPERTY — As defined in accordance with the
Abandoned Properties Rehabilitation Act, N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq., and
shall mean the following:
Except as provided in N.J.S.A. 55:19-83, any property that has not
been legally occupied for a period of six months and which meets
any one of the following additional criteria as noted in N.J.S.A.
55:19-81 may be deemed to be an abandoned property upon a
determination by the Construction Official and/or Zoning Officer
that:
The property is in need of rehabilitation in the reasonable
judgment of the Construction Official and/or the Zoning
Official, and no rehabilitation has taken place during that sixmonth
period;
(a)
Construction was initiated on the property and was
discontinued prior to completion, leaving the building
unsuitable for occupancy, and no construction has taken place
for at least six months as of the date of a determination by
(b)
(1)
78.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding violations and penalties, was repealed
12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 17-14.
§ 148-6 WASHINGTON CODE § 148-8
140:370
NUISANCE PROPERTY —
the Construction Official and/or Zoning Official pursuant to this
section;
At least one installment of property tax remains unpaid and
delinquent on that property in accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:4-1
et seq., as of the date of a determination by the Construction
Official and/or Zoning Official pursuant to this section; or
(c)
The property has been determined to be a nuisance by the
Construction Official and/or Zoning Official in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 55:19-82.
(d)
A property which contains both residential and nonresidential
space may be considered abandoned pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-78
et seq., so long as 2/3 or more of the total net square footage of
the building was previously legally occupied as residential space
and none of the residential space has been legally occupied for at
least six months at the time of the determination of abandonment
by the Construction Official and/or the Zoning Officer and the
property meets the criteria of either Subsection (1)(a) or (d) of this
definition.
(2)
Property determined to be "abandoned property" in accordance
with the meaning of such term in the Abandoned Properties
Rehabilitation Act, N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq., shall also be deemed
to be abandoned property for the purposes of this section.
(3)
As defined in accordance with the Abandoned Properties
Rehabilitation Act, N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq., and shall mean the
following:
The property has been found to be unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use pursuant to Section 1 of P.L. 1942, c. 112
(N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3);
(a)
The condition of the property materially increases the risk of
fire to the property and adjacent properties;
(b)
The property is subject to unauthorized entry leading to
potential health and safety hazards; the owner has failed to
take reasonable and necessary measures to secure the
property; or the municipality has secured the property in order
to prevent such hazards after the owner has failed to do so;
(c)
The presence of vermin or the accumulation of debris, uncut
vegetation or physical deterioration of the structure or
grounds have created potential health and safety hazards and
the owner has failed to take reasonable and necessary
measures to remove the hazards; or
(d)
(1)
§ 148-8 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 148-8
140:371
OWNER — An owner shall include the title holder, any agent of the
title holder having authority to act with respect to a vacant property,
any foreclosing entity subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 or
any other entity determined by the Township to act with respect to the
property.
VACANT PROPERTY — Any building used or to be used as a residence
which is not legally occupied or at which substantially all lawful
construction operations or residential occupancy has ceased for a
period of at least three months, and any commercial property that
has not been legally occupied or at which substantially all lawful
construction operations have ceased for a period of at least three
months, and which exhibits evidence of vacancy such that a reasonable
person would believe that the property is vacant. Any property that
contains all building systems in working order, is being maintained on
a regular basis, has not been cited by the Township for any violation of
municipal ordinance within such time and is being actively marketed by
its owner for sale or rental shall not be deemed vacant. This section is
not applicable to seasonal agricultural labor housing.
The dilapidated appearance or other condition of the property
materially affects the welfare, including the economic welfare,
of the residents of the area in close proximity to the property,
and the owner has failed to take reasonable and necessary
measures to remedy the conditions.
(e)
A Construction Official, Zoning Official and/or Property
Maintenance Official who determines a property to be a
nuisance pursuant to Subsection (1)(a) through (e) of this
definition shall follow the notification procedures set forth in
P.L. 1942, c. 112 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq.).
(f)
Meeting any condition noted in Subsection (1)(a) through (e) of this
definition shall constitute a nuisance property.
(2)
B. General requirements.
(1) The owner of any vacant or abandoned property as defined herein
shall, within 30 days after the building becomes vacant or within 30
days after assuming ownership of the property, whichever is later,
file a registration statement for each such vacant property with the
Township on forms provided by the Township for such purposes.
The registration shall remain valid until the end of the calendar
year. The owner shall be required to renew the registration
annually, no later than January 31, as long as the building remains
vacant property and shall pay a registration or renewal fee in the
amount prescribed in Subsection D, Fee schedule, of this section
for each property registered. The initial and renewal fees shall be
prorated and/or credited accordingly upon legal occupancy.
(2) Any owner of any building that meets the definition of "vacant
property" or "abandoned property" prior to the adoption date shall
§ 148-8 WASHINGTON CODE § 148-8
140:372
file a registration statement for that property on or before the
adoption date plus 60 days. The registration statement shall
include the information required under Subsection C, Registration
statement requirements; property inspection, of this section, as
well as any additional information that the Construction Official
and/or Zoning Official may reasonably require.
(3) The owner shall notify the Township within 30 days of any change
in the registration information by filing an amended registration
statement on a form provided by the Township for such purpose.
(4) The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the Township against
the owner or owners of the building.
C. Registration statement requirements; property inspection.
(1) After filing a registration statement or a renewal of a registration
statement, the owner of any vacant or abandoned property shall
provide access to the Construction Official and/or Zoning Official, if
requested, following reasonable notice, during the period covered
by the initial registration or any subsequent renewal. If an
inspection is required of the interior of the property due to
complaints or other cause, the fee for such inspection shall be the
same as that for a continued certificate of occupancy inspection as
provided in the applicable provisions of the Township Code.
(2) The registration statement shall include the name, street address,
and telephone number of a natural person 18 years of age or older,
designated by the owner or owners as the authorized agent for
receiving notices of code violations and for receiving process in any
court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding, on
behalf of such owner or owners in connection with the enforcement
of any applicable code. The designated agent must have a contact
number that will be available 24 hours per day on an emergency
basis. The statement shall also include the name of the person
responsible for maintaining and securing the property, if different
from the designated agent.
(3) An owner who is a natural person and who meets the requirements
of this section as to availability with a contact number on a twentyfour-
hour emergency basis may designate himself or herself as
agent.
(4) By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this
section, the owner consents to receive any and all notices of code
violations concerning the registered vacant or abandoned property
and all process in any court proceeding or administrative
enforcement proceeding brought to enforce code provisions
concerning the registered building by service of the notice or
process on the authorized agent. Any owner who has designated an
§ 148-8 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 148-8
140:373
authorized agent under the provisions of this section shall be
deemed to consent to the continuation of the agent's designation
for the purpose of this section until the owner notifies the Township
of a change of the authorized agent, or until the owner files a new
annual registration statement. The designation of an authorized
agent in no way releases the owner from any requirement of this
section.
D. Fee schedule. The initial registration fee for each building shall be
$500. The fee for the first renewal is $750. The fee for any subsequent
renewal is $1,000. After five years, the registration fee shall be $5,000.
The initial fee shall be prorated according to the month of registration
and renewal fees shall be credited when a property becomes legally
occupied during a renewal period.
Vacant and Abandoned Property Registration Fee Schedule
Registration Fee
Initial registration $500
First renewal $750
Any subsequent renewal up to five years $1,000
After five years $5,000
E. Requirements for owners of vacant and/or abandoned property. The
owner of any building that has become vacant and/or abandoned
property, and any person maintaining, operating or collecting rent for
any such building that has become vacant and/or abandoned, shall,
immediately:
(1) With the exception of vacant or abandoned single-family dwellings,
post a sign, affixed to the inside of the building indicating the name,
address and telephone number of the owner, the owner's
authorized agent for the purpose of service of process (if
designated pursuant to Subsection C, Registration statement
requirements; property inspection, of this section), and the person
responsible for the day-to-day supervision and management of the
building, if such person is different from the owner holding title or
authorized agent. The sign shall be of a size and placed in such a
location so as to be legible from the nearest public street or
sidewalk, whichever is nearer, but shall be no smaller than 15
inches by 17 inches; and
(2) Enclose and secure the building against unauthorized entry as
provided in the applicable provisions of the Township Code and
maintain the sign required by this section until the building is again
legally occupied or demolished or until repair or rehabilitation of
the building is complete; and
§ 148-8 WASHINGTON CODE § 148-8
140:374
(3) Make provision for the maintenance of the lawn and yard, including
regular grass cutting as required by the applicable provisions of
the Township Code; and
(4) Make provision for the cessation of the delivery of mail,
newspapers and circulars to the property, including having the
property listed on the exclusion list maintained by the Township for
the delivery of circulars and advertisements to the property; and
(5) Make provision for the winterizing of the property by the cessation
of water service to the property and the draining of water lines,
other than buildings with a fire sprinkler system; and
(6) Make provision for the cessation of electric or gas utility services to
the property, other than buildings with a fire sprinkler system; and
(7) Make provision for the regular maintenance of the exterior of the
property.
F. Administration. The Township Committee shall issue rules and
regulations for the administration of the provisions of this section.
(1) Any owner who is not in full compliance with this section or who
otherwise violates any provision of this section or of the rules and
regulations issued hereunder shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $500 and not more than $1,000 for each offense. Every day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. Fines assessed under this section shall be governed by
§ 1-3, General penalty, be recoverable from the owner and may be
pursued by judgment, and once docketed, as a lien on the property.
(2) For purposes of this section, failure to file a registration statement
in time, failure to provide correct information on the registration
statement, failure to comply with the provisions of Subsection E,
Requirements for owners of vacant and abandoned property, of this
section, or such other matters as may be established by the rules
and regulations of the Township, shall be deemed to be a violation
of this section.
G. Compliance with other provisions. Nothing in this section is intended to
nor shall be read to conflict or prevent the Township from taking action
against buildings found to be unfit for human habitation or unsafe
structures as provided in applicable provisions of the Code of the
Township and/or the Uniform Construction Code. Further, any action
taken under any such code provision other than the demolition of a
structure shall not relieve an owner from its obligations under this
section.
§ 148-8 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 148-9
140:375
§ 148-9. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-15-2014 by Ord. No.
17-14]
Except as set forth in § 148-8D and herein, any person, firm, corporation
or entity violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
punishable as provided in § 1-3 of the Code of the Township of Washington.
A creditor required to care, maintain, secure and upkeep a property under
this chapter cited in a notice issued pursuant to § 148-8B shall be subject to
a fine of $1,500 for each day of the violation, commencing 31 days following
receipt of the notice, except if the violation presents an imminent risk to
public health and safety, in which case the fine shall commence 11 days
following the receipt of the notice.
Chapter 155
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 56.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 121.
Water connections — See Ch. 213.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
247.
§ 148-9 WASHINGTON CODE § 148-9
155:376
ARTICLE I
Sewer Connections
[Adopted 10-18-1993 by Ord. No. 30-93 (Sec. 14A of the Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 155-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Mandatory Sewer Connection Ordinance
of the Township of Washington."
§ 155-2. Applicability. [Amended 7-17-1995 by Ord. No. 21-95]
The owner of any house, building or property used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or any other purpose situated within the Township
abutting on or having easement or right-of-way access to any street,
easement or right-of-way in which there is now located a public sewerage
system is required, at the owner's expense, to install suitable sanitary sewer
facilities and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer
in accordance with the provisions of this article and with the rules and
regulations of the Washington Township Municipal Utilities Authority or the
Hackettstown Municipal Utilities Authority, as the case may be, and the
Washington Township Board of Health.
§ 155-3. Time limitation for connection to public sewer.
A. Structures within existing sewered districts. Any new occupied
structure within an existing sewered district or along the line of any
existing sanitary sewer shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system
and have received a certificate of acceptance before a certificate of
occupancy is issued.
B. Districts sewered by a developer under a local improvement ordinance,
pursuant to a Washington Township Municipal Utilities Authority
Capital Project or under an order of necessity issued by the State
Department of Environmental Protection and Energy. The house sewer
shall be satisfactorily connected to the house connection provided for
each existing occupied structure capable of discharging sewage and
any existing individual disposal system satisfactorily disconnected from
the house plumbing system within 120 calendar days after receipt of
written notice to the owner by the Township to connect to the sanitary
sewer system. Said notice will be given by the Health Officer to each
owner of record as determined by the records of the Tax Assessor of the
Township of Washington. "Occupied structure," as used in this section,
shall be construed to mean any structure for which a certificate of
occupancy has been issued or any structure which is being or has been
actually occupied or used for human habitation or use and is deemed
suitable for such occupation or use.
C. Any person who fails to comply with any order issued pursuant to this
article after notice by the Health Officer of the Township to make the
§ 155-1 SEWERS § 155-3
155:377
§ 155-4. Compliance with other regulations.
All sanitary sewer work shall comply with all applicable Township,
Municipal Utility Authority, Board of Health, state and federal regulations.
§ 155-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-16-2007 by Ord. No.
9-07]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject,
upon conviction, to the penalties provided in § 1-3 of this Code.
required connection shall be liable for a penalty as set forth herein.
Such notice may be served upon the owner personally or by leaving it
at his usual place of abode with a member of his family above the age
of 18 years.
§ 155-3 WASHINGTON CODE § 155-5
155:378
ARTICLE II
Illicit Connections to the Storm Sewer System
[Adopted 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 10-05]
§ 155-6. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of Washington so as
to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for
the failure to comply.
§ 155-7. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this ordinance clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) Rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township, unless
that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other than the Tier
A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit Number
NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not limited to,
leaks, flows or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated under § 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal Clean
Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township or other public body, and
is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER - — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
§ 155-6 SEWERS § 155-7
155:379
product. Non-contact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than non-contact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 155-8. Prohibited conduct.
No person or persons, firm, association or corporation shall discharge
or cause to be discharged through an illicit connection to the municipal
separate storm sewer system operated by the Township any domestic
sewage, non-contact cooling water, process wastewater, or other industrial
waste (other than stormwater).
§ 155-9. Enforcement. [Amended 5-16-2005 by Ord. No. 17-05]
All police officers of the Township, regular and special, the Department
of Public Works Superintendent or his/her duly authorized designee, the
Health Officer or his/her duly authorized designee, the Zoning Officer and/
or his/her duly authorized designee and the Township Engineer and/or his/
her duly authorized designee, are hereby given full power and authority and
are charged with the duty to enforce all provisions of this article.
§ 155-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-16-2007 by Ord. No.
9-07]
Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this article shall be subject, upon conviction, to the penalties
provided in § 1-3 of this Code.
§ 155-7 WASHINGTON CODE § 155-10
155:380
Chapter 159
SITE PLAN REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 56.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 111.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 121.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 148.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 172.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 175.
Zoning — See Ch. 217.
Housing standards — See Ch. 240.
§ 155-10 SEWERS § 155-10
155:381

ARTICLE I
Title, Purpose and Approving Agency
§ 159-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Site Plan Ordinance
of the Township of Washington."
§ 159-2. Purpose. [Amended 5-18-1992 by Ord. No. 7-92]
The purpose of this chapter is to establish rules, regulations, standards and
procedures for approval of all developments in order to:
§ 159-3. Approving agency.
A. Preserve existing natural resources and give proper consideration to
the physical constraints of the land.
B. Provide for safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
C. Provide for screening, landscaping, signing and lighting.
D. Ensure efficient, safe and aesthetic land development.
E. Provide for compliance with appropriate design standards to ensure
adequate light and air, proper building arrangements and minimum
adverse effect on surrounding property.
F. Develop proper safeguards to minimize the impact on the environment,
including but not limited to soil erosion and sedimentation and air and
water pollution.
G. Ensure the provision of adequate water supply, drainage and
stormwater management, sanitary facilities and other utilities and
services.
H. Provide for recreation, open space and public use areas.
A. Planning Board. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by
the Planning Board of the Township of Washington, except as noted
below.
B. Board of Adjustment. The provisions of this chapter shall be
administered by the Board of Adjustment in applications before the
Board of Adjustment involving a variance provided for in Article 9,
Section 57, paragraph d (Use Variance), of the Municipal Land Use Law.
§ 159-1 SEWERS § 159-3
155:383

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 159-4. Application of requirements. [Amended 9-19-1983 by Ord.
No. 21-83; 5-18-1992 by Ord. No. 7-92; 7-19-1999 by Ord. No. 19-99;
11-20-2006 by Ord. No. 22-06]
A site plan shall be approved by the Planning Board for all developments
other than individual single- or two-family structures, construction of a
parking area for less than four vehicles or for construction on Township
property or for which a waiver of site plan has been granted in accordance
with § 159-5 (Waiver of requirements). Notwithstanding anything contained
herein to the contrary, installation of signs shall be exempt from site plan
approval requirements, provided that the following conditions are met:
§ 159-5. Waiver of requirements. [Amended 5-16-1994 by Ord. No.
7-94; 9-19-1999 by Ord. No. 19-99; 11-20-2006 by Ord. No. 22-06]
The Zoning Officer may waive the requirements of this chapter, or at his
discretion, may refer the waiver request to the Planning Board, either of
which may waive the requirements of this chapter upon submission of an
Affidavit in Support of Request for Waiver of Site Plan,79 if the proposed
development:
A. The proposed signs conform to the requirements set forth in § 159-32.
B. The proposed signs are not to be erected or installed in conjunction
with other improvements requiring site plan approval.
C. The proposed sign installation shall be approved and a permit issued by
the Construction Official pursuant to Chapter 56, Building
Construction, § 56-7E.
A. Involves normal maintenance or replacement in kind such as a new
roof, new siding or similar activity; or
B. Does not significantly affect existing circulation, drainage, building,
arrangements, landscaping, buffering, lighting or other considerations
of site plan approval.
C. The proposed use/change will involve:
(1) No changes to the exterior use of the premises except as noted in
Subsection F.
(2) No exterior changes to the property except as noted in Subsections
A and F.
(3) No changes to the exterior lighting except as noted in Subsection
F.
79.Editor's Note: The affidavit form is included at the end of Chapter 111, Land Use
Procedures.
§ 159-4 SEWERS § 159-5
155:385
§ 159-6. Site Plan Review Advisory Board.
(4) No increase in traffic to and from the property except as noted in
Subsection F.
(5) No signs (or sign to be approved by Construction Code Official).
(6) No impact on neighboring properties or residences.
(7) No nuisance elements, including but not limited to smoke, liquid
wastes, radiation, noise audible beyond the building setback lines,
vibrations detectable beyond the building wall, glare detectable
beyond the building wall and heat detectable beyond the building
wall.
D. Involves interior changes that do not affect the use of the building or
parking requirements as set out in § 159-39.
E. Change in use or tenant that does not affect parking requirements as
set out in § 159-39.
F. At the sole discretion of the board, waivers may be granted for limited
changes in Subsection C(1), (2), (3) and (4).
A. Membership.
(1) There shall be established a Site Plan Review Advisory Board
consisting of the following Township officials or their designated
representatives: The Township Engineer, Planning Board
Chairman, Health Officer, Zoning Officer, Construction Official,
Environmental Commission Chairman and Shade Tree Committee
Chairman.
(2) The Chairman of the Planning Board may request, on a temporary
basis or for a specific application, other municipal officials,
representatives of other governmental agencies or citizens of the
Township to sit on the Site Plan Review Advisory Board. The
Chairman of the Planning Board may appoint on a temporary basis
or for a specific application any member of the Planning Board to
sit on said Board.
B. Function. The Site Plan Advisory Board shall:
(1) Review all applications to determine their compliance with
applicable development regulations.
(2) Review and recommend classification of site plans for subsequent
action by the Planning Board.
(3) Meet with applicants to discuss the technical aspects of the
proposed site plan, including but not limited to parking and
circulation, lighting, signs, landscaping, drainage, building location
and design.
§ 159-5 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-6
155:386
§ 159-7. Period of approval extended.
In the event that during the period of approval heretofore or hereafter
granted to an application for site plan approval, the developer is barred
or prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
otherwise permitted under such approval by a legal action instituted by
any state agency, political subdivision or other party to protect the public
health and welfare or by a directive or order issued by any state agency,
political subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public
health or welfare and the developer is otherwise ready, willing and able to
proceed with said development, the running of the period of approval under
this chapter shall be suspended for the period of time said legal action is
pending or such directive or order is in effect.
§ 159-8. Conditional approvals.
§ 159-9. Reservation of public areas.
(4) Recommend to the Planning Board appropriate action on any
specific site plan application.
A. In the event that a developer submits an application for site plan
approval proposing a development that is barred or prevented, directly
or indirectly, by a legal action instituted by any state agency, political
subdivision or other party to protect the public health and welfare or by
a directive or order issued by any state agency, political subdivision or
court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public health and welfare,
the Planning Board shall process such application in accordance with
this chapter, and if such application complies with all Township
regulations, the Planning Board shall approve such application
conditioned on removal of such legal barrier to development.
B. In the event that development proposed by an application for site plan
approval requires an approval by a governmental agency other than the
Planning Board, the Planning Board shall, in appropriate instances,
condition its approval upon the subsequent approval of such
governmental agency. The Planning Board shall make a decision on any
application for site plan approval within the time period provided in this
chapter or within an extension of such period as has been agreed to by
the applicant unless the Planning Board is prevented or relieved from
so acting by the operation of law.
A. If the Master Plan or the Official Map provides for the reservation of
designated streets, public drainageways, flood control basins or public
areas within the proposed development, before approving a site plan,
the Planning Board may further require that such streets, ways, basins
or areas be shown on the plan in locations and sizes suitable to their
intended uses. The Planning Board may reserve the location and extent
of such streets, ways, basins or areas shown on the plan for a period of
one year after the approval of the final plan or within such further time
§ 159-6 SEWERS § 159-9
155:387
§ 159-10. Simultaneous review.
The Planning Board shall have the power to review and approve or deny
conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with review for subdivision
approval without the developer being required to make further application
to the Planning Board or the Planning Board being required to hold further
hearings. The longest time period for action by the Planning Board, whether
it be for subdivision, conditional use or site plan approval, shall apply.
Whenever approval of a conditional use is requested by the developer
pursuant to this section, notice of the hearing on the plat shall include
reference to the request for such conditional use.
as may be agreed to by the developer. Unless during such period or
extension thereof the Township shall have entered into a contract to
purchase or institute condemnation proceedings according to law for
the fee or a lesser interest in the land comprising such streets, ways,
basins or areas, the developer shall not be bound by such reservations
shown on the plan and may proceed to use such land for private use
in accordance with applicable development regulations. The provisions
of this chapter shall not apply to the streets and roads, flood control
basins or public drainageways necessitated by the land development
and required for final approval.
B. The developer shall be entitled to just compensation for actual loss
found to be caused by such temporary reservation and deprivation of
use. In such instances, unless a lesser amount has previously been
mutually agreed upon, just compensation shall be deemed to be the fair
market value of an option to purchase the land reserved for the period
of reservation, provided that determination of such fair market value
shall include but not be limited to consideration of the real property
taxes apportioned to the land reserved and prorated for the period of
reservation. The developer shall be compensated for the reasonable
increased cost of legal, engineering or other professional services
incurred in connection with obtaining site plan approval caused by the
reservation. The procedure for the payment of all compensation
payable under this chapter shall be provided for in other ordinances.
§ 159-9 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-10
155:388
ARTICLE III
Hearings and Notices
§ 159-11. When required. [Amended 7-19-1993 by Ord. No. 21-93]
Hearings shall be required as part of preliminary approval for all major site
plans.
§ 159-12. Maps, documents and exhibits on file.
A complete set of maps, documents and exhibits shall be on file at least 10
days prior to the date of the hearing at the office of the Planning Board.
§ 159-13. Public notice of application.
A. When required. Public notice shall be required for preliminary approval
of all major site plans. [Amended 4-21-1986 by Ord. No. 9-86;
7-19-1993 by Ord. No. 21-93]
B. Contents of notice. Notices shall state the date, time and place of the
hearing, the nature of the matters to be considered and an
identification of the property proposed for development by street
address, if any, and by reference to lot and block numbers as shown on
the current tax duplicate in the Township Tax Assessor's office, and the
location and times at which any maps and documents for which
approval is sought are available.
C. To whom notice is required; how served. The applicant shall be required
to give public notice as follows:
(1) By publication in the official newspaper of the Township.
(2) The owners of all real property, as shown on the current tax
duplicate, located within 200 feet in all directions of the property
which is the subject of such hearing.
(3) Notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on the property
owner as shown on said current tax duplicate, or his agent in
charge of the property, or by mailing a copy thereof by certified
mail to the property owner at his address as shown on said current
tax duplicate.
(4) Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any
partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon
its president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized
by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation.
(5) Upon the written request of an applicant and payment of $10, the
Township Clerk shall, within seven days, make and certify a list
from said current tax duplicate of the names and addresses of
owners to whom the applicant is required to give notice. The
§ 159-11 SEWERS § 159-13
155:389
§ 159-14. Notices required for all hearings.
§ 159-15. Service.
applicant shall be entitled to rely upon the information contained
in such list, and failure to give notice to any owner not on the list
shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
A. Adjoining municipalities. Notice of all hearings on applications for site
plan approval involving property located within 200 feet of an adjoining
municipality shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Clerk of such municipality.
B. County road. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail
to the County Planning Board of a hearing on an application for site
plan approval of property adjacent to an existing county road or
proposed road shown on the Official County Map or on the County
Master Plan, adjoining other county land or situated within 200 feet of a
municipal boundary.
C. State highway. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified
mail to the Commission of Transportation of a hearing on an application
for site plan approval of property adjacent to a state highway.
D. Large projects. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified
mail to the Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning of a
hearing on an application for site plan approval of property which
exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling units. Such notice shall include a
copy of any maps or documents required to be on file with the Planning
Board pursuant to § 159-12.
A. Proof. The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the
Planning Board on the application for development.
B. Mail. Any notice made by certified mail shall be deemed complete upon
mailing.
§ 159-13 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-15
155:390
ARTICLE IV
Procedure for Site Plan Approval
§ 159-16. Filing and review process.
§ 159-17. Preliminary approval of site plan.
A. Filing and referral. An applicant for site plan approval shall submit
sufficient copies of all required exhibits as set forth in Article V, Site
Plan Details, together with an application form and all fees, to the Clerk
of the Planning Board. The Clerk of the Planning Board shall refer the
site plan and exhibits to the Site Plan Review Advisory Board and the
County Planning Board. The Planning Board may also designate other
local, county, state or other governmental officials or agencies to
receive copies of any application for review and recommendation.
B. Site Plan Review Advisory Board action. The Site Plan Review Advisory
Board shall review the application and report back to the Planning
Board within 30 days after receipt. In the event that an application is
found to be incomplete or in violation of any applicable codes and
ordinances, the applicant shall be notified within 30 days of submission
by the Site Plan Review Advisory Board, by certified mail, as to the
items omitted or ordinances violated.
C. Sketch site plan review. [Repealed 10-20-1980 by Ord. No. 44-80]
D. Minor site plan review. Within 45 days of the submission to the Clerk of
the Planning Board of a complete minor site plan, the Board shall take
action. Minor site plan approval shall be deemed to be final approval by
the Board. [Added 7-19-1993 by Ord. No. 21-93]
A. Planning Board action. Within 45 days of the submission to the Clerk of
the Planning Board of a complete site plan application for 10 acres of
land or less, or within 95 days of submission of a complete application
for a site plan of more than 10 acres, or within such further time as may
be agreed upon by the developer, the Planning Board shall act upon the
application. The Planning Board shall:
(1) Approve the site plan;
(2) Deny the site plan; or
(3) Refer it back to the applicant for revision prior to further
consideration. Any substantial amendment to the site plan shall be
acted on as in the case of an original application.
B. Hearing. As provided in Article III, Hearings and Notices, all actions of
the Planning Board on major site plans shall be at a public hearing.
Public notice of application as provided in § 159-13 shall be required for
all major site plans. [Amended 7-19-1993 by Ord. No. 21-93]
C. Decision of Planning Board.
§ 159-16 SEWERS § 159-17
155:391
(1) A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Planning Board within
10 days of the date of decision to the applicant and be filed in the
office of the Planning Board. Copies of such filed decision shall be
made available to any interested party for a reasonable fee and
available for public inspection at the Planning Board office during
reasonable hours.
(2) A brief notice of the decision shall be published by the Planning
Board in the official newspaper of the Township. The period of time
in which an appeal of the decision may be made shall run from the
first publication of the decision.
D. County Planning Board approval. Any application requiring County
Planning Board approval shall be approved by the Washington
Township Planning Board subject to approval by the County Planning
Board.
E. Effect of preliminary approval. Preliminary approval of a site plan shall,
except as provided in Subsection F below, confer upon the applicant the
following rights for a three-year period from the date of the preliminary
approval:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and on-site
and off-tract improvements; and any requirements peculiar to the
specific site plan. The Township may modify such general terms
and conditions of preliminary approval as they may relate to public
health and safety, provided that such modifications are in accord
with amendments adopted by ordinance subsequent to approval.
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary site plan.
F. Extensions of preliminary approval. The applicant may apply for and the
Planning Board may grant extensions on such preliminary approval for
additional periods of at least one year but not to exceed a total
extension of two years, provided that if the design standards have been
revised by ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
(1) In the case of a site plan for an area of 50 acres or more, the
Planning Board may grant the rights referred to above for such
period of time, no longer than three years, as shall be determined
by the Planning Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration
the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under preliminary approval, economic conditions and
the comprehensiveness of the development.
(2) The applicant may apply for thereafter and the Planning Board may
thereafter grant an extension to preliminary approval for such
§ 159-17 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-17
155:392
additional period of time as shall be determined by the Planning
Board to be reasonable taking into consideration the above items.
(See § 159-53 for fees relating to the granting of an extension.)
G. Variances. The Planning Board, when acting upon application for
preliminary site plan approval, shall have the power to grant such
exceptions from the requirements for site plan approval as may be
reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of these
provisions if the literal enforcement of one or more provisions of this
chapter is impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of
peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question.
H. Planning Board Review in lieu of Board of Adjustment. The Planning
Board, when reviewing applications for site plans, shall have the power
to grant, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the
Board of Adjustment, variances from lot area, lot dimensions, setback
and yard requirements, provided that relief, pursuant to this section,
from lot area requirements shall not be granted for more than one lot.
Said variances shall be granted where, by reason of exceptional
narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property, or by
reason of exceptional topographic conditions, or by reason of other
extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece of
property, the strict application of any zoning regulation would result in
peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and
undue hardship upon the developer of such property. The variance
granted from such strict application of such regulation shall relieve
such difficulties or hardship; provided, however, that no variance shall
be granted under this section to allow a structure or use in a district
restricted against such structure or use.
I. Performance guaranty. [Added 10-16-1989 by Ord. No. 24-89]
(1) Prior to the start of any site plan construction, a separate
performance guaranty shall be posted where applicable for the
value of all proposed drainage, curbing and pavement within
existing Township rights-of-way. The purpose of the guaranty is to
insure that all work within the right-of-way, when started, shall be
continued in a timely manner to maintain safe conditions for the
traveling public and adjacent residents.
(2) The amount of the guaranty shall be approved by the Township
Engineer and shall comply with the requirements of this chapter
and the Municipal Land Use Law.80
(3) This guaranty shall be terminated when an overall guaranty is
posted at time of final site plan approval.
J. Soil erosion and sedimentation control guaranties. [Added 7-16-1990
by Ord. No. 22-90]
80.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 159-17 SEWERS § 159-17
155:393
§ 159-18. Final approval of site plan.
(1) Prior to the start of any site plan construction, including but not
limited to clearing or grading, a separate cash performance
guaranty for soil erosion and sedimentation control shall be posted,
except where the amount of disturbed area is less than 10,000
square feet. The amount of the guaranty shall be $5 per 1,000
square feet of disturbed area or $200, whichever is greater, for site
plans with typical soil erosion and sedimentation control problems.
However, the Township may require an increased amount upon
receiving written recommendation from the Township Engineer
citing critical soil and/or slope conditions. In the event of
noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter and/or the
approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, the Township
may issue a written notice to the developer. Except for emergencies
where substantial damage to life and property has or is likely to
occur, after 72 hours have lapsed from receipt of said notice, the
Township shall have the option to take corrective actions and
charge the cost of corrective actions against the cash performance
guaranties.
(2) In the event that the charges exceed the amount of the cash
performance guaranty, the deficit shall be paid by the developer
within 60 days. Upon certification of the Township Engineer of
substantial completion, the remaining cash performance guaranty
balance shall be returned to the developer.
A. Planning Board action. Within 45 days after submission of a complete
site plan application, or within such further time as may be agreed upon
by the applicant, the Planning Board shall approve the application for
final site plan approval with or without conditions, provided that the
following requirements are met:
(1) That the detailed drawing and specifications meet all applicable
codes and ordinances.
(2) That the final plans are substantially the same as the approved
preliminary site plan.
(3) That all improvements have been installed, except that
performance guaranties in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter and of the Municipal Land Use Law, may be posted to
assure the installation of the following improvements only:
[Amended 11-17-1980 by Ord. No. 55-80]
(a) The final bituminous surface course of streets.
(b) Street signs.
(c) Dry wells and swales, as may be required.
(d) Monuments.
§ 159-17 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-18
155:394
(e) Shade trees.
(4) That the applicant agrees, in writing, to all conditions of final
approval.
(5) That proof has been submitted that all taxes and assessments for
local improvements on the property have been paid.
B. Hearing. Planning Board action shall take place at a hearing. No public
notice of application shall be required.
C. Decision of Planning Board. As set forth in § 159-17C.
D. County Planning Board approval. As set forth in § 159-17D.
E. Effect of final approval. Final approval shall terminate the time period
of preliminary approval for the section granted final approval and shall
guaranty the applicant that the zoning requirements applicable to the
preliminary approval and all other rights conferred upon the applicant
as part of preliminary approval shall not be changed for a period of two
years after the date of final approval.
F. Time limit for final approval and extensions. Final approval shall expire
two years from the date of final approval unless the applicant has
secured a building permit to commence construction. The Planning
Board may extend final approval and the protection offered under
Subsection E for one year. Up to three such extensions may be granted.
(1) In the case of a site plan for a planned unit development, planned
unit residential development or residential cluster of 50 acres or
conventional site plan for 150 acres or more, the Planning Board
may extend the rights granted under final approval for such period
of time, longer than two years, as shall be determined by the
Planning Board to be reasonable taking into consideration the
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under final approval, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development.
(2) The developer may apply for thereafter, and the Planning Board
may thereafter grant, an extension of final approval for such
additional period of time as shall be determined by the Planning
Board to be reasonable taking into consideration the above items.
(See § 159-53, Fees, for fees related to the granting of an
extension.)
G. Notice of farm use. For the purpose of giving due notice of the farm
rights contained in § 217-40 to new residents, owners, tenants, lessees
and other users, the Planning Board shall require an applicant for every
site plan, as a condition of approval of such application, to provide
every owner, tenant, lessee or other user with a copy of the Township's
Right-to-Farm Ordinance.81 [Added 3-19-2001 by Ord. No. 7-01]
§ 159-18 SEWERS § 159-19
155:395
§ 159-19. Conditions of final approval.
The Planning Board may, as a condition of final approval:
A. Grant final approval only for designated geographic sections of the
development;
B. Grant final approval for certain work but require resubmission for final
approval for designated elements, such as but not limited to
landscaping, signs, street furniture, etc., and require approval of these
elements as a prerequisite for a certificate of occupancy or zoning
permit; or
C. Condition the granting of a certificate of occupancy or zoning permit
subject to the applicant or developer or subsequent heirs or assignees
meeting certain requirements within a designated period of time, not to
exceed one year, from the date of issuance of the certificate of
occupancy or zoning permit. This may include but is not limited to the
installation of landscaping, erection of signs, installation of
improvements, reevaluation of circulation patterns, reevaluation of
lighting and similar items.
81.Editor's Note: See § 217-40.
§ 159-19 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-19
155:396
ARTICLE V
Site Plan Details
[Amended 7-21-1980 by Ord. No. 26-80; 12-21-1981 by Ord. No.
49-81; 4-19-1982 by Ord. No. 10-82; 9-19-1983 by Ord. No. 21-83;
7-15-1985 by Ord. No. 25-85; 9-16-1985 by Ord. No. 32-85;
2-20-1989 by Ord. No. 1-89; 7-19-1993 by Ord. No. 21-93]
§ 159-20. Information required.
The major site plan shall be prepared by a New Jersey licensed professional
engineer, land surveyor, architect or professional planner at an appropriate
scale. The major site plan shall be based on the latest Tax Map information
and shall be 24 inches by 36 inches in size. The major site plan shall contain
the following information:
A. A key map of the site with reference to surrounding areas and existing
street locations and in accordance with § 175-27A. [Amended
12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 36-00]
B. The name and address of the owner and major site plan applicant,
together with the name of the owners of all contiguous land and of
property directly across the street as shown by the most recent tax
records of all municipalities in which such properties shall lie.
C. Lot line dimensions.
D. Location of all existing and proposed buildings and structures, streets,
easements, driveways, entrances and exits, delineated flood hazard
areas and riparian zones, wetlands and transition areas, ridgelines,
stream corridor and open water buffers per § 111-46 and § 175-47B on
the site and within 200 feet thereof. [Amended 12-18-2000 by Ord.
No. 36-00; 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 18-08]
E. Proposed location and dimensions of proposed buildings and
structures, roads, driveways, parking areas, etc. House numbers, as
approved by the Construction Code Official, shall be shown for all new
buildings.
F. Building setback, side line and rear yard distances.
G. All existing physical features on the site and within 200 feet thereof,
including the building site and including but not limited to streams,
watercourses, soils information and significant site conditions, such as
swamps or rocks. In addition, the limits of wooded areas, location/
species/condition of all trees 10 inches or more in diameter measured
4.5 feet from the grade where said trees are in the area of proposed
disturbance plus fifty 50 feet surrounding the proposed area of
disturbance. Soils information shall be shown on the site plan with soils
classifications and boundaries per the Soil Survey of Morris County,
New Jersey, prepared by the Soil Conservation Service of the United
States Department of Agriculture. In addition, a tally of the acreage in
§ 159-20 SEWERS § 159-20
155:397
each soils class so designated shall be provided. [Amended
12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 36-00]
H. Topography showing existing and proposed contours at two-foot
intervals for all slopes. A reference bench mark shall be clearly
designated. [Amended 2-15-2010 by Ord. No. 05-10]
I. Parking, loading and unloading areas shall be indicated with
dimensions, traffic patterns, access aisles and curb radii.
J. Improvements such as roads, curbs, bumpers and sidewalks shall be
indicated with cross sections, design details and dimensions.
K. Location and design of existing and proposed stormwater systems,
sanitary waste disposal systems, potable water supply and methods of
solid waste storage and disposal, in addition to the location of all
passing percolation tests, as well as the location of all failing,
unsatisfactory and abandoned tests, along with existing wells and
sanitary disposal systems.
L. A landscaping and buffering plan showing what will remain and what
will be planted, indicating names of plants and trees and dimensions,
approximate time of planting and maintenance plans.
M. Lighting details indicating type of standards, location, radius of light
and intensity in footcandles.
N. Location, dimensions and detail of signs in conformity with the
requirement set forth in § 159-32, Signs.
O. A surface water management plan shall be submitted in accordance
with Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land, § 175-49, Surface water
management standards. All surface water management plans must also
comply with the provisions of the Water Quality Management Planning
Rules set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:8 and 7:15. For the portion of the major site
plan having existing improved surfaces, such as roofs, walks,
driveways, parking areas and landscaping areas, and which shall
remain unchanged, the meadow of good hydrologic condition criteria as
set forth in Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land, § 175-49A(2) is hereby
waived. [Amended 2-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2-05]
P. Soil erosion and sediment control plan.
Q. Development impact statement.
R. The following legends shall be on the major site plan map:
(1) Major site plan of _____________________________
Lot _____________ Block ______________ Zone
Date __________________ Scale
Applicant
§ 159-20 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-20
155:398
Address
(2) I consent to the filing of this major site plan with the Planning
Board of
(Owner) (Date)
(3) I hereby certify that I have prepared this major site plan and that
all dimensions and information are correct.
(Name) (Title and License No.)
(4) I have received this major site plan and certify that it meets all
codes and ordinances under my jurisdiction.
(Date) (Township Engineer)
(5) To be signed before issuance of a building permit: I hereby certify
that all the required improvements have been installed or a bond
posted in compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances.
(If improvements installed)
(Township Engineer) (Date)
(If bond posted)
(Township Clerk) (Date)
Building permit issued
(6) Approved by the Planning Board (Preliminary)
(Final)
(Chairman) (Date)
S. A geologic investigation program for applications in the Carbonate Area
District shall be submitted and shall include a completed Phase I
Geologic Investigation Checklist as provided in Chapter 20, Application
Forms and Checklists. Submission of the Phase II Investigation Plan
shall be based on the recommendation of the Township Geotechnical
Consultant, which recommendation shall be based on the analysis set
forth in Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land, § 175-30, Geologic
investigations. Preliminary and final site plans shall include the
language provided in Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land, § 175-26X(1),
relative to geotechnical details. [Added 4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 4-98]
§ 159-20 SEWERS § 159-21
155:399
§ 159-21. Other information.
The Planning Board may require other information and data for specific
major site plans. These data may include but are not limited to geologic
information, water yields, flood data, environmental information, traffic
counts, road capacities, market and socioeconomic information and similar
material.
§ 159-22. Compliance with other ordinances. [Amended 2-17-1997
by Ord. No. 5-97]
Information and documents required for other Township codes and
ordinances, such as environmental impact statements, development impact
statements, soil erosion and sedimentation plans and stormwater
management plans, shall be submitted as part of the major site plan
application and may be used to comply with site plan submission
requirements where applicable.
§ 159-23. Waiver of information required.
The Planning Board may waive submission of any required exhibits in
appropriate cases and for specific major site plans in writing.
§ 159-24. Sketch major site plans.
Sketch major site plans may be prepared by the applicant and contain
sufficient information for discussion by the Planning Board and applicant.
§ 159-25. Information required for minor site plans.
The minor site plan shall be based on the latest Tax Map information and
shall be at an appropriate scale. The minor site plan shall contain the
following information:
A. A key map of the site with reference to surrounding areas, existing
street locations, the zone of the subject property and adjacent
properties.
B. The name and address of the owner and applicant.
C. Where changes are proposed to the inside of a building, a plan or sketch
of the interior layout and uses.
D. Where changes are proposed to the exterior surface or size of a
building, include:
(1) A plan or sketch of proposed changes and building materials.
(2) Show proposed distance(s) to property lines, parking lots, other onsite
buildings or other site features.
§ 159-21 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-25
155:400
§ 159-26. Site plan application requirements for installation of
wireless telecommunications towers. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No.
9-97; amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 4-99]
E. Where changes are proposed to the property (driveways, parking lots,
fences, etc.), a plan or sketch of the proposed changes and their
distance(s) to property lines and other relevant site features.
F. Where changes are proposed to the exterior of a building and will result
in site disturbance, topography showing existing and proposed
contours at two-foot intervals for all slopes. A reference bench mark
shall be clearly designated. [Amended 2-15-2010 by Ord. No. 05-10]
G. Other information which may be required by the Minor Site Plan
Committee.
A. All site plan details required by § 159-20 shall be provided and shall
include the site boundaries; tower location; existing and proposed
structures, including accessory structures; existing and proposed
ground-mounted equipment; vehicular parking and access and uses
structures and land use designated on the site and abutting parcels.
B. A landscape plan drawn to scale generally showing proposed
landscaping including species, type, size, spacing, other landscape
features and existing vegetation to be retained, removed or replaced.
C. An environmental impact study.
D. A report from a qualified expert containing the following:
(1) A description of the tower and the technical and other reasons for
the tower design and height.
(2) Documentation to establish that the tower has sufficient structural
integrity for the proposed use at the proposed location and meets
the minimum safety requirements and margins according to
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) requirements in their
current adopted standards and revisions.
(3) The general capacity of the tower in terms of the number and type
of antenna it is designed to accommodate.
(4) A statement dealing current FCC information concerning wireless
telecommunication towers and radio frequency emission standards
as well as information on the projected power density of the
proposed facility and how it meets the FCC standards.
E. A letter of commitment by the applicant to lease excess space on the
tower to other potential users at prevailing rates and standard terms.
The letter of commitment shall be recorded prior to issuance of a
building permit. The area shall commit the tower owner and successors
in interest.
§ 159-25 SEWERS § 159-26
155:401
F. Elevations of the proposed tower and accessory building generally
depicting all proposed antennas, platforms, finish materials and all
other accessory equipment.
G. A visual impact study, graphically simulating through models,
computer-enhanced graphics or similar techniques, the appearance of
any proposed tower and indicating its view from at least five locations
around and within one mile of the proposed wireless
telecommunications tower where the wireless telecommunications
tower will be most visible. Aerial photographs of the impact area shall
also be submitted.
§ 159-26 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-26
155:402
ARTICLE VI
Performance Standards
§ 159-27. Consideration of standards in review of site plans.
In reviewing any site plan, the Planning Board shall consider the following
performance standards.
§ 159-28. Circulation.
§ 159-29. Design and building layout.
The design and layout of buildings and parking areas shall be reviewed so
as to provide an aesthetically pleasing design and efficient arrangement.
Particular attention shall be given to safety and fire protection, impact on
surrounding development and contiguous and adjacent buildings and lands.
§ 159-30. Lighting. [Amended 8-19-2002 by Ord. No. 32-02]
Adequate lighting shall be provided to ensure safe movement of persons
and vehicles and for security purposes. Lighting standards shall be a type
approved by the Planning Board. Directional lights shall be arranged so as
to minimize glare and reflection on adjacent properties. All lighting shall
be in accordance with the standards of § 159-41, Lighting, landscaping and
buffering.
§ 159-31. Buffering, landscaping and open space.
A. Pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement within and adjacent to the
site with particular emphasis on the provision and layout of parking
areas, off-street loading and unloading and movement of people, goods
and vehicles. Circulation shall also include bike and pedestrian paths
where appropriate.
B. The Planning Board shall ensure that all parking spaces are usable and
are safely and conveniently arranged. Access to the site from adjacent
roads shall be designed so as to interfere as little as possible with traffic
flow on these roads and to permit vehicles a rapid and safe ingress and
egress to the site.
C. The circulation system shall also be designed to implement state
requirements for the handicapped. Separate pedestrian circulation
facilities shall be considered as indicated.
A. Buffering. Required buffering shall be located around the perimeter of
the site to minimize the annoyance of headlights of vehicles, noise, light
from structures and the movement of people and vehicles and to shield
activities from adjacent properties when necessary. Buffering may
consist of fencing, evergreens, shrubs, bushes, deciduous trees or
combinations thereof to achieve the stated objectives.
§ 159-27 SEWERS § 159-31
155:403
B. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided as part of the overall site
plan design and integrated into building arrangements, topography,
parking and buffering requirements. Landscaping shall include trees,
bushes, shrubs, ground cover, perennials, annuals, plants, sculpture,
art and the use of building and paving materials in an aesthetically
pleasing manner and appropriate to the site.
C. Open space.
(1) Open space shall be provided as part of any planned development,
cluster subdivision or multifamily development. The open space
shall be classified as developed (recreational) or undeveloped
(natural) space. Open space and recreation areas shall be
distributed throughout the development and be readily accessible.
(2) Open space shall serve as a buffer to help integrate buildings and
uses. A recreation facility or park can be used to integrate a project
with the surrounding neighborhood.
(3) Developed open space shall average between 500 to 1,000 square
feet per dwelling unit.
(4) Developed open space used for active recreational use shall not be
less than 2,000 square feet or less than 60 feet in its smallest
dimension. This type of space shall be distributed in relation to the
dwelling units it is intended to serve. Developed open space shall
be reasonably accessible to all dwelling units in the project. All
developed open space should be linked to all other open spaces by
walkway systems.
(5) Undeveloped open spaces shall have as a prime objective the
preservation of a site's natural amenities. Ponds, rock
outcroppings, wooded areas, vistas, steep slopes, ravines and
stream beds are prime lands recommended for undeveloped open
space.
D. Buffer requirements for houses of worship and schools. At least 1/2 of
the width of the required landscaped buffer (37 1/2) feet shall be a
landscaped berm with an average height of at least three feet and
nowhere less than two feet in height. The landscaped berm shall be
planted in a dense mix of indigenous vegetation consisting of coniferous
and deciduous trees and shrubs. Planted berms shall be located on site
so as to minimize off-site impacts on adjoining uses such as, but not
limited to, sound, noise and lighting glare. The remaining 1/2 of the
width of the required landscaped buffer shall be suitably planted in a
mix of indigenous plantings and may consist of vegetation existing on
site, if, in the opinion of the reviewing Board, said existing vegetation
provides adequate planted buffering of the site. Where buffers may be
reduced in nonresidential zones, or where property boundaries do not
abut residential zones or uses, at least 1/2 of the required buffer shall
be a landscaped berm as provided herein, and the remaining 1/2 of the
§ 159-31 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-31
155:404
§ 159-32. Signs.
Signs shall be designed so as to be aesthetically pleasing, harmonious with
other signs on the site and located so as to achieve their purpose without
constituting hazards to vehicles and pedestrians.
§ 159-33. Utilities.
Storm drainage, sanitary waste disposal, water supply and solid waste
collection and disposal shall be reviewed and considered. Particular
emphasis shall be given to the adequacy of existing systems and the need
for improvements, both on site and off site, to adequately carry runoff and
sewage and to maintain an adequate supply of water at sufficient pressure.
The requirements of Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land, § 175-34A, shall be
followed.
§ 159-34. Environmental considerations.
Environmental elements relating to soil erosion, preservation of trees,
protection of watercourses and resources, noise, topography, soil and
animal life shall be reviewed, and the design of the plan shall minimize any
adverse impact on these elements.
§ 159-35. Street furniture.
The site plan shall provide for those elements of street furniture appropriate
to the particular use. These may include phone booths, benches, bike racks,
trash receptacles, bus shelters, kiosks and similar items.
required buffer shall be planted in accordance with the planting
requirements of this section. [Added 6-18-2001 by Ord. No. 14-01]
A. Design theme. There shall be a consistent sign design theme
throughout a particular project. The design theme shall include style of
lettering, construction, material, type of pole or standards (wood or
metal, for example), size and lighting. Color of letters and background
shall be carefully considered in relation to the color of the material or
buildings or where the signs are proposed to be located.
B. Location. Signs shall be located so as not to create a hazard. At
intersections, the sight distances required by § 159-39F(1)(b) shall be
maintained. The location of signs shall be selected to ensure visibility.
Signs designed to be seen from vehicles shall be perpendicular to the
line of travel, while signs designed to be read on foot can be parallel
with walks.
C. Size. The size of signs shall not exceed the maximums established in
§ 159-42. Signs from interiors designed to be read from the outside
shall also be included in this figure.
§ 159-31 SEWERS § 159-36
155:405
§ 159-36. Road improvements. [Added 2-20-1995 by Ord. No. 3-95]
Improvements to existing roads fronting the site shall comply with road
widths, construction and time restrictions as set forth in Chapter 175,
Subdivision of Land.
§ 159-37. Conservation easements. [Amended 6-15-1998 by Ord. No.
22-98]
Location, dedication and marking of conservation easements shall be in
accordance with the requirements of Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land,
§ 175-27U and V.
§ 159-36 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-37
155:406
ARTICLE VII
Design Details
§ 159-38. Purpose.
The purpose of the design details set forth in this chapter are to implement
the performance standards established in Article VI, Performance
Standards. For good and sufficient reason the Planning Board may vary
these design standards and details as they may apply to a specific site plan
application.
§ 159-39. Circulation.
A. Off-street parking. In all zones, in connection with every industrial
business or with institutional, recreational, residential or any other use,
there shall be provided, at the time any building or structure is erected
or is enlarged or increased in capacity, off-street parking for automotive
and other vehicles in accordance with the requirements set forth
herein. Such facilities shall be completed prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
(1) Design standards for off-street parking areas.
(a) Number of parking spaces required. The number of off-street
parking spaces required shall be as set forth in accordance
with the definition of "floor area."
(b) Size of parking stalls. Each off-street parking space shall have
an area of not less than 180 square feet, exclusive of access
drives or aisles, and shall be not less than 10 feet in width by
18 feet in length, exclusive of overhang, and shall be of usable
shape and condition. For designated employee parking, the
area may be reduced to 162 square feet and the width reduced
to nine feet. Off-street parking areas shall comply with
handicapped parking requirements. The width of angle parking
stalls shall be measured perpendicular to the side stall
markings. Parallel curb parking spaces shall measure eight
feet in width and 24 feet in length. Except in the case of onefamily
and two-family dwellings, no parking area provided
hereunder shall be established for less than three spaces.
[Amended 2-18-1985 by Ord. No. 2-85]
(c) Off-street parking requirements for particular uses:
Uses Required Parking Spaces
Automotive service stations 3 for each bay, plus 1 for each
service vehicle
Bank and savings institutions 1 for each 100 square feet of
floor area exclusive of service
areas or 10 for each teller
window, whichever is greater
§ 159-38 SEWERS § 159-39
155:407
Uses Required Parking Spaces
Bowling lanes 5 for each lane
Churches and other places of
worship
1 for each 3 seats or 1 for
each 72 linear inches of
seating space when benches
rather than seats are used
Community buildings, social
halls and places of public
assembly
1 for each 2 seats except
where a specific amount of
seating is undetermined, then
1 parking space shall be
required for each 75 square
feet of assemblage area
Country clubs 1 for each 100 square feet of
floor area occupied by all
principal or accessory
structures except those used
for parking purposes
Farm stands 1 for each 150 square feet of
stand area
Funeral homes and
mortuaries
10 plus 1 for each 50 square
feet of floor area
Golf courses and clubs 5 for each tee
Golf driving ranges 2 for each tee
Industrial uses [Amended
5-10-1989 by Ord. No.
17-89]
1 for each 300 square feet of
floor area (See Note 1.)
Laboratory and research uses
[Amended 5-10-1989 by
Ord. No. 17-89]
1 for every 300 square feet of
floor area (See Note 1.)
Medical or dental clinics or
offices [Amended 2-18-1985
by Ord. No. 2-85;
5-10-1989 by Ord. No.
17-89]
1 for every 200 square feet of
floor plan area, plus 1 for
each staff person on premises
Motels, hotels and motor
lodges
1 for each rental unit and, in
addition, compliance with the
requirements for each
particular additional use
located on the property, such
as restaurants, eating and
drinking establishments,
retail stores and meeting
rooms
Nursing homes 1 for each bed
§ 159-39 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-39
155:408
Uses Required Parking Spaces
Offices, business and
professional (other than
medical and dental)
[Amended 5-10-1989 by
Ord. No. 17-89]
0 to 9,999 square feet: 1 per 150 square feet
10,000 to 24,999 square
feet:
1 per 200 square feet
25,000 to 49,999 square
feet:
1 per 250 square feet
50,000 plus square feet: 1 per 300 square feet
(calculated progressively)
Offices, real estate [Added
5-10-1989 by Ord. No.
17-89]
1 for every 100 square feet of
floor area
Residential dwellings 2 for each dwelling unit
Restaurants, eating and
drinking establishments and
catering halls [Amended
5-10-1989 by Ord. No.
17-89]
1 for each 2 1/2 seats or 1 per
square 75 feet, whichever
yields the greater number of
spaces
Retail stores, store groups,
shops, etc.
1 for each 150 square feet of
floor area where the floor
area shall not exceed 2,000
square feet; 1 for each 175
square feet of floor area
where the floor area shall
exceed 2,000 square feet
Theaters 1 for each 3 seats
Trailer parks 2 for each trailer
Wholesale establishments,
warehouses, furniture stores
[Amended 5-10-1989 by
Ord. No. 17-89]
1 for each 500 square feet of
floor area1
1Note: Where industrial or laboratory/research use could be
converted to office use and where wholesale establishments,
warehouses and furniture stores could be converted to retail
use, deferred parking shall be provided for the higher
intensity use. [Added 5-10-1989 by Ord. No. 17-89]
(d) Off-street parking requirements for a combination of uses. The
parking requirement for each use shall be computed
separately and then added together to compute the total
§ 159-39 SEWERS § 159-39
155:409
number of required parking spaces. In all questionable or
doubtful cases, or for uses not enumerated, the Planning Board
shall determine the required number of spaces, utilizing as a
standard the requirements for the uses which are specifically
enumerated.
(e) Parking area design standards.
[1] Access. There shall be adequate provisions for ingress and
egress to all parking spaces. Access drives or driveways
shall be not less than ten feet for either ingress or egress
and 15 feet wide for combined ingress and egress as
provided in Subsection F(3).
[2] Size of aisles. The width of all aisles providing direct
access to individual parking stalls shall be in accordance
with the requirements set forth below. Only one-way traffic
shall be permitted in aisles serving parking spaces placed
at an angle other than 90º.
Parking Angle
(degrees)
Aisle Width
(feet)
0 (parallel parking) 12
30 12
45 13
60 18
90 (perpendicular parking) 25
[3] General location. No off-street parking or loading area
shall be located within 30 feet of any property line. All
parking shall be located in bays generally perpendicular to
driveways or roads.
[4] Location in different zones. No access drive, driveway or
other means of ingress and egress shall be located in any
residential zone to provide access to uses other than those
permitted in such residential zone.
[5] Sidewalks and curbing. Sidewalks between parking areas
and principal structures, along aisles and driveways and
wherever pedestrian traffic shall occur, shall have a
minimum width of four feet of passable area and shall be
raised six inches or more above the parking area except
when crossing streets or driveways. Guardrails and wheel
stops permanently anchored to the ground shall be
provided in appropriate locations. Parked vehicles shall
not overhang or extend over sidewalk areas, unless an
additional sidewalk width of 2 1/2 feet is provided to
accommodate such overhang.
§ 159-39 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-39
155:410
[6] Paving. The surface of any required parking area shall be
stabilized or paved in a manner approved by the Township
Engineer as suitable for the nature and intensity of the
anticipated use. [Added 4-19-1982 by Ord. No. 10-82]
(f) The amount of off-street parking area to be paved may be
reduced by the Planning Board if it can be clearly
demonstrated by the applicant that such additional parking
area is not necessary; however, the entire amount of unpaved
parking area must at all times be made available for parking in
the event that future conditions should so require. [Added
5-10-1989 by Ord. No. 17-89]
(2) Other design criteria.
(a) Landscaping and drainage. [Amended 12-17-1984 by Ord.
No. 31-84]
[1] Parking areas shall be suitably landscaped to minimize
noise, glare and other nuisance characteristics, as well as
to enhance the environment and ecology of the site and
surrounding area. All parking areas shall have a minimum
of one shade tree for every 10 parking spaces. This
requirement is in addition to trees located outside the
perimeter of the parking lot. Large parking lots shall be
broken down into sections of not more than 50 parking
spaces and separated from other sections by landscaping,
islands, berms and other similar elements. Said parking
areas shall have suitable drainage facilities, as required by
the Township Engineer. [Amended 8-20-1990 by Ord.
No. 27-90]
[2] Off-site drainage facilities and structures requiring
enlargement, modification or reconstruction, resulting in
part from or totally as a result of the proposed
development, shall be subject to off-site improvement
requirements and standards as established in this chapter.
(b) Lighting. All parking areas shall be lighted to provide a
minimum of two footcandles at intersections and a total
average illumination of one footcandle throughout the parking
area. Such lighting shall be shielded in such a manner as not to
create a hazard or nuisance to the adjoining properties or the
traveling public. [Amended 4-19-1982 by Ord. No. 10-82]
(c) Markings and access. Parking stalls, driveways and aisles shall
be clearly marked and delineated. The Planning Board may
require certain areas be maintained for firefighting or other
emergency purposes, and these areas shall be appropriately
designated.
§ 159-39 SEWERS § 159-39
155:411
(3) Multifamily circulation systems. Multifamily developments (R-MDU
or R-PURD) shall be serviced by a complete loop street system of at
least 30 feet in width affording at least two means of ingress and
egress to the site. Crossovers between the legs of the loop shall be
provided. When a complete loop system is not practical, a street 30
to 40 feet wide, with a divided roadway at the entrance, shall be
considered. Separate pedestrian circulation paths between
buildings and between parking areas and buildings, and between
buildings and community facilities shall be provided.
(4) General circulation design and parking principles.
(a) Parking space allocations shall be conveniently oriented and
located adjacent to the buildings which they service.
(b) Parking areas shall be designed to include walkways for safe
and convenient pedestrian traffic.
(c) Where pedestrians cross service roads or access roads to reach
parking areas, crosswalks shall be clearly designated by
pavement markings or signs. Crosswalk surfaces may be raised
slightly to designate them to drivers, unless drainage problems
would result. A one-way car movement (to the left or
counterclockwise) shall be encouraged. A major loop road shall
be developed around the parking areas, and parking bays
should run perpendicular off the road.
(d) Driveways shall approach from the right to permit passengers
to alight to or from the sidewalk.
(e) Whenever possible, one-way traffic shall be established at
building entrances.
(f) Where buses are provided, special bus indentation slots off the
roadway shall be developed to allow passengers to get on and
off easily and safely.
(g) Roads and driveways from main roads shall be located at grade
and not below the crest of vertical curves.
B. Off-street loading requirements.
(1) In any zone, in connection with every building or building group or
part thereof hereafter erected which is to be occupied by
industrial, office and laboratory or commercial uses or distribution
by vehicles of material or merchandise, there shall be provided and
maintained, on the same lot with such building, off-street loading
berths in accordance with the requirements set forth below.
§ 159-39 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-39
155:412
Uses
Floor Area
(square feet)
Loading
Berths
Schools 15,000 or more 1
Hospitals and nursing
homes (in addition to
space for ambulances)
From 10,000 to
30,000
1
For each additional
30,000 or fraction thereof
1 additional
Undertakers and funeral
parlors
5,000 1
For each additional 5,000
or fraction thereof
1 additional
Hotels and offices From 10,000 or more 1
Retail, commercial,
planned commercial and
industrial development
groups, wholesaling,
manufacturing and
industrial uses
From 5,000 to 15,000 1
From 15,000 to
30,000
2
From 30,000 to
50,000
3
From 50,000 to
75,000
4
For each additional
100,000 or fraction
thereof
1 additional
(2) Each loading space shall be no less than 12 feet in width, 50 feet in
length and 14 feet in height and may not occupy any part of any
required front, side or rear yard; provided, however, that on lots on
which the rear yard or side yard abuts a limited access highway or
a railroad, such loading space may occupy the rear yard up to the
rear property line.
C. Joint facilities for off-street parking or loading. Off-street parking and
loading facilities for separate uses may be provided jointly if the total
number of spaces so provided is not less than the sum of the separate
requirements for each use, provided that all regulations governing the
location of accessory spaces in relation to the use served are adhered
to. Further, no accessory space or portion thereof shall serve as a
§ 159-39 SEWERS § 159-39
155:413
required space for more than one use unless otherwise approved by the
Planning Board as provided herein in accordance with the purposes and
procedures set forth herein.
D. Maintenance of off-street parking and loading areas.
(1) Every parcel of land hereafter approved for use as a public or
private off-street parking or loading area shall be maintained in
good condition, free of hazards and deterioration. All pavement
areas, sidewalks, curbs, drainage facilities, lighting, bumpers,
guardrails, markings, signs, landscaping and other improvements
shall be maintained in workable, safe and good condition.
(2) The governing body may authorize repairs for such improvements
if, after proper notice, the owner fails to maintain such
improvements and such conditions constitute a hazard to health
and safety or where such improvements are governed by a
development or other similar agreement. The cost of said repairs
shall be assessed against the owner.
E. Waiver of parking requirements. If any applicant can clearly
demonstrate to the Planning Board that, because of the nature of his
operation or use, the parking requirements of this chapter are
unnecessary or excessive, the Planning Board shall have the power to
approve a site plan showing less paved parking area than is required by
this chapter; provided, however, that a landscaped area of sufficient
size to meet the deficiency shall be set aside and reserved for the
purpose of meeting future off-street parking requirements in the event
that a change of use of the premises shall make such additional offstreet
parking spaces necessary.
F. Location of driveways.
(1) Design.
(a) All entrance and exit driveways shall be located to afford
maximum safety to traffic, to provide for safe and convenient
ingress and egress to and from the site and to minimize conflict
with the flow of traffic.
(b) Any exit driveway or lane shall be so designed in profile and
grading and located to provide the following minimum sight
distances, measured in each direction, when observed at a
point 10 feet back from the existing pavement at a height of
three feet above the ground: [Amended 9-15-1980 by Ord.
No. 36-80; 10-20-1986 by Ord. No. 35-86]
Allowable Speed
(miles per hour)
Required Sight Distance
(feet)
25 300
30 350
§ 159-39 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-39
155:414
Allowable Speed
(miles per hour)
Required Sight Distance
(feet)
35 425
40 475
45 525
50 600
(c) Where a site occupies a corner of two intersecting roads, no
driveway entrance or exit shall be located within 125 feet of
the intersection's point of tangency with the existing or
proposed curb radius of that site. [Amended 4-19-1982 by
Ord. No. 10-82]
(d) No part of any driveway shall be located within a minimum of
10 feet of a side property line. However, the Planning Board
may permit a driveway serving two or more adjacent sites to be
located on or within 10 feet of a side property line between the
adjacent site.
(e) No entrance or exit driveway shall be located on a rotary, ramp
of an interchange or within 20 feet of the beginning of any
ramp or other portion of an interchange.
(f) Where two or more driveways connect a single site to any one
road, a minimum clear distance of 50 feet measured along the
right-of-way line shall separate the closest edges of any two
such driveways.
(2) Driveway angle.
(a) Two-way operation. Driveways used for two-way operation
shall intersect the road at an angle as near 90º as site
conditions will permit and in no case will be less than 60º.
(b) One-way operation. Driveways used by vehicles in one
direction of travel (right turn only) shall not form an angle
smaller than 45º with a road, unless acceleration and
deceleration lanes are provided.
(3) Driveway dimensions. The dimensions of driveways shall be
designed to adequately accommodate the volume and character of
vehicles anticipated to be attracted daily onto the land
development for which a site plan is prepared. The required
maximum and minimum dimensions for driveways are indicated
below. Driveways serving large volumes of daily traffic or traffic of
over 15% truck traffic shall be required to utilize high to maximum
dimensions.
§ 159-39 SEWERS § 159-39
155:415
§ 159-40. Design and building layout.
In reviewing site plans the following design and building layout principles
shall be followed:
Area
One-Way
Operation
Driveway* Width
(feet)
Two-Way Operation
Driveway1 Width
(feet)
3- to 10-family
residence
10 to 15 15 to 25
10-family or over 15 to 25 20 to 35
Commercial and
industrial
15 to 30 25 to 35
1Note: All driveways shall be five feet wider at the curbline, and
this additional width shall be maintained for a distance of 20 feet
into the site.
(4) Driveway surfacing. The surface of any driveway shall be
constructed with a permanent pavement of a type approved by the
Township Engineer. Such pavement shall extend to the paved
portion of the road and shall extend throughout the area defined by
the required driveway dimensions specified above.
(5) Driveway profile. Any vertical curve on a driveway shall be flat
enough to prevent the dragging of any vehicle undercarriage.
Should the sidewalk be so close to the curb at a depressed curb
driveway as to cause the ramp to be too steep and likely to cause
undercarriage drag, the sidewalk shall be appropriately lowered to
provide a suitable ramp gradient.
G. Acceleration lanes. Where a driveway serves right-turning traffic from a
parking area providing 200 or more parking spaces, and the road has a
peak hour traffic volume exceeding 7,500 vehicles per hour, an
acceleration lane shall be provided which is at least 200 feet long and at
least 13 feet wide measured from the road curbline. A minimum curb
return radius of 35 feet shall be used from the driveway to the
acceleration lane.
H. Deceleration lanes. Where a driveway serves as an entrance to a land
development providing 100 or more parking spaces, a deceleration lane
shall be provided for traffic turning right into the driveway from the
road. The deceleration lane shall be at least 200 feet long and at least
13 feet wide measured from the road curbline. A minimum curb return
radius of 35 feet shall be used from the deceleration lane into the
driveway.
§ 159-39 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-40
155:416
A. Minimum spacing between buildings.
(1) Between similar structures. In development groups (more than one
building or structure on tract) the following distances shall be
maintained between similar use structures:
(a) End wall (no openings) to end wall: 1/2 the height of the
highest wall, 12 feet minimum.
(b) Any building face to street curb: height of building face for first
25 feet, two times the building height for 25 feet and over 20
feet minimum.
(c) Any building face to parking area: 1/2 the height of the highest
building face, 12 feet minimum.
(d) End wall to window wall: 1 1/2 times the height of highest wall,
30 feet minimum.
(e) Window wall to window wall: three times the height of highest
wall, 75 feet minimum.
(2) Between buildings of different types. Where buildings of different
types will be developed as a single development group, such as
single-family houses and townhouses, an appropriate transition
area or buffer shall be used. This may include fencing, facing
similar with each other, natural area, parks or recreation facilities
or uses providing gradual density changes between the two
dissimilar uses. (See § 159-31A for examples of buffering.) Actual
spacing between the two types of uses shall not be less than twice
the height of the tallest adjacent building.
B. Townhouses.
(1) A maximum of eight units shall be developed in a single row. There
shall be a minimum width of 20 feet for each dwelling unit and an
offset of four feet shall be provided between every two units.
(2) Townhouses shall be grouped in clusters with a maximum of 30 per
cluster. There shall be a minimum of 50 feet between clusters.
Private parking areas shall be located near the entrances and
outdoor living areas or patios adjoining open space or paths leading
to open space. Units shall not front on a through street.
(3) Maximum density of townhouses shall be as required by Chapter
217, Zoning. Each unit shall have two means of ingress and/or
egress. End units shall have at least a ten-foot side yard. Units shall
be at least 50 feet from all tract boundary lines unless abutting the
same or higher density area; then a minimum of 35 feet is required.
(4) Townhouses in each cluster shall be consistent in terms of
architectural style and major design elements such as materials,
windows, roof lines, roof design, etc.
§ 159-40 SEWERS § 159-40
155:417
§ 159-41. Lighting, landscaping and buffering.
C. Garden apartments.
(1) There shall be a minimum of 10 units in any structure, and the
maximum length of structure shall be 160 feet. Maximum density
shall be as permitted in Chapter 217, Zoning.
(2) Garden apartment structures shall be grouped in cluster with
architectural design consistent in each cluster. Minimum distance
between clusters shall be 100 feet. In addition to the normal means
of ingress and egress, each apartment unit shall have a second
means of ingress and egress directly from the apartment unit to the
outside, such as off a balcony or patio. A four-foot building offset
shall be required every 40 feet or less.
(3) Recreation facilities such as swimming pools and tennis courts
shall be carefully located to avoid problems of noise, lights and
similar nuisance elements affecting residential units.
A. Lighting. In connection with every site plan, the applicant shall submit
plans for all proposed exterior lighting in accordance with this section.
These plans shall include the location, type of light, radius of light and
intensity in footcandles. The following design standards shall be
followed: [Amended 4-19-1982 by Ord. No. 10-1982; 8-19-2002 by
Ord. No. 32-02]
(1) Purpose. The governing body of Washington Township finds that
regulation of outdoor lighting in Washington Township is necessary
to prevent misdirected or excessive artificial light, caused by
inappropriate or misaligned light fixtures that produce glare, light
trespass (nuisance light) and/or sky glow; and also that such
regulation is necessary to discourage the waste of electricity and to
improve or maintain nighttime public safety, utility and security.
(a) The style of the light and light standard shall be consistent with
the architectural style of the principal building.
(b) Spotlight-type fixtures attached to buildings shall not be
permitted.
(c) Freestanding lights shall be so located and protected to avoid
being easily damaged by vehicles.
(d) Lighting shall be located along streets, parking areas, at
intersections and where various types of circulation systems
merge, intersect or split.
(e) Pathways, sidewalks and trails shall be lighted with low or
mushroom-type standards.
(f) Stairways, and sloping or rising paths, building entrances and
exits require illumination.
§ 159-40 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-41
155:418
(g) Lighting shall be provided where buildings are set back or
offset.
(2) Outdoor lighting. All nonresidential outdoor light fixtures installed
and thereafter maintained, shall be outdoor, enclosed light fixtures,
and shall comply with the requirements specified in this section.
Outdoor light fixtures that are installed on or that serve one- and
two-family dwellings, for which a building permit issued after the
effective date of this subsection, shall comply with §217-100G.
(a) Where used for security purposes or to illuminate walkways,
roadways and parking lots, only outdoor, enclosed light fixtures
shielded from public view and having the performance
characteristics of a cutoff light fixture shall be used. For
parking lots and walkways, light poles that are visible to the
public shall not exceed 16 feet in height including base, pole
and fixture.
(b) Where used for commercial and industrial purposes such as in
merchandise display areas, work areas, platforms, signs,
architectural, landscape or sports or recreational facilities, all
light fixtures shall be equipped with automatic timing devices
and shall comply with the following:
[1] Lamp/luminaire combinations being considered to
illuminate flags, statues or any other objects mounted on a
pole, pedestal or platform, shall have their candlepower
curve plotted such that 100% of the beam angle used is not
greater than the size of the object to be illuminated. In the
case of flags that can move in the wind 360° around the
pole, the beam angle shall be based on a circle having a
radius equal to the width of the flag, except that flags
having a width of 12 feet or more shall be illuminated by a
beam with a radius not greater than two-thirds of the
width of the flag.
[2] Other upward directed architectural, landscape or
decorative light emissions shall have at least 90% of their
total distribution pattern within the profile of the
illuminated structure.
[3] Externally illuminated signs, including commercial
billboard, building identification or other similar
illuminated signs, shall comply with the following:
[a] Top-mounted light fixtures shall have illumination
levels plotted such that 100% of the beam angle used
is not greater than the size of the externally
illuminated sign, and are preferred over any other
positioned light fixtures.
§ 159-41 SEWERS § 159-41
155:419
[b] When top-mounted light fixtures are not feasible for
good cause shown, illumination from other positioned
light fixtures shall continue to be restricted to the sign
area. Visors or other directional control devices shall
be used to eliminate any spill light. Furthermore,
when any signage is viewed from the opposite side of
that being illuminated, luminous portions of light
fixtures, and stray light, shall not be visible.
(c) Detailed plans are to be provided to illustrate floodlight
distribution patterns. Once properly installed, the fixtures are
to be aimed, permanently affixed, and maintained in the
approved position according to the terms of approval outlined
in the approving resolution.
(d) Foundations supporting lighting poles installed less than four
feet behind the curb shall not be less than 24 inches above the
ground.
(e) Outdoor light fixtures for purposes of private, commercial or
industrial usage shall not be attached or mounted to public
property (i.e., public buildings, utility poles, telephone poles,
streetlights, road/street signs). Furthermore, these fixtures
shall not tap or extend power from sources servicing public
lighting and/or power devices.
(f) To prevent visual adaptation for motorists approaching
commercial properties from adjacent low luminance
residential areas, vertical luminances on the commercial and
industrial properties in these locations shall be limited to 100
fL for internally illluminated signs and five fL for externally
illuminated signs and building surfaces used as signs.
(g) Except for lighting maintained by a governmental authority,
outdoor recreational and sports facility lighting shall be
shielded from public view, as observed from outside the playing
field. Such lighting shall have directional and glare control
devices, when necessary, to comply with §159-41A(3).
(3) Light trespass (nuisance light). All light fixtures, except lighting
maintained by a governmental authority, and those used on one- or
two-family dwellings, shall be designed, installed and maintained to
prevent light trespass, as specified below. Note: Light fixtures near
adjacent property may require special shielding devices to prevent
light trespass.
(a) Facade lighting on schools, hospitals and other public
buildings or incident illumination occurring above a height of
five feet above the property line of the subject property shall
not exceed 0.1 footcandles in a vertical plane on residentially
zoned property.
§ 159-41 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-41
155:420
(b) Outdoor light fixtures properly installed and thereafter
maintained shall be directed so that there will not be any direct
glare source visible from any property.
(4) Illuminance and luminance requirements. Illuminance and
luminance requirements shall be as set forth below.
(a) Street lighting.
Average
Illuminance
(fc)
Average
Luminance
(fL)
Ratio
(fc)
Ratio
(fL)
CategoryInitialMaintainIneidtial Maintained
Average
to
Minimum
Average
to
Minimum
Residential
Street
lighting
local
0.6 0.4 0.12 0.09 5 to 1 5 to 1
Street
lighting
collector
0.9 0.6 0.18 0.12 4 to 1 4 to 1
Average
Illuminance
(fc)
Average
Luminance
(fL)
Ratio
(fc)
Ratio
(fL)
CategoryInitial Maintained InitialMaintained
Average
to
Minimum
Average
to
Minimum
Commercial
Street
lighting
local
1.3 0.9 0.26 0.18 5 to 1 5 to 1
Street
lighting
collector
1.7 1.2 0.34 0.24 4 to 1 3 to 1
(b) On-grade parking. Refer to Schedule A.82
[1] All other illuminance uses shall not exceed IESNA
recommendations.
[2] Internally illuminated signs shall not exceed 75% of IESNA
luminance recommendations.
82.Editor's Note: Schedule A is located at the end of this subsection.
§ 159-41 SEWERS § 159-41
155:421
(c) Externally illuminated signs. Luminance values are to be based
on the following surface reflectances:
Range of surface
reflectance
Luminance measured
(fL)
10% to 20% 5 to 10
20% to 50% 4 to 10
50% to 100% 5 to 10
(d) When building surfaces are used as signs, the luminance
values and surface reflectances shall be the same as those
indicated for externally illuminated signs.
(5) Outdoor lighting energy conservation.
(a) All outdoor lighting not essential for safety and security
purposes or to illustrate changes in grade or material shall be
activated by automatic control devices and turned off during
nonoperating hours. Illuminated signs are excluded from this
requirement.
[1] Exterior retail and merchandise display lighting, e.g.,
automobile dealerships, nurseries/garden markets, shall
not remain on after 10:00 p.m. Reduced levels of lighting
in interior show or display windows may remain on for
security purposes provided, however, that these levels
shall not exceed 25% of the normal artificial lighting levels
in the interior display or show windows.
[2] Except for lighting maintained by a governmental
authority, exterior lighting for recreational areas, athletic
fields and courts shall not remain on after 10:00 p.m.
unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
[3] Exterior security lighting shall be classified as one of the
following:
[a] Lighting which is essential to deter vandalism and/or
break-in. This lighting shall be limited to exterior door
locations. Fixtures used for normal operation at these
locations may remain on. The fixtures shall be outdoor,
enclosed lighting fixtures. If window areas present
possible break-in locations, reduced levels of interior
lighting which is situated around the windows may
remain on as a night light source to illuminate the
window. Night light levels shall not exceed 50% of the
normal interior artificial lighting levels around the
windows.
§ 159-41 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-41
155:422
[b] Normally-off lighting that is activated by a sensor or
detector. Typically, discharge lamp sources such as
sodium vapor, mercury vapor, and metal halide are not
instant start. Therefore, consideration should be given
to using other lamp sources such as incandescent,
tungsten, halogen, and fluorescent which can be used
for immediate activation. Normally-off lighting
activated by sensors or detectors shall be directed
toward the vertical surfaces of buildings or objects of
concern.
[c] Lighting that remains on for surveillance cameras.
This lighting shall be confined to vertical building
surfaces and vertical surfaces along the perimeter of a
site, e.g., walls, trees, bushes. Illuminance levels for
this lighting shall be coordinated with, and not
exceed, the minimum illuminance threshold of the
cameras being used. This data shall be provided with
the submission of the plans, in accordance with
§159-41A(6).
(b) All lighting shall be designed to prevent misdirected or
excessive artificial light and to maximize energy efficiency in
accordance with §159-41A(3).
(6) Submission of plans. Plans and evidence of compliance shall
include the following.
(a) Description of outdoor lamp/luminaire combinations including
component specifications such as lamps, reflectors, optics,
angle of cutoff, supports, poles and include manufacturers'
catalog cuts.
(b) Locations and description of every outdoor, enclosed light
fixture and hours of operation, their aiming angles and
mounting heights.
(c) The initial horizontal and vertical illuminance shall be
illustrated in footcandles (before depreciation). Illustrate
relamping and cleaning cycles to arrive at maintained values of
illumination. Separately state proposed maintained
footcandles (horizontal and vertical).
[1] Maximum.
[2] Minimum.
[3] Average, during operating and nonoperating hours.
[4] Average to minimum uniformity ratio.
(d) Computer-generated photometric grid showing footcandle
readings every 10 feet and the average footcandles. Depending
§ 159-41 SEWERS § 159-41
155:423
upon the design application, this can be for either or both
facade (vertical) or horizontal illumination levels.
(e) Foundation details for light poles.
(7) Prohibitions. Searchlights or flashing or animated signs are
prohibited, other than as approved by the Township Council.
(8) Notification. Any developer constructing new one- and two-family
dwellings in the Township shall provide home purchasers with a
copy of § 217-100G which addresses lighting standards for one- and
two-family dwellings.
Schedule A
Maintained Illuminance for Parking
Lots Initial Illuminance
Basic
Enhanced
Security Basic
Enhanced
Security
Horizontal
Illuminance
Minimum 0.2 fc 0.5 fc 0.3 fc 0.7 fc
Average 1.0 fc 2.5 fc 1.4 fc 3.6 fc
Uniformity
Ratios
Average to
Minimum
5:1 5:1 5:1 5:1
Maximum to
Minimum
20:1 15:1 20:1 20:1
Minimum
Vertical
Illuminance
0.1 fc 0.25 fc 0.15 fc 0.35 fc
NOTES:
1. Minimum horizontal illuminance shall be no lower than 0.2 fc.
2. Average horizontal illuminance shall not exceed 2.5 fc.
3. Minimum vertical illuminance shall be measured at five feet
above parking surface at the point of lowest horizontal
illuminance, excluding facing outward along the boundaries.
4. For typical conditions. During periods of nonuse, the
illuminance of certain parking facilities should be turned off or
reduced to conserve energy. If reduced lighting is to be used
only for the purpose of property security, it is desirable that
the minimum (low point) not be less than 0.1 hfc. Reductions
should not be applied to facilities subject to intermittent night
use, such as apartments, hospitals and active transportation
areas.
§ 159-41 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-41
155:424
NOTES:
5. High vehicular traffic locations should generally require the
enhanced level of illumination. Exits, entrances, internal
connecting roadways and such would be some examples.
Certain data above have been summarized from IESNA
RP-20-98, titled "Lighting for Parking Facilities."
B. Landscaping. A landscaping plan shall be submitted with each site plan
application. The plan shall identify existing and proposed trees, shrubs,
bushes, plant material, ground cover and natural features, such as
boulders and rock outcroppings in accordance with § 159-31B.
(1) The standards for trees, shade trees and buffering trees and for the
installation thereof shall be as follows: [Added 10-3-1978 by Ord.
No. 26-78]
(a) All trees must be nursery-grown.
(b) Trees are to be balled and burlapped, well branched and with a
good root system.
(c) Trees are to have straight trunks.
(d) Tree species must be accurate.
(e) Backfill should consist of 50% humus for each tree.
(f) All trees are to be generously and thoroughly watered at time
of planting.
(g) Trees will be properly pruned at time of planting.
(h) All excess debris and soil is to be removed from the immediate
area of the planting site. No soil is to be piled around the base
of trees above normal ground level.
(i) Trees are to be guaranteed to live for a period of two years
from the date of planting.
(j) Trees shall be included on site plans and shall be covered by a
performance bond. Written notification of planting must be
given to the Shade Tree Committee one month prior to
installation. [Amended 12-17-1984 by Ord. No. 31-84]
(k) Each tree will be staked approximately five feet from the
ground with two stakes two inches by two inches by eight feet
long. Trees will be wired to stakes passing through a rubber
hose where attached to tree.
(l) All trees shall be no less than two-and-one-half-inch caliper
measured six inches above ground. [Amended 3-21-1988 by
Ord. No. 7-88]
§ 159-41 SEWERS § 159-41
155:425
(m) Shade trees shall not be planted within the road right-of-way. A
separate shade tree easement of a width of 10 feet shall be
provided adjacent to the street right-of-way, except that at
intersections, the shade tree easement shall be adjacent to the
sight easement. [Amended 4-19-1982 by Ord. No. 10-82;
12-17-1984 by Ord. No. 31-84]
(n) Trees shall be planted 30 feet to 50 feet apart, as determined
by the Shade Tree Committee. [Amended 11-16-1981 by
Ord. No. 40-81; 12-17-1984 by Ord. No. 31-84]
(o) The Shade Tree Committee shall provide the owner or
developer with a list of approved trees for planting. Said list
shall be selected by the Shade Tree Committee from the Trees
for New Jersey Streets, published by the New Jersey
Federation of Shade Tree Commissions. For existing wooded
areas, evergreen may be required as follows: [Amended
11-16-1981 by Ord. No. 40-81; 12-17-1984 by Ord. No.
31-84]
[1] The following group of trees and shrubs are to be planted
in areas where the existing deciduous tree line is within 20
feet from the curb: pines, spruce, hemlock, upright
junipers, upright arborvitae, holly, cotoneaster, Douglas fir,
azaleas, rhododendrons, mountain laurel, Andromeda and
spreading juniper.
[2] Trees are to be from five to six feet high at the time of
planting. Shrubs are to be from three to four feet high or
spread at the time of planting.
[3] Trees are to be planted in groups of from three to five, at
random spacings.
[4] In addition, five seedlings of the same varieties nine to 12
inches high are to be planted for each tree or shrub used.
[5] The location and number of plantings are to be determined
by the Shade Tree Committee in the field.
[6] No evergreens are to be planted where they will shade the
road and cause icing conditions.
(p) For installation of shade trees at street intersections, the
applicant shall comply with the land development standards of
the County of Morris, New Jersey, as amended and
supplemented. [Added 12-17-1984 by Ord. No. 31-84]
(q) The Shade Tree Committee shall have the power to waive, in
whole or in part, the requirements for shade trees where an
adequate natural growth of shade trees exists on a building lot.
[Added 12-17-1984 by Ord. No. 31-84]
§ 159-41 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-41
155:426
C. Buffers.
(1) Buffers are fences, landscaping, berms and mounds used to
minimize any adverse impacts or nuisances on the site or from
adjacent areas. The following points shall be considered:
(a) Evergreens can be used as buffers, provided that they are
planted properly. An evergreen buffer requires two or even
three rows of staggered plantings. The rows shall be
approximately seven feet apart and the evergreens planted
eight feet on center.
(b) Fences or walls are effective buffers. They shall complement
the structural type and design of the principal building. Solid
structures call for fences or walls projecting that impression.
More contemporary designs call for lighter, more open types.
(c) Consider buffers for the following areas:
[1] Buffers other than fences shall be located along property
lines shielding various uses from each other.
[2] Where interior roads run parallel with roads exterior to
the site, a buffer shall be erected to prevent confusion,
particularly at night.
[3] Buffer parking areas, garbage collection areas and loading
and unloading areas.
[4] Consider prevailing wind patterns and use buffers to stop
windborne debris from leaving the site.
(2) Where required. All uses, other than single-family detached
dwellings, which abut a single-family residential zone or singlefamily
dwelling, shall be required to maintain a buffer zone in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. [Amended
4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 10-98]
(3) Restrictions on the use of buffer zones:
(a) No principal or accessory structure other than as may be
provided herein, nor any off-street parking or loading areas or
other use, shall be permitted within the buffer zone.
(b) No access or driveways other than as may be permitted by the
Planning Board, shall be permitted within the buffer zone.
(c) Buffer zones shall be maintained in their natural state when
wooded, and when natural vegetation is sparse, plant material
or fencing may be required, as determined by the Planning
Board.
(d) Underground utility easements shall be permitted when
deemed necessary or desirable by the Planning Board.
§ 159-41 SEWERS § 159-41
155:427
§ 159-42. Signs. [Amended 9-19-1983 by Ord. No. 21-83]
It is the intent of these regulations to provide for attractive, coordinated,
informative and effective signing for uses in the Township. Each site plan
application shall include a sign plan showing the specific design, location,
size, construction and illumination in compliance with the following
regulations:
(4) Area of buffer zone.
(a) All buffer zones shall be a minimum of 10% of the minimum lot
width required in the zone in which located; provided,
however, that no buffer zone need be greater than 75 feet in
width.
(b) The area encompassed in the buffer zone may be utilized for
the purpose of computing lot coverage and yard setbacks.
D. Fences. Fences, other than for single- or two-family detached
residences, shall be considered as accessory uses to a principal
permitted use and are permitted in all zones.
A. Nameplate and identification signs for single-family dwellings. A sign
indicating the name or address of the occupant may be permitted,
provided that the sign shall be no larger than two square feet. A
permitted home occupation may be included with the name of the
occupant. Only one sign per dwelling unit is permitted in addition to a
mailbox identification sign. One additional sign not to exceed 15 square
feet may be posted at the entrance of an active farm.
B. Sales or rental signs; artisan or contractors' signs. Signs advertising
the sale or rental of the premises upon which they are located and
artisan and contractors' signs on properties being worked on may be
permitted, provided that:
(1) The gross display area of a sale or rental sign shall not exceed eight
square feet on each side and artisan or contractors' signs four
square feet on each side.
(2) Two such signs shall be permitted on a residential structure with
frontage on two public streets.
(3) Such signs shall be promptly removed when premises are sold or
rented.
(4) Developments with four or more homes for sale or industrial or
commercial properties may be advertised on a sign not to exceed
32 square feet. One such sign shall be permitted on each frontage if
the development fronts on more than one street. All development
signs shall be removed when 95% of the lots have been initially
sold.
§ 159-41 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-42
155:428
C. Institutional signs. Signs of schools, colleges, churches and other
institutions of a similar public or semipublic nature may be erected and
maintained, provided that:
(1) The size of any freestanding sign shall not exceed 30 square feet
and not more than one such sign is placed on a property, unless
such property fronts upon more than one street, in which instance
a sign may be erected on each frontage.
(2) Signs affixed to the facade of the structure shall be permitted,
provided that the sign shall not exceed 5% of the building facade.
(3) Golf courses shall be permitted up to two unlighted freestanding
signs not exceeding 20 square feet in total sign area and not
exceeding eight feet in height. [Added 3-20-2000 by Ord. No.
2-00]
D. Signs in nonresidential districts for single-tenanted and singlestructure
developments. Business signs may be erected and maintained
when in compliance with the following provisions:
(1) The total gross advertising area of all signs other than freestanding
signs on any one property shall not be greater than the lesser of 5%
of the area of the building face fronting on the street or 100 square
feet.
(2) One freestanding sign shall be permitted on any single property.
The total advertising area shall not exceed 5% of the building face
fronting on the street but in no event greater than 100 square feet.
(3) Each such development shall submit a sign plan to the Planning
Board for approval. Such sign plan shall include details on: [Added
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 07-15]
(a) Letter style, color and dimensions.
(b) Lighting.
(c) Color(s), including background.
(d) Construction and materials.
(e) Dimensions and height of sign.
(f) Height above grade or below roofline.
(g) Locations.
(h) Standards.
E. Signs for multiuse developments, shopping centers or industrial parks.
Shopping centers, industrial parks, planned residential developments,
multitenanted structures or multistructure uses shall be governed by
the following regulations:
§ 159-42 SEWERS § 159-42
155:429
(1) Each such development shall submit a sign plan to the Planning
Board for approval. Such sign plan shall include details on:
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 07-15]
(a) Letter style, color and dimensions.
(b) Lighting.
(c) Color(s), including background.
(d) Construction and materials.
(e) Dimensions and height of sign.
(f) Height above grade or below roofline.
(g) Locations.
(h) Standards.
(2) The sign plan shall be based on an integrated design theme to
include all of the elements in Subsection E(1) above. All of the
above elements shall be designed to be in harmony and consistent
with each other, the architecture and materials of principal
structures and the landscaping plan. The Planning Board, in its sole
discretion, shall determine if a proposed sign plan meets the goals
and objective of this section.
(3) The total area of all signs affixed to a structure shall not exceed 5%
of the building facade of the structure. The Planning Board may
permit in total sign area up to 7% of the building facade if, in the
Planning Board's judgment, such additional area shall assist in
developing a harmonious and integrated sign plan in accordance
with the goals and objectives of this section.
(4) Freestanding signs to be located on poles, kiosks, stanchions or
similar supports shall not project above the maximum height
permitted in the zone. Such signs shall have a display area not in
excess of 5% of the building face fronting on the street but in no
event greater than 100 square feet. The Planning Board may permit
a total sign display area of up to 150 square feet if, in the Planning
Board's judgment, such additional area shall assist in achieving the
goals and objectives of this section. Only one such freestanding
sign shall be permitted on any single property regardless of the
number of establishments on the property, except that the Planning
Board may authorize an additional freestanding sign if the property
has access from more than one public street.
F. Indigenous farmers' temporary sale signs. Indigenous farmers selling
farm products, at least some of which they have grown, may display a
temporary sale sign, which shall not exceed 12 square feet and which
may be posted at a safe distance from the used right-of-way. When such
§ 159-42 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-42
155:430
farm products are no longer available for sale to the public, the sign
shall be promptly removed. [Added 10-17-1983 by Ord. No. 23-8383]
G. General regulations. The following regulations shall apply to all
permitted and preexisting nonconforming signs:
(1) Only those signs identifying the name, business, occupant, service,
address or product offered or sold on the premises shall be
permitted to be erected. Coming events and community bulletin
board signs that may include manually changeable letters shall also
be permitted. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 07-15
(2) Signs attached to a principal structure shall not extend above the
roofline or parapet.
(3) No electronic, mechanical, wind- or solar-powered, flashing,
moving or apparently moving signs shall be permitted. [Amended
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 07-15]
(a) No commercial electronic signs with static or changeable
messaging or imaging, including, but not limited to LED (light
emitting diode), LCD (liquid crystal display), projection, and
neon signs shall be permitted, except where not visible from
the public right-of-way or visible to any residential use.
(b) No blinking or flashing lights visible from the public right-ofway
shall be permitted to be displayed inside or outside on
commercial properties except for traditional holiday displays
that may be displayed one month before or after the holiday for
which such lighting may be displayed.
(c) Each business shall be permitted to display one "Open"
electronic LED sign that may be operated during business
hours, provided that:
[1] Such sign shall not exceed three square feet in area; and
[2] Such sign shall have received written approval by the
Washington Township Zoning Officer.
(4) The top of freestanding signs shall not exceed the height limit of
principal structures in the zone where located or 25 feet,
whichever is the lesser.
(5) Signs, whether portable, permanent or temporary, other than
municipal, county or state signs, shall not be erected within the
right-of-way of any street or approved sight easements, nor shall
any sign be located so as to constitute a traffic hazard.
83.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the relettering of former Subsection F as
Subsection G.
§ 159-42 SEWERS § 159-42
155:431
(6) All temporary signs erected for a special event such as an election
or sale shall be removed by the advertiser within five days after the
event shall have taken place. Real estate signs shall be installed
only on the premises involved. No permit shall be required for such
temporary signs, provided that they do not exceed 32 square feet of
display area on each side and provided that all temporary signs,
other than election signs, shall not remain in place more than four
weeks.
(7) Off-premises commercial advertising signs, including billboards,
shall not be permitted in any zone district in the Township.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 07-15]
(8) Whenever a sign shall become structurally unsafe or endangers the
safety of the building or the public, the Construction Official shall
order that such sign be made safe or removed. Such order shall be
complied with within 10 days of the receipt thereof by the person
owning or using the sign or the owner of the building or premises
on which such unsafe sign is affixed or erected.
(9) Location.
(a) Signs shall not be located closer than the following distances to
street rights-of-way:
Display Area of Sign Per
Side
(square feet)
Minimum Distance
(feet)
Less than 25 20
25 to 75 25
More than 75 30
(b) The Planning Board shall be authorized to waive the strict
application of this section if, because of local site conditions,
strict adherence would cause inconvenience to the public or
would constitute a hazard.
(10) The area surrounding ground signs shall be kept neat, clean and
landscaped. The tenant, owner or occupant to which the sign
applies shall be responsible for maintaining the condition of the
area.
(11) Directional signs having areas of less than three square feet are
exempt from area and location regulations but shall be shown on an
approved sign plan and further provided that they do not constitute
a hazard to the traveling public.
(12) All signs shall be kept in good repair, which shall include
replacement or repair of broken structural elements, casings or
faces, maintenance of legibility and all lighting elements working.
§ 159-42 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-42
155:432
§ 159-43. Utilities.
The design and location of all utilities shall be designed in accordance
with state and municipal standards and those of the public utility having
primary jurisdiction. Utility design requirements set forth in Chapter 175,
Subdivision of Land, shall be followed. Stormwater management details
set forth in Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land, § 175-49, Surface water
management standards, shall also be followed. All plans shall be approved
by the Township Engineer.
§ 159-44. Environmental considerations. [Amended 4-19-1982 by
Ord. No. 10-82; 2-17-1997 by Ord. No. 3-97; 12-19-2005 by Ord. No.
43-05]
The site plan shall be designed in accordance with applicable township
ordinance sections designed to protect the environment. These include but
are not limited to stormwater management, floodplain, soil erosion and
(13) Any location where business goods are no longer sold or produced
or where services are no longer provided shall have 90 days to
remove any remaining or derelict on-premises signs following
notification by the Township and at the expense of the owner of
such property. Where due written notification has been given by the
Township and compliance has not been made within the required
ninety-day period, the Township may cause removal of such signs
with the cost for such removal to be attached to the property.
(14) The applicant shall also comply with all applicable county, state and
federal sign regulations.
(15) All signs not specifically permitted by this section are prohibited.
(16) The provisions of this Code or any other ordinance of the Township
of Washington notwithstanding, signs displaying noncommercial
political or public interest messages shall be permitted in all zone
districts of the Township. One such sign, not to exceed 32 square
feet in area, shall be permitted per property. Each sign shall be
affixed so that it does not readily become detached. Such signs
shall not be displayed in such a manner as to obstruct or
substantially interfere with ingress to or egress from any building
or driveway, nor shall they be located in the public right-of-way or
obstruct the view of motorists in any way. No sign may be affixed to
a private fence or tree without the consent of the property owner or
affixed to a utility pole. Signs which are to be erected on a
temporary basis for a special event such as an election shall
conform to the requirements of Subsection G(6) of this section.
[Added 12-17-1990 by Ord. No. 37-90]
(17) A zoning permit must be obtained for all new signs or for any
change to an existing sign. [Added 8-18-2008 by Ord. No.
13-08]
§ 159-42 SEWERS § 159-44
155:433
sedimentation control requirements and stream corridor and open water
buffers. Drainage and conservation easement requirements set forth in
Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land, § 175-47, and environmental protection
requirements set forth in § 175-48, shall be followed.
§ 159-45. Open space and recreation.
A. General requirements. At least 25% of any tract proposed for planned
development, cluster or multifamily development shall be in open space
and distributed generally as follows:
(1) A minimum of 10% of the gross tract area shall be in formal
recreation facilities, such as tennis courts, playgrounds, swimming
pools, ballfields and similar facilities.
(2) A minimum of 10% of the gross tract area shall be in natural
features, vistas, significant wooded areas, vegetation and in other
usable open space, which shall be defined as lands other than in
channels, floodways and on slopes in excess of 25% or water bodies
whether used for recreation, retention or detention purposes.
(3) Five percent of the gross tract area may include all lands excluded
in Subsection A(2) above and water bodies.
B. Recreational facilities. The following recreational facilities shall be
considered as part of any planned development:
(1) Trails. Use to connect open space between recreational facilities
and between buildings and other uses.
(2) Bikeways. Minimum width of five feet, optimum of eight feet. Keep
grades under 10% and lower if for any length. Improved surfaces
are desirable, and all turning radii shall be 12 feet. Bike path
systems shall also meet county standards where applicable.
(3) Playlots. Minimum of 2,000 square feet for toddlers and up to 5,000
square feet for older children. Primarily used by preschool-age
children. Facilities include swings, slides, play sculpture and
benches for parents. Effective service radius of one block or 1/8 of a
mile. Approximately one playlot for each 400 persons or 100
children.
(4) Playgrounds.
(a) Designed for a variety of uses and equipment and shall reflect
the patronage. Sandboxes and play sculpture for young
children, basketball courts of backboards for older youths,
paved areas for various activities and shuffleboard and sunny
and quiet area for the elderly.
(b) The size of the playgrounds shall be based on population as
follows:
§ 159-44 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-45
155:434
§ 159-46. Fire-protection system. [Added 2-16-1987 by Ord. No.
3-87]
For all site plan applications involving new building construction of more
than 5,000 square feet of floor area, a fire-protection system shall be
provided. Where the building is located more than 1,000 feet from a public
water supply hydrant, the fire-protection system shall meet the criteria set
forth in Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land, § 175-50B, C, D and E, subject to
the following:
§ 159-47. Sight easements. [Amended 9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 27-88]
Sight easements shall be provided at street intersections and, where
required, at driveway intersections, in accordance with Chapter 175,
Subdivision of Land, § 175-44B(2).
§ 159-48. Geotechnical improvements. [Added 4-20-1998 by Ord.
No. 4-98]
Where geotechnical improvements are required by Chapter 175,
Subdivision of Land, § 175-30, the design and construction of the
Population
Size
(acres)
2,000 3.25
3,000 4.00
4,000 4.00
5,000 6.00
(5) Tennis. One for each 100 dwelling units. Parking shall be provided
on the basis of four spaces per court.
(6) Swimming pools. Provide three square feet of pool area for each
resident above three years of age. Provide for wading pools.
C. Other considerations. Recreational facilities shall be operated for the
Township residents, conveniently located and readily accessible. They
shall not be commercial enterprises open to anyone who pays a fee.
A. For underground storage tanks, the volume of water shall be two
gallons per square foot of building floor area, but not less than 10,000
gallons nor more than 50,000 gallons. The underground storage tank
shall be located greater than 200 feet from the building, but not more
than 500 feet.
B. For fire ponds and/or retention basins, the volume of water shall be two
times the volume of water calculated for underground tanks, but not
less than 20,000 gallons nor more than 100,000 gallons.
§ 159-45 SEWERS § 159-48
155:435
improvements shall be in accordance with the design standards of Chapter
175, Subdivision of Land, § 175-52.
§ 159-48.1. Golf course regulations. [Added 3-20-2000 by Ord. No.
2-00]
All golf courses shall be designed and constructed to conform to the
following standards:
A. The golf course shall utilize existing buildings and structures to the
greatest extent practicable.
B. The golf course shall be designed and situated to minimize conflicts
with existing and permitted land uses, and the layout of the course shall
provide safe locations for tees, fairways, greens and practice areas in
relation to adjacent roadways and improvements, both on- and off-site.
C. Whenever a waterway crossing is proposed, such crossing shall be
designed to minimize the removal of trees and other shading
vegetation. Additionally, all crossings shall be bridged, not designed
with culverts, except for golf cart paths, Where a golf course is adjacent
to or within an open space corridor, including floodplains, open waters,
stream corridors, wetlands and associated buffers, linkages and
conservation areas as provided in the Washington Township Master
Plan, the golf course shall provide and maintain all required buffer
setbacks from such features, subject to any limitations provided herein,
and shall provide drainage and conservation easements as required by
the Code of the Township of Washington or otherwise required as a
condition of approval.
D. Where a golf course is situated between public recreation areas shown
on the Master Plan, reasonable best efforts shall be required to connect
any existing or proposed pedestrian or trail networks in a safe and
appropriate manner.
E. Where a golf course is traversed by existing or proposed trails,
reasonable best efforts shall be required to connect any relocated
portions of the existing trail networks in a safe and appropriate manner.
F. Assurances shall be provided that all necessary utilities and services
are available for the proposed development, including wastewater
treatment, potable water and irrigation water.
G. No portion of any golf tee, fairway or green shall be located closer to
any existing tract boundary or public road right-of-way than as shown
on the attached exhibit titled "Setback Design Guidelines for Golf Hole,"
except that cart paths may be located no closer than 100 feet to such
boundaries or roads.84
84.Editor's Note: The "Setback Design Guidelines for Golf Hole" is on file in the office of the
Township Clerk.
§ 159-48 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-48.1
155:436
H. The golf course shall be designed to minimize the opportunity for golf
balls to be hit beyond tract boundaries.
I. No more than 35% of the wooded area (as shown on the most recent
aerial photographs available) shall be cleared, and any clearing beyond
25% of the wooded acreage of the tract shall be mitigated by
replacement of an equal number of native trees (minimum two-and-onehalf-
inch caliper) and shrubs elsewhere on the tract. Priority for such
replacement shall be given to locations where stream corridors are not
shaded by vegetation at the time of development.
J. No clearing, grading or site improvements related to the golf course
shall be conducted in areas of 25% slope or greater. Clearing and
regrading may be conducted in areas between 15% and 25% according
to special measures approved by the Planning Board Engineer, and
areas of play (tees, greens, bunkers, fairways and practice facilities)
created as part of the golf course which result in new areas of steep
slope shall not be regulated by these requirements.
K. A vegetated buffer at least 95 feet wide, consisting of native trees,
shrubs and ground covers, shall be provided and/or maintained
between any turf area which will be treated with fertilizers or pesticides
and the closest point of any one-hundred-year floodplain, or if there is
no floodplain, the top of the bank of any permanent nonseasonal stream
or open water body, on or off site, except that up to 35% of pond
frontage shall be exempt from this requirement, upon a showing of
good cause by the applicant.
L. An Integrated Turf Management Plan and an Integrated Pesticide and
Pest Management Plan shall be provided, which is specific to the
operation and maintenance of the proposed golf course. These plans
shall be prepared in accordance with guidelines established by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) and shall take
into account guidelines promulgated by the United States Golf
Association (USGA) and the Golf Course Superintendents' Association
of American (GCSAA), These plans shall also utilize the Best
Management Practices (BMPS) to prevent and/or minimize adverse
impacts of the golf course on groundwater and surface water resources
and shall be resubmitted to the Planning Board whenever modified.
M. The golf course developer shall demonstrate to the Planning Board that
the proposed golf course facility has satisfied the minimum
requirements for achieving the Audubon International Signature
Program Bronze Level designation (or equal).
N. Assurances shall be provided that the owner/operator will take all steps
to avoid any adverse impacts on surface water and groundwater quality
and quantity which result from operation of the golf course. Should any
adverse impact result, the owner/operator shall correct the problem
and remediate the adverse impacts. Monitoring of surface water and
groundwater quality and quantity shall be provided by the owner(s)
§ 159-48.1 SEWERS § 159-48.1
155:437
according to a plan prepared specifically for the proposed golf course
and approved by the approving authority in consultation with the
Washington Township Board of Health or their designee. Such
monitoring program shall detail the type, timing and frequency of
testing, as well as identify the specific chemical parameters to be tested
and shall be established at the time the Integrated Turf Management
Plan and the Integrated Pesticide and Pest Management Plans are
approved by the reviewing Board. A continuing monitoring program
shall be established, consistent with the guidelines for monitoring plans
established by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
(NJDEP), Bureau of Safe Drinking Water. The results of such water
quality monitoring shall be submitted by the owner(s) to the
Washington Township Board of Health or their designee and Planning
Board within 30 days of receipt of such results by the owner(s). All
requirements of § 217-59 (Restricted activities in Carbonate Area
District Overlay Zone) shall be met.
O. A water use budget and water recycling plan, which is specific to the
proposed golf course, shall be prepared and submitted to the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment. This plan shall detail the source
of potable and irrigation water, the projected amounts which will be
required and the water supply capacity of any aquifer from which such
water will be withdrawn, as outlined in the Land Oriented Reference
Data System (LORDS), Bulletin 74, New Jersey Geological Survey,
Bureau of Geology and Topography, Division of Water Resources, New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (August 1974).
P. Following the installation of any well intended to serve as a water
supply source for the golf course, and prior to the issuance of a
construction permit, a pump test shall be conducted at the maximum
projected pumping rate to assess the impact(s) on other well users in
the vicinity. If significant well interference is demonstrated during
interference tests on an existing well (observation well), the new well
cannot be certified for use. In such instances, the applicant may be
required to demonstrate why the documented well interference is not
significant. If a significant adverse impact of interference cannot be
remedied, certification of the new well may be denied. A Water
Allocation Permit shall be secured pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:19-1.1 et seq.
Q. The golf course owner/operator shall pay for all costs incurred by the
Township to hire outside consultants to assist the Township, the Board
of Health or their designee with ongoing monitoring of the approved
monitoring plans. Such ongoing monitoring shall include but is not
limited to the approved surface water and groundwater monitoring
plan, the Integrated Turf Management Plan and the Integrated
Pesticide and Pest Management Plan approved for the golf course.
R. Clearing, grading and other disturbances shall be designed to avoid the
nesting, breeding and feeding areas of endangered and threatened
animal species and to avoid the locations of endangered and threatened
plant species.
§ 159-48.1 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-48.1
155:438
S. Construction of runoff collection ponds in upland areas is encouraged
for use as stormwater management devices and as sources of irrigation
water. Best management practices shall be employed to maximize
recharge of surface runoff where appropriate. Ponds shall be
constructed to prevent stagnation, which may include aeration devices
or other techniques to maintain pond water motion and circulation.
T. Grasses selected for use on a golf course should be drought and pest
resistant to minimize the use of pesticides and irrigation.
U. Soil erosion and sedimentation shall be minimized through golf course
design which minimizes the need for mass grading for greens, tees and
fairways, coordinated soil erosion and sediment control measures and
construction phasing which limits the extent of clearing and soil
exposure prior to revegetation. A limit of disturbance for each hole shall
be provided. An individual grading plan shall be submitted for each hole
that is sufficient to determine stormwater management requirements
prior to site plan approval.
V. Exterior site lighting shall be downward directed to prevent off-site
light pollution effects and shall be limited to safety and security needs,
and there shall be no spillover of lighting beyond the tract boundaries.
Lighting shall conform to § 159-30.
W. On-site parking shall be provided in accordance with § 159-39, and all
areas designated for parking shall be located at least 150 feet from any
tract boundary. A seventy-five-foot buffer shall be provided within this
setback, which shall include such features as berms, fences, walls and
landscaping of sufficient density to provide a year-round screen when
viewed from adjoining properties.
X. The golf course shall be designed to preserve the rural character of the
viewshed, shall minimize the visual impact on the landscape and shall
not be included in the calculation of open space required for any
residential development.
Y. Gasoline-powered golf carts shall be prohibited on any golf course.
Z. Practice facilities including driving ranges shall only be permitted when
part of a golf course, provided that such facilities are not lighted and
are located where no netting or other protective structures are
required.
AA. Major site plan approval shall be required for a golf course and shall
incorporate GIS format as applicable.
§ 159-48.1 SEWERS § 159-48.1
155:439

ARTICLE VIII
Improvements
§ 159-49. On-tract improvements required. [Amended 11-17-1980
by Ord. No. 55-80]
As a condition of final site plan approval, the applicant shall have installed
all improvements required by the Planning Board, except that the Planning
Board may require and shall accept, in accordance with the standards
adopted herein, for the purpose of assuring the installation and
maintenance of on-tract improvements:
A. The furnishing of a performance guaranty in favor of the Township of
Washington in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation
for the following improvements only:
(1) The final bituminous surface course of streets.
(2) Street signs.
(3) Dry wells and swales, as may be required.
(4) Monuments.
(5) Shade trees.
B. Provision for a maintenance guaranty to be posted with the governing
body for a period not to exceed two years after final acceptance of the
improvement in an amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the
improvement. In the event that other governmental agencies or public
utilities automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the
improvements are covered by a performance or maintenance guaranty
to another governmental agency, no performance or maintenance
guaranty, as the case may be, shall be required by the Township for
such utilities or improvements.
C. The amount of any performance guaranty may be reduced by the
governing body, by resolution, when portions of the improvements have
been certified by the Township Engineer to have been completed. The
time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the
performance guaranty has been provided may be extended by the
governing body by resolution.
D. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the Township for the reasonable cost of
the improvements not completed or corrected, and the Township may
either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof complete
such improvements.
E. When all of the required improvements have been completed, the
obligor shall notify the governing body, in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the Township Clerk, of the completion of said
§ 159-49 SEWERS § 159-49
155:441
§ 159-50. Off-tract improvements required. [Amended 12-15-1980
by Ord. No. 69-80]
improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Township Engineer.
Thereupon, the Township Engineer shall inspect all of the
improvements and shall file a detailed report, in writing, with the
governing body, indicating either approval, partial approval or rejection
of the improvements with a statement of reasons for any rejection. If
partial approval is indicated, the cost of the improvements rejected
shall be set forth.
F. The governing body shall either approve, partially approve or reject the
improvements on the basis of the report of the Township Engineer and
shall notify the obligor, in writing, by certified mail, of the contents of
said report and the action of said approving authority with relation
thereto not later than 65 days after receipt of the notice from the
obligor of the completion of the improvements. Where partial approval
is granted, the obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to the
performance guaranty except for that portion adequately sufficient to
secure provision of the improvements not yet approved. Failure of the
governing body to send or provide such notification to the obligor
within 65 days shall be deemed to constitute approval of the
improvements, and the obligor and surety, if any, shall be released from
all liability, pursuant to such performance guaranty.
G. If any portion of the required improvements are rejected, the approving
authority may require the obligor to complete such improvements, and
upon completion, the same procedure of notification, as set forth in this
chapter, shall be followed.
H. The obligor shall reimburse the Township for all reasonable inspection
fees paid to the Township Engineer for the foregoing inspection of
improvements.
A. As a condition for approval of a major site plan, an applicant shall be
required by the approving agency to pay his pro rata share of the cost of
providing reasonable and necessary street improvements, recreational
facilities, water, sewage, drainage and other utility facilities, and
easements therefor, located outside the property limits of the
development but necessitated or required by construction or
improvements within such development. Any such improvements shall
be based on the circulation and comprehensive utility service plans of
the Master Plan. The developer shall either construct the off-tract
improvement or contribute its pro rata share of the cost, at the option of
the approving authority, subject to the approval of the governing body.
If the developer constructs the improvement, it shall be compensated
by the Township of Washington for all but the developer's pro rata share
of the cost of the improvement. Where a developer pays the amount
determined as his pro rata share under protest, he shall institute legal
action within one year of such payment in order to preserve the right to
§ 159-49 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-50
155:442
a judicial determination as to the fairness and reasonableness of such
amount. [Amended 7-19-1993 by Ord. No. 21-93]
B. Standards for determining the developer's pro rata share of the cost of
an off-tract improvement.
(1) If only the tract to be developed is benefited by the off-tract
improvement, the entire cost of the improvement will be paid by
the developer.
(2) If both the tract to be developed and other lots are benefited, the
developer shall pay any difference between the total cost of the offtract
improvement and the total amount by which all lots serviced
thereby, including the developed tract, have been specially
benefited, unless the governing body, on recommendation or
referral by the approving authority, determines that the
improvement shall be constructed as a local improvement, in which
case the developer shall pay, in addition, the value of the special
benefit to be conferred upon the developed property, and each
other benefited property owner shall pay the value of the benefit
conferred upon its respective lot.
(3) If any off-tract improvement is not to be constructed, the
developer's pro rata share shall be zero.
C. Determination of the amount by which each lot served is benefited.
(1) Upon request of the approving authority, the Tax Assessor of the
Township of Washington shall determine which lots are benefited
by the proposed off-tract improvement and the amount by which
each such lot is specially benefited.
(2) The amount by which each tract is specially benefited shall be
determined in a manner consistent with N.J.S.A. 40:56-27 and the
manuals, rules and regulations prescribed by the State of New
Jersey for assessment and valuation of property and other
recognized authority deemed necessary by the Tax Assessor.
(3) If the Tax Assessor is unable to make the determination required,
the approving authority shall select a qualified valuation company
approved by the Tax Assessor to make the determination in the
manner prescribed.
(4) Any cost of making the determination shall be paid solely by the
developer from the developer's deposit.
(5) The determination of the Tax Assessor or valuation company shall
be confirmed, modified or rejected by the approving authority after
a hearing on notice to the developer. The hearing shall be
conducted in accordance with the approving authority's rules of
procedure.
D. Deposit.
§ 159-50 SEWERS § 159-50
155:443
§ 159-51. Geotechnical improvements. [Added 4-20-1998 by Ord.
No. 4-98]
The geotechnical improvements required by § 159-48, and Chapter 175,
Subdivision of Land, § 175-30, to address site specific karst/solution
features shall be installed prior to final approval or bonded. Inspection
of these improvements shall be under the supervision of the Township
Engineer in conjunction with the Township Geological Consultant and, if
necessary, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, a Township
Geotechnical Engineer as designated by the Township Engineer.
(1) Upon determination by the approving authority that an off-tract
improvement is necessitated or required, the developer shall
submit an additional deposit in the sum of 120% of the estimated
cost of obtaining, making and reviewing the determination in
Subsection C above.
(2) Failure of the developer to submit the deposit within 15 days of
request by the approving authority shall render the application
incomplete.
(3) Only the formula for calculating the developer's pro rata share of
the estimated cost of the improvement shall be determined in
conjunction with site plan approval. The estimated cost may be
modified prior to installation or in conjunction with final site plan
approval. The actual amount shall be determined after completion,
and a refund will be made or an additional payment required
depending on the actual cost of the improvement.
(4) If the improvement is to be constructed by the developer, the
approving authority shall require the developer either to pay 120%
of the estimated cost of the improvement or to deliver a
performance guaranty in that amount either prior to installation or
as a condition of final approval, whichever is earlier. If the
municipality is to construct the improvement, the approving
authority shall require the developer either to pay 120% of the
developer's pro rata share of the estimated cost of the
improvement or to deliver a performance guaranty in that amount
as a condition of final approval. The funds shall be for the
construction of the off-tract improvement.
§ 159-50 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-51
155:444
ARTICLE IX
Miscellaneous
§ 159-52. Definitions. [Amended 10-15-1990 by Ord. No. 34-90]
As defined under Chapter 111, Land Use Procedures, Article VI, Definitions.
§ 159-53. Fees. [Amended 12-18-1978 by Ord. No. 36-78; 2-18-1980
by Ord. No. 7-80; 11-17-1980 by Ord. No. 54-80; 7-20-1981 by Ord.
No. 29-81; 12-21-1981 by Ord. No. 50-81; 2-21-1983 by Ord. No.
2-83; 12-17-1984 by Ord. No. 33-84; 7-21-1986 by Ord. No. 23-86;
12-21-1987 by Ord. No. 28-87; 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 12-92]
The following fees shall be required for site plan approval:
A. Application for site plan approval.
(1) The following application fees covering administration and
overhead shall be charged to the applicant for a site plan and shall
be collected by the Township at the time of submission of an
application to the Planning Board for approval:
(a) Preliminary site plans:
[1] Preliminary site plan, nonresidential: $1,000, plus $100
per 1,000 square feet of floor area; residential: $1,000,
plus $200 per unit. [Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No.
23-02]
[2] Amendment or extension of preliminary site plan: 25% of
the preliminary site plan application fee.
[3] Wireless telecommunications installations where a new
tower is proposed: $1,000. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord.
No. 9-97]
[4] In addition to the fees required above, for any application
involving a geologic investigation pursuant to Chapter
175, Subdivision of Land, § 175-30, $35 per 1,000 square
feet of building area and paved driveway/parking area
included in the Carbonate Area District. [Added
4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 4-98]
(b) Final site plans:
[1] Final site plan, agricultural: $1,000; nonresidential other
than agricultural: $1,000, plus $100 per 1,000 square feet
of floor area; residential: $1,000, plus $80 per unit.
[Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 23-02; 7-16-2012 by
Ord. No. 13-12]
[2] Amendment or extension of final site plan approval: 25% of
final site plan application fee.
§ 159-52 SEWERS § 159-53
155:445
(c) Minor site plans. [Amended 5-16-1994 by Ord. No. 7-94]
[1] Minor site plan: $300. [Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No.
23-02]
[2] Amendment or extension of minor site plan approval:
$150.
[3] Waiver of site plan: $100. [Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord.
No. 23-02]
[4] Wireless telecommunications installations where a new
tower is not proposed: $400. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord.
No. 9-97]
(d) Conditional uses: $250. [Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
03-11]
(2) The following deposits shall be submitted by the developer at the
time of submission of an application to the Planning Board for
approval. Said deposit shall cover the cost of engineering, legal and
professional planner review and documentation fees and
disbursements. [Amended 7-19-1993 by Ord. No. 21-93;
2-19-1996 by Ord. No. 4-96]
(a) Preliminary site plans:
[1] Preliminary site plan: $2,500 for up to 1,000 square feet of
lot area, plus $5 per 1,000 square feet of additional lot
area, plus $60 per 1,000 square feet of building area and
paved driveway/parking area, except that for agricultural
uses, the fee shall be $2,500, plus $5 per 1,000 square
feet, or any portion thereof, proposed to be disturbed, plus
$60 per 1,000 square feet of building area and paved
driveway/parking area. [Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord.
No. 23-02; 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 05-12]
[2] Amendment or extension of preliminary site plan approval:
25% of preliminary site plan review fee deposit.
[3] Wireless telecommunication installations where a new
tower is proposed: $5,000. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord.
No. 9-97]
(b) Final site plans:
[1] Final site plan: 50% of the preliminary site plan deposit.
[2] Amendment or extension of final site plan approval: 25% of
final site plan review fee deposit.
(c) Minor site plans.
§ 159-53 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-53
155:446
[1] Minor site plan: $350 for up to 600 square feet of building
area.
[2] Amendment or extension of minor site plan approval: 25%
of minor site plan review fee deposit.
[3] Wireless telecommunications installations where a new
tower is not proposed: $2,000. [Added 3-17-1997 by
Ord. No. 9-97]
[4] Waiver of site plan: $250. [Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
03-11]
(d) Conditional uses: $500. [Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
03-11]
B. Fees for inspection of a site plan by the Township Engineer to ensure
compliance. The inspection fee deposit shall be the greater of $500 or
5% of the estimated cost of improvements as set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53h. Payment shall be made prior to the start of construction.
[Amended 12-18-1995 by Ord. No. 38-95; 5-21-2001 by Ord. No.
12-01]
C. Payment in installments. [Added 12-18-1995 by Ord. No. 38-9585]
(1) For those developments for which the reasonably anticipated
inspection fees are less than $10,000, fees may, at the option of the
developer, be paid in two installments. The initial amount deposited
shall be 50% of the reasonably anticipated fees as calculated by the
Township Engineer. When the balance on deposit drops to 10% of
the reasonably anticipated fees because the amount deposited by
the developer has been reduced by payments to the Township
Engineer and Attorneys in connection with inspections, the
developer shall deposit the remaining 50% of the anticipated fees
immediately upon receipt of a request from the Chief Financial
Officer.
(2) For those developments for which the reasonably anticipated
inspection fees are $10,000 or greater, fees may, at the option of
the developer, be paid in four installments. The initial amount
deposited by a developer shall be 25% of the reasonably
anticipated fees as calculated by the Township Engineer. When the
balance on deposit drops to 10% of the reasonably anticipated fees
because the amount deposited by the developer has been reduced
by payments to the Township Engineer and attorneys in connection
with inspections, the developer shall make additional deposits of
25% of the reasonably anticipated fees. The Township Engineer
shall not perform any inspection except required health and safety
85.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections C, D and E as
Subsections D, E and F, respectively.
§ 159-53 SEWERS § 159-53
155:447
inspections if sufficient funds to pay for those inspections are not
on deposit.
D. List of persons (improvements) within 200 feet: $10. [Amended
12-18-1995 by Ord. No. 38-95]
E. Tabulation and appeal of review fees. [Amended 7-19-1993 by Ord.
No. 21-93; 12-18-1995 by Ord. No. 38-95]
(1) The Chief Financial Officer shall tabulate the costs of the Engineer,
planner and attorneys, their staffs and any outside consultants
required when an application is of a nature beyond the scope of the
expertise of the professionals normally utilized by the Township, for
a proper review and documentation pursuant to vouchers
submitted by the professionals identifying the personnel
performing the service and stating the date the services were
performed, the hours spent to one-fourth-hour increments, the
hourly rate and the expenses incurred. All charges and fees shall be
established by resolution of the governing body. Expenses shall be
actual out-of-pocket expenses of any such professionals or
consultants, including normal and typical expenses incurred in
processing applications. Vouchers shall be submitted monthly to
the Chief Financial Officer with a copy to the developer. These costs
shall be deducted from the engineering/planning/legal review fee
escrow deposit and paid to the professionals by the Chief Financial
Officer. Where the reasonable and necessary review costs exceed
or are anticipated to exceed the review fee deposit, the developer
shall pay the additional amount prior to the signing of any site plan.
Failure to remit the additional required deposit within 15 days of
the request shall render the application incomplete, and no further
proceedings or action shall be taken by the Planning Board until
after compliance.
(2) The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare and send to the developer
a statement which shall include an accounting of funds listing all
deposits, interest earnings, disbursements and the cumulative
balance of the escrow account. This statement shall be provided
quarterly, if monthly charges are $1,000 or less, or monthly, if
monthly charges exceed $1,000.
(3) After the final site plan has been signed, the developer shall send
written notice by certified mail to the Chief Financial Officer, the
Planning Board, the Township Engineer and other relevant
professional that the application is completed. After receipt of such
notice, the Engineer and/or other professional shall submit a final
voucher to the Chief Financial Officer within 30 days with a copy to
the developer. The Chief Financial Officer shall render a written
final accounting to the developer on the status of the escrow within
45 days of receipt of the final bill, together with any balance
remaining in the account, including interest, in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1.
§ 159-53 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-53
155:448
(4) Within 15 days of the tabulation of review costs and notification of
the developer by the Chief Financial Officer, the developer shall
have the right to appeal said tabulation by so notifying the
Township Committee, in writing, with copies to the Chief Financial
Officer, the Planning Board and any relevant professional, provided
that any additional fees or amounts required by the Planning Board
to be paid prior to the signing of any site plan or issuance of a
building permit must be paid by the developer prior to the bringing
of any such appeal. Upon receipt of any such appeal, the Planning
Board shall review the same and make a recommendation thereon
to the Township Committee within 45 days. The Township
Committee shall then decide the proper review fee to be charged,
based upon information provided by both the developer and the
Planning Board. If the matter is not resolved to the satisfaction of
the developer, the developer may appeal to the County
Construction Board of Appeals, established under P.L. 1975, c. 217
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127), any charge to an escrow account or a deposit
by any municipal professional or consultant pursuant to the
procedure set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2.
F. Tabulation and appeal of inspection fees. [Added 7-19-1993 by Ord.
No. 21-93; 12-18-1995 by Ord. No. 38-95]
(1) The Chief Financial Officer shall tabulate the costs of the Township
Engineer, Attorneys, their staff and any outside consultants
required for construction inspection and related costs. Related
costs shall include travel time, conferences and review of plans
relating to inspection and engineering/attorney costs relating to
developer's agreements, deeds, posting of guaranties, release of
guaranties, acceptance and any other out-of-pocket costs related
thereto. The costs shall be pursuant to vouchers submitted by the
professionals identifying the personnel performing the service and
stating the date the services were performed, the hours spent to
one-fourth-hour increments, the hourly rate and expenses incurred.
All such charges and costs shall be established by resolution of the
governing body. Vouchers shall be submitted monthly to the Chief
Financial Officer with a copy to the developer. The cost shall be
deducted by the Chief Financial Officer from the inspection fee
deposit and paid to the professionals by the Chief Financial Officer.
Where the reasonable and necessary inspection costs exceed or are
anticipated to exceed the inspection fee deposit, the developer
shall pay the additional amount within 15 days of request by the
Chief Financial Officer.
(2) The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare and send to the developer
a statement which shall include an accounting of funds listing all
deposits, interest earnings, disbursements and the cumulative
balance of the inspection fee deposit account. This statement shall
be provided quarterly, if monthly charges are $1,000 or less or
monthly, if monthly charges exceed $1,000.
§ 159-53 SEWERS § 159-53
155:449
(3) After the improvements have been approved by the Township
Committee, the developer shall send written notice by certified
mail to the Chief Financial Officer and the Planning Board, the
Township Engineer and other relevant professional that the
application is complete. After receipt of such notice, the Engineer
and/or other professional shall submit a final voucher to the Chief
Financial Officer within 30 days with a copy to the developer. The
Chief Financial Officer shall render a written final accounting to
the developer on the status of the inspection fee deposit within 45
days of receipt of the final bill, together with any balance remaining
in the account, including interest, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.1.
(4) Within 15 days of the tabulation of costs of inspections and
notification of the developer of such costs by the Chief Financial
Officer, the developer shall have the right to appeal the same by so
notifying the Township Committee, in writing, with copies to the
Chief Financial Officer, the Planning Board and any relevant
professional, provided that any costs required to be paid prior to
the start of construction or prior to any inspection shall be paid
prior to the commencement of any such appeal. Upon receipt of
such appeal, the Township Administrator shall review the same and
make a recommendation thereon to the Township Committee
within 45 days. The Township Committee shall then decide the
proper inspection fee to be charged based upon information
provided by both the developer and the Township Administrator. If
the matter is not resolved to the satisfaction of the developer, the
developer may appeal to the County Construction Board of Appeals
established under P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127), any
charge to an inspection fee account or a deposit by any municipal
professional or consultant pursuant to the procedure set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2.
G. Fees for inspection of fire-protection systems installed pursuant to
§ 159-46. The inspection fee shall be $175 per tank, which shall cover
all inspections prior to acceptance of the fire-protection system by the
Township. Payment shall be made at the same time as the engineering
inspection fees. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 18-02]
§ 159-53 WASHINGTON CODE § 159-53
155:450
Chapter 164
SOIL DISTURBANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 92.
Open pits and trenches — See Ch. 132.
Street openings — See Ch. 172, Art. V.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 175.
§ 164-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Soil Disturbance
Ordinance of the Township of Washington."
§ 164-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin,
including earth, sand, clay, loam, sediment, muck, gravel, stone, humus,
rock or dirt.
SOIL DISTURBANCE — To dig, excavate, remove, deposit, fill, grade,
replace, level or otherwise alter or change the location or contour of land or
to transport or supply soil.
§ 164-3. Permit/waiver required.
No person shall perform soil disturbance without first having procured
a permit from the Township Committee. Any waiver to this permit
requirement must be submitted in writing to the Township Committee
with a detailed explanation as to why a waiver should be granted. Waiver
approval shall be memorialized by resolution from the Township Committee.
Soil disturbance permits shall not be required for the following:
A. Soil disturbance, other than for installation of a driveway, in connection
with the construction of a building on such premises and excavation or
grading incidental thereto, provided that no soil is transferred to or
from the lot.
B. Soil disturbance in connection with construction for an approved
subdivision or site plan, provided that the applicant submits to the
Planning Board/Board of Adjustment all information required by this
chapter, the performance bond required by § 164-10 and the approval
resolution includes approval of soil disturbance. If an applicant/
developer wishes to amend his/her approval under this provision, then
the applicant shall apply to the Board that granted the original soil
disturbance approval for an amended approval.
§ 159-53 SEWERS § 164-3
155:451
§ 164-4. Filing of application; information required. [Amended
11-21-2011 by Ord. No. 17-11; 11-20-2017 by Ord. No. 12-17]
The Township Committee shall not issue a permit for the disturbance of
soil unless and until the owner of the premises shall first file six copies of
an application requesting such permit with the Planning Board Clerk. The
application shall include or be accompanied by the following:
C. Soil disturbance in connection with projects on municipal land and/or
rights-of-way.
D. Soil disturbance of insignificant amounts, wherein "insignificant" is
defined as less than 100 cubic yards in any twelve-month period.
E. Soil disturbance in connection with agricultural uses, except that
agricultural activities that do not produce plants, animals or their
products worth $2,500 or more annually shall not be entitled to import
or export more than 100 cubic yards of soil in any twelve-month period
without securing a soil disturbance permit. [Amended 6-17-2013 by
Ord. No. 15-13]
F. Soil disturbance in connection with septic system repairs to existing
building.
G. Soil disturbance in connection with percolation tests and/or soil
borings.
H. Soil disturbance for the construction of a swimming pool for which a
permit has been issued.
I. Soil disturbance for the construction of a driveway pursuant to a permit
issued in accordance with Chapter 172, Streets and Sidewalks, Article
III, Driveway Construction.
A. The name and address of the owner of the land.
B. The lot and block numbers of the land as shown on the current Tax Map
of the Township.
C. The reason for soil disturbance.
D. The type or types of soil to be disturbed.
E. The volume of soil of each type to be disturbed. The volume shall be in
both cubic yards and in truckloads.
F. A map or maps of premises in a scale of one inch equals 50 feet,
showing the existing contour lines, the proposed contour elevations
resulting from the soil disturbance and trees and vegetation on the
premises before and after the proposed soil disturbance.
G. The location of any soil to be imported to the Township, including the
address, block and lot of the location and a description of the property's
history and use (e.g., farmland, residential, industrial, etc.).
§ 164-3 WASHINGTON CODE § 164-4
155:452
§ 164-5. Consideration of application.
H. The location(s) to which any disturbed soil is to be taken. If one or more
such locations are within the Township, a map of each shall be provided
showing the information required by Subsections B and F.
I. The measures that will be undertaken to prevent road damage, traffic
problems and the dropping of soil onto public streets or roads while in
transit.
J. The proposed dates for the commencement and completion of the work.
K. The proposed sequence of operations indicating the time allotted to
each phase.
L. Engineering data, such as soil borings or test pits, certified by a
professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey
substantiating the feasibility of any proposed soil disturbance project.
M. Such other pertinent data as the Planning Board/Board of Adjustment
Engineer may deem necessary or appropriate. [Amended 4-15-2019
by Ord. No. 08-19]
N. Where the soil disturbance area exceeds 5,000 square feet, a soil
erosion/sedimentation control approval from the Morris County Soil
Conservation Service.
O. Where soil disposal areas are located within a floodplain, a stream
encroachment approval from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
P. Certified soil analysis/test results, from a soils engineer, geologist or
licensed subsurface evaluator, in accordance with the testing
procedures set forth in the soil disturbance application, as well as the
technical requirements for site remediation set forth in N.J.A.C.
7:26E-2.1 and 7:26E-3.4, for all soil to be imported to the Township or
to be relocated within the Township.
A. Upon submission of a completed application for soil disturbance in
accordance with § 164-4, the Planning Board Clerk shall forward one
copy to the Planning Board/Board of Adjustment Engineer, one copy to
the Township Soil Consultant and one copy to the Washington Township
Environmental Commission for their review and comment. In addition,
one copy shall be submitted to the Washington Township Clerk.
[Amended 11-21-2011 by Ord. No. 17-11; 11-20-2017 by Ord. No.
12-17; 4-15-2019 by Ord. No. 08-19]
B. In reviewing the application, the Environmental Commission, the Soil
Consultant and the Planning Board/Board of Adjustment Engineer shall
be guided by a general concern for the public health, safety and
welfare. In addition, specific consideration shall be given to the
§ 164-4 SEWERS § 164-5
155:453
following factors, rules and minimum standards: [Amended
4-15-2019 by Ord. No. 08-19]
(1) The potential for soil erosion by water and wind.
(2) The prevention of silt and sediment from entering brooks, streams,
ponds, lakes, rivers and other bodies of water.
(3) The existing drainage of the site involved and any changes in
drainage patterns that may result from the establishment of new
contours.
(4) Types and fertility of the soil to be removed and the use to which it
will be put.
(5) Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and lands.
(6) Land values and uses of those properties affected directly or
indirectly by the proposed disturbance of soil.
(7) No soil disturbance for transport off site shall be done in any area
within 100 feet of any residential property line, and the buffer area
shall remain in its natural state.
(8) The grade of excavated slopes shall not be steeper than 3 to 1
(three feet horizontal to one foot vertical).
(9) The possible need for any soil disturbance excavation to be
completely fenced with a six-foot-high chain-link-type fence or
approved equivalent where necessary to protect the safety and
welfare of the public.
(10)No more than four acres shall be scheduled for disturbance at any
time, and any previously disturbed area must be stabilized and
completed to the approved proposed contours and the provisions of
§ 164-9 complied with before further disturbance.
(11) Satisfactory soil test results, below the current NJDEP residential,
or most stringent, soil cleanup criteria.
C. If the soil tests have not been completed, any approval will be subject to
satisfactory soil test results.
D. No later than 15 days after receipt of the application, the Planning
Board/Board of Adjustment Engineer and the Township Soil Consultant
shall determine whether the application is complete or whether
additional information is required, in which event the Planning Board
Clerk shall communicate the request for additional information to the
applicant. No later than 15 days after the application has been deemed
complete by the Planning Board/Board of Adjustment Engineer and the
Township Soil Consultant, the Planning Board/Board of Adjustment
Engineer, the Township Soil Consultant and the Environmental
Commission shall submit comments on the application, in writing, to
§ 164-5 WASHINGTON CODE § 164-5
155:454
§ 164-6. Public hearing on application. [Amended 11-21-2011 by
Ord. No. 17-11]
§ 164-7. Notice to owners of adjacent property.
the Township Planning Board and may recommend that the permit
applied for be either granted or denied. Any conditions for approval
or the reasons for denial shall be included in the recommendations.
[Added 11-21-2011 by Ord. No. 17-11; amended 11-20-2017 by
Ord. No. 12-17; 4-15-2019 by Ord. No. 08-19]
A. When the application has been deemed complete by the Planning
Board/Board of Adjustment Engineerr and the Township Soil Consultant
the applicant shall submit 15 copies of the application to the Planning
Board Clerk. The Planning Board Clerk shall refer an application that
has been deemed complete by the Planning Board/Board of Adjustment
Engineer and the Township Soil Consultant to the Washington Township
Planning Board. [Amended 11-20-2017 by Ord. No. 12-17;
4-15-2019 by Ord. No. 08-19]
B. The Washington Township Planning Board shall hold a public hearing
on each application for a soil disturbance permit within 30 days of its
receipt by the Planning Board Secretary.
C. No later than 10 days after the public hearing, the Washington
Township Planning Board shall recommend, in writing, to the Township
Committee that the permit applied for be either granted or denied. Any
conditions for approval or the reasons for denial shall be included in the
recommendations.
A. The applicant shall, at least 10 days prior to the time appointed for the
hearing on the application, give notice to all owners of property
situated within or without the township, as shown by the most recent
tax lists of the municipality, whose property or properties are shown by
said lists to be located within 200 feet of the boundaries of the property
which is the subject of said applications. Such notice shall be given by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of
the property owner or owners, as shown by the most recent tax lists of
their municipality. Where the owner is a partnership, service upon any
partner as above provided shall be sufficient, and where the owners are
corporations, service upon any officers, as above set forth, shall be
sufficient.
B. The applicant shall, by affidavit, present satisfactory proof to the
Planning Board at the time of the hearing that said notices have been
duly served as aforesaid. At the hearing, any party may appear in
person or by agent or by attorney. [Amended 11-21-2011 by Ord. No.
17-11]
§ 164-5 SEWERS § 164-8
155:455
§ 164-8. Issuance or denial of permit. [Amended 11-21-2011 by Ord.
No. 17-11]
At a regularly scheduled regular meeting of the Township Committee held
not more than 35 days after receipt of the Planning Board’s
recommendation relative to the application for a soil removal permit, the
Township Committee shall by resolution either grant or deny such
application. The resolution shall set forth any conditions imposed in
granting the permit or the reasons for denying the application therefor.
§ 164-9. Conduct of operations.
If a soil disturbance permit is granted, the owner or person in charge shall
so conduct the operations that:
§ 164-10. Performance guarantee required. [Amended 11-21-2011
by Ord. No. 17-11]
A. There shall be no sharp declivities, pits or depressions.
B. The area shall be properly leveled off, cleared of debris and graded to
conform with the contour lines and grades as approved by the Township
Committee.
C. All operations shall take place only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on
Saturday.
D. The top layer of arable soil for a depth of six inches shall be set aside for
retention on the premises, stabilized to prevent erosion and respread
over the premises when the soil disturbance has been completed,
pursuant to levels and contour lines as recommended by the Planning
Board/Board of Adjustment Engineer and approved by the Township
Committee, unless permission to remove such soil shall be granted by
the Township Committee. [Amended 4-15-2019 by Ord. No. 08-19]
E. Grass or another cover crop approved by the Planning Board/Board of
Adjustment Engineer capable of retaining and/or stabilizing soil on any
surface which results from subject disturbance shall be established
within a reasonable length of time. A reasonable length of time shall be
considered as 60 days or less and prior to the stabilization date of
October 15 established by the Soil Conservation Service. In the event
that the cover crop shall fail to grow, it shall be replaced promptly until
a successful growth is accomplished. [Amended 4-15-2019 by Ord.
No. 08-19]
A. Before any permit for soil disturbance shall be issued, the owner or
applicant shall file with the Township Committee a performance
guarantee in cash or by letter of credit in such amount as in the opinion
of the Township Committee shall be sufficient to insure the faithful
performance of the work to be undertaken pursuant to the permit
granted according to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 164-8 WASHINGTON CODE § 164-10
155:456
§ 164-11. Conformity with provisions required.
No soil disturbance shall be made under the provisions of this chapter
unless a permit therefor shall have been first obtained as provided herein,
and no soil disturbance shall be made except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 164-12. Fees.
§ 164-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-16-2007 by Ord. No.
9-07]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject, upon conviction, to the penalties provided in
§ 1-3 of this Code. Each and every violation or a nonconformance with this
B. In no event shall the guarantee be in an amount less than $1 per cubic
yard of proposed disturbance or $1,000, whichever is greater.
C. Before any guarantee shall be released to the permittee, the authorized
soil disturbance must be completed to the approved contours, the
permittee must submit an as-built plan, including contours, prepared by
a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey
and any damage to public and private roadways and other
improvements must be repaired to the satisfaction of the Planning
Board/Board of Adjustment Engineer. [Amended 4-15-2019 by Ord.
No. 08-19]
A. Each applicant shall pay the following fees to the Clerk for the use of
the Township of Washington:
(1) A filing fee of $100 to be paid at the time of application.
(2) An escrow review fee in the amount of $1,000 for the review of the
application by the Township Soil Consultant and Planning Board/
Board of Adjustment Engineer and any other professional retained
by the Township or the Planning Board in connection with the
application. The balance of the review fee, if any, shall be refunded
to the applicant at the conclusion of the soil disturbance operation.
The escrow fee deposit shall be administered by the Township in
accordance with the requirements set forth in the Municipal Land
Use Law for escrow deposits. [Amended 11-21-2011 by Ord. No.
17-11; 4-15-2019 by Ord. No. 08-19]
(3) A permit fee of $0.10 per cubic yard of soil proposed to be
disturbed, with a minimum fee of $100, to be calculated by the
Planning Board/Board of Adjustment Engineer as hereinafter
provided and to be paid upon issuance of the permit, which permit
shall be valid for a period of one year from date of issuance, at
which time application shall be made to the Township Committee
for renewal. [Amended 4-15-2019 by Ord. No. 08-19]
§ 164-10 SEWERS § 164-13
155:457
chapter or each day that any provision of this chapter shall have been
violated shall be construed as a separate and distinct violation thereof.
Chapter 168
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 250.
§ 164-13 WASHINGTON CODE § 164-13
155:458
ARTICLE I
Recycling
[Adopted 12-19-1988 by Ord. No. 36-8886 (Ch. XXIV of the Revised
General Ordinances); amended in its entirety 4-21-2008 by Ord. No.
04-08]
§ 168-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLASS B RECYCLABLES — Construction/demolition debris.
COMMERCIAL — Any nonresidential building or establishment, including
but not limited to those used for industrial purposes, retail, wholesale,
dining, offices, professional services, shipping and receiving areas and
cafeterias.
COMMINGLED — A combining of nonputrescible source-separated
recyclable materials for the purpose of recycling.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials designated
within the Morris County District Solid Waste Management Plan to be
source-separated for the purpose of recycling. These materials include:
Aluminum cans: cans made from aluminum that was manufactured to
hold a serving of a beverage. Specifically omitted from this definition
are aluminum foil and aluminum pie plates.
A.
Glass bottles and jars: bottles and jars made from glass, including
clear, brown and green glass. "Bottle" is defined as a receptacle having
a narrow neck and a mouth that can be corked or capped. "Jar" is
defined as a wide-mouthed container that can be capped. Caps and
lids not included. Specifically omitted from this definition are drinking
glasses, windows, mirrors, light bulbs, and anything made of Pyrex® or
ceramic.
B.
Plastic bottles (coded 1 and 2): plastic bottles coded to indicate that
they are comprised of the specific types of plastic compounds
(polymers) known as "polyethylene terephthalate (PETE)" or highdensity
polyethylene (HDPE). See symbols below. "Bottle" is defined as
a receptacle having a narrow neck and a mouth that can be corked
or capped. Caps and lids not included. Any item made of plastic that
is not a bottle, and any plastic bottle without one of the symbols
shown below, is specifically omitted from this definition. Empty bottles
which contained hazardous materials, such as motor oil, antifreeze,
etc., should not be recycled.
C.
86.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. XXIV, Mandatory Recycling,
adopted 12-16-1985 by Ord. No. 44-85.
§ 168-1 SEWERS § 168-1
155:459
Steel (tin) cans: an airtight container for the distribution or storage
of goods, composed of thin, usually ferrous, metal. Examples are soup
cans and tuna fish cans.
D.
Newspaper: a publication containing news, information and
advertising, usually printed on low-cost paper called "newsprint."
Newspaper may include glossy inserts which come with the paper,
dependent upon the market conditions at the time.
E.
Corrugated cardboard: shipping containers made with kraft paper
linerboard and corrugated medium.
F.
Mixed paper: various categories of recyclable paper, including, but not
limited to, white and colored paper used in printers, photocopiers and
fax machines, white and colored ledger paper, carbonless copy paper,
construction paper, undeliverable mail, mailed promotional letters/
advertisements/circulars, magazines, catalogues, envelopes, soft cover
books.
G.
Leaves: vegetative material, typically generated in the autumn when
they fall from trees and then are raked from residents' and/or
commercial lawns.
H.
Grass clippings: vegetative material generated when grass (lawns) are
cut.
I.
Brush: branches, woody plants and other similar vegetative material.
Leaves and grass do not constitute brush.
J.
Natural wood waste: logs, stumps, branches and other wood tree parts.
Dimensional lumber is omitted from inclusion in this definition.
K.
Oil-contaminated soil: nonhazardous soil that contains petroleum
hydrocarbons (gasoline, diesel, kerosene, jet fuel, No. 4 and No. 6
heating oils and certain other refinery products including coal tar). This
type of soil shall be determined to be nonhazardous in accordance with
the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:26.
L.
Used motor oil: motor oil from motor vehicles, lawn mowers, boats, etc.,
which has served its intended useful purpose.
M.
Lead-acid batteries: storage batteries in which the electrodes are grids
of lead containing lead oxides that change in composition during
charging and discharging, and the electrolyte is dilute sulfuric acid.
These include starting batteries such as car batteries that deliver a
short burst of high power to start the engine. In addition, they may
N.
§ 168-1 WASHINGTON CODE § 168-1
155:460
ELECTRONIC WASTE — A computer central processing unit and associated
hardware, including keyboards, modems, printers, scanners and fax
machines; a cathode ray tube, a cathode ray tube device, a flat panel display
or similar video display device with a screen that is greater than four inches
measured diagonally and that contains one or more circuit boards, including
a television, and cell phones.
INSTITUTION — An established organization or foundation dedicated to
public service or culture, including but not limited to religious, educational,
health care and governmental establishments.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure, or complex of
buildings, in which three or more dwelling units are owner-occupied or
rented or leased, or offered for rental or lease, for residential purposes
(see N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a) and shall include hotels, motels, or other guest
houses serving transient or seasonal guests as those terms are defined
under Subsection (j) of Section 3 of the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law,
P.L. 1967, c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.).
include deep cell batteries found on boats or campers used to power
accessories like trolling motors, winches or lights.
Hazardous dry cell batteries: rechargeable batteries, such as nickelcadmium,
nickel-iron, nickel metal hydride, lithium ion, small sealed
lead acid, etc. These are often used as substitutes for nonrechargeable
batteries in standard sizes such as AAA, AA, C, D and 9V. Rechargeable
batteries are commonly found in cordless tools, cellular and cordless
phones, laptop computers, cameras, remote controls, toys, etc. Also
included in this definition are nonrechargeable batteries that are
hazardous as defined by the Resource Conservation Recovery Act
(RCRA), regardless of the RCRA exclusion of household waste from
the definition of "hazardous waste" pursuant to 40 CFR 261.4(b).
Nonrechargeable, hazardous batteries include older alkaline and
carbon zinc batteries as well as silver oxide, mercury and magnesium
button-type batteries, etc. It should be noted that domestically
manufactured alkaline and carbon zinc nonrechargeable batteries
made after circa 1994 eliminated mercury content to the point that
they should not be considered RCRA hazardous and therefore are not
included in this material category.
O.
Metal appliances: appliances composed predominantly of metal, and
may include stoves, washing machines and dryers, for example, if the
appliance is predominantly metal. Also included are air conditioners,
refrigerators and dehumidifiers if they are predominantly metal. If
these appliances on the latter list contain refrigerants that are
prohibited by the Clean Air Act from being knowingly vented, the
refrigerant must be recovered accordingly.
P.
Whole tires: tires that are whole, not chipped into small pieces. (NOTE:
Tires are allowed to be recycled and/or incinerated for energy
recovery.)
Q.
§ 168-1 SEWERS § 168-1
155:461
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The person or persons
appointed by the municipal governing body to fulfill the requirements of
the Morris County Solid Waste Management Plan and the New Jersey
Statewide Mandatory Source Separation and Recycling Act and those rules
and regulations promulgated therefor.
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING ENFORCEMENT COORDINATOR — The person
or persons named by the municipality who shall fulfill the responsibilities
with respect to recycling enforcement coordination detailed in the March
2007 Morris County Solid Waste Management Plan Amendment Section 8.6.
This person may be the same person designated as the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) STREAM — All solid waste generated
at residential, commercial, and institutional establishments within the
boundaries of the Township of Washington which is not bulky waste or
construction and demolition debris.
PRIVATE RECYCLER — Person or group of persons wishing to collect
recyclable materials and registered with the Department of Public Works.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials which would otherwise
become solid waste and which may be collected, separated, or processed
and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products.
RESIDENT — Any person who owns, leases and/or occupies dwellings
within the municipality, including those in multifamily dwellings and/or
single-family developments.
SOLID WASTE — Includes all garbage and rubbish normally placed at
the curb at residential and nonresidential properties in the Township of
Washington for regularly scheduled collection by private haulers. As used in
this chapter, "solid waste" is deemed to be nonrecyclable material.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclable materials
which are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof
from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The process by which recyclable materials are
separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof from solid
waste for the purposes of recycling.
§ 168-2. Acceptance of Municipal Solid Waste Recycling Goal.
As set forth in N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13b(4)(c), the Township of Washington
accepts the goal of fifty-percent recycling of municipal solid waste by 2015
and shall monitor its level of recycling and solid waste disposal and shall
strive to achieve the recycling of 50% of the municipal solid waste
generated within its borders.
§ 168-1 WASHINGTON CODE § 168-3
155:462
§ 168-3. Source separation.
Mandatory source separation. It shall be mandatory for all persons who are
owners, tenants, or occupants of residential and nonresidential premises,
which shall include but not be limited to retail and other commercial
locations, as well as government, schools and other institutional locations
within the Township of Washington to separate designated recyclable
materials from all solid waste. Designated recyclable materials shall be
deposited separate and apart from other solid waste generated by the
owners, tenants, or occupants of such premises. This shall be done in the
manner set forth in § 168-4.
§ 168-4. Program responsibilities and descriptions.
A. Residential establishments.
(1) Residents shall separate all designated materials from all other
solid waste and shall segregate newspaper, corrugated cardboard,
mixed paper, aluminum cans, glass bottles and jars, plastic bottles
(coded 1 and 2), steel (tin) cans, leaves, grass clippings, brush,
natural wood waste, used motor oil, metal appliances, whole tires,
hazardous dry cell batteries, lead-acid batteries, oil-contaminated
soil and electronic waste for deposit at the recycling depot. These
materials shall be deposited at designated recycling centers within
the Township in accordance with the regulations established in this
article, except for leaves, grass clippings, brush or natural wood
waste on property of two acres or more, on which properties
residents must compost such waste on their own property or place
at curbside for pickup pursuant to a contract with a private
recycler.
(2) If transported to designated recycling centers, said recyclables
shall be separately bundled.
(3) If deposited at curbside for pickup pursuant to a contract with a
private recycler, recyclables shall be prepared in accordance with
the recycler's specifications, except for leaves, grass clippings,
brush and natural wood waste. Leaves, grass clippings, brush,
natural wood waste placed at the curb or along the street, pursuant
to pickup by a private recycler, must be containerized (placed in a
trash can, bucket, bag or other vessel to prevent spilling or blowing
into the street) and be placed at the street no more than seven days
prior to a scheduled collection and shall not be placed closer than
10 feet from any storm drain inlet. Placement of such waste at the
curb or along the street at any other time or in any other manner is
a violation of this section.
(4) Except in those instances where a private recycler provides
curbside pickup of recyclables and specifies otherwise, all material
shall be prepared in the following manner:
§ 168-3 SEWERS § 168-4
155:463
(a) Newspaper: Cross-tie with string or twine into bundles not to
exceed 12 inches in height and 30 pounds in weight.
Advertising enclosures and newspaper inserts may be bundled
with newspapers. Such bundles shall not be contained in
plastic bags.
(b) Corrugated cardboard: Flattened and tied and may be
commingled with paper bags.
(c) Glass: Rinse and remove cap and rings.
(d) Aluminum cans: Rinse.
(e) Plastic bottles: Rinse.
(f) Steel (tin) cans: Rinse.
(g) Aluminum: Rinse.
(h) Mixed paper: secured in string or twine-tied bundles, not to
exceed 12 inches in height or 30 pounds in weight. Such
bundles shall not be contained in plastic bags.
(i) Brown bags: neatly folded, stacked and tied and maybe
commingled with corrugated cardboard.
(j) Motor oil: placed in a tightly closed, unbreakable container will
be returned to residents.
(k) Batteries, tires and hazardous waste shall be prepared in
accordance with regulations which may be promulgated
pursuant to § 168-9.
(5) From September through December, on property consisting of less
than two acres, fallen leaves shall be bagged. Brush shall not
exceed three inches in diameter and shall be cut into three-foot
lengths and bundled. Grass clippings must be left on the lawn or
composted on the property from which they are generated.
(6) Metal appliances may be brought to the Department of Public
Works complex during the Township cleanup weeks.
(7) Oil-contaminated soil shall not be disposed of at the recycling depot
but rather shall be disposed of by the owner in accordance with
procedures approved by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection. All persons are prohibited from placing
oil-contaminated soil at the curb for collection and from disposing
of oil-contaminated soil in solid waste collections. Said prohibition,
however, shall not impose an obligation upon the Township of
Washington to provide for the collection and disposal of such waste.
The collection and disposal of oil-contaminated soil is the
responsibility of the resident and/or property owner.
§ 168-4 WASHINGTON CODE § 168-4
155:464
§ 168-5. Residential dwelling compliance requirements.
The owner of any property shall be responsible for compliance with this
article. For multifamily units, the management or owner is responsible
for setting up and maintaining the recycling system, including collection
of recyclable materials, in accordance with guidelines or regulations
established by the appropriate municipal office. Violations and penalty
notices will be directed to the owner or management, in those instances
where the violator is not easily identifiable. The management shall issue
notification and collection rules to new tenants when they arrive and every
six months during their occupancy. A copy of all notices and information
materials shall be provided annually, by January 15, to the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator.
§ 168-6. Nonresidential establishment compliance requirements.
Documentation of tonnage recycled pursuant to this subsection
shall be submitted in accordance with § 168-6.
(8) All of the aforementioned provisions may, from time to time, be
modified by the Municipal Recycling Coordinator to the extent that
procedures are developed for residents to have their recyclables
recycled.
B. Commercial establishments and institutions shall separate designated
materials for recycling. Newspaper, corrugated cardboard, mixed
paper, aluminum cans, glass bottles and jars, plastic bottles (coded 1
and 2), steel (tin) cans included as designated materials may be
deposited at the designated recycling centers if prepared according to
the above specifications. The commercial establishments and
institutions shall be responsible for establishing recycling programs for
the collection, transportation and marketing of all other designated
materials not deposited at the designated recycling centers.
Documentation of tonnage of materials recycled pursuant to such a
program shall be submitted in accordance with § 168-6.
A. All nonresidential generators, including commercial, industrial and
institutional establishments, of solid waste shall be required to comply
with the provisions of this article.
B. The arrangement for collection of designated recyclables hereunder
shall be the responsibility of commercial, institutional or industrial
property owners or their designee. All commercial, institutional or
industrial properties which provide outdoor litter receptacles and
disposal service for their contents shall also provide receptacles for
designated recyclable materials, for those materials commonly
deposited, in the location of the litter receptacle, and shall provide for
separate recycling service for their contents.
§ 168-4 SEWERS § 168-6
155:465
§ 168-7. New developments of multifamily units and nonresidential
properties.
New developments of multifamily residential units or commercial,
institutional, or industrial properties (pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a and
13:99.16c):
C. All nonresidential facilities shall provide a copy of its recycling plan by
January 15 of each year to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator. For
purposes of this section, a contractual commitment shall be sufficient.
D. Quarterly documentation for certain facilities and private recyclers.
(1) All nonresidential facilities which do not deposit designated
materials at designated municipal recycling centers and all
property owners recycling materials pursuant to § 168-4A(4) shall
report on a quarterly basis by the eighth of the month following the
end of each quarter to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator, on
such forms as may be prescribed, on recycling activities at their
premises, including the recycling plan, the amount of recycled
material, by material type, collected and recycled, the tonnage
recycled and the vendor or vendors providing recycling service.
(2) In addition, all private recyclers operating in the Township of
Washington are required to submit quarterly documentation in the
form of certified weight slips to the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator to verify the tonnage and volume of materials picked
up and deposited at places other than designated recycling centers
in the Township. The recycling documentation will be due on or
before the eighth of the month following the end of the quarter.
E. All food service establishments, as defined in the Health Code, shall, in
addition to compliance with all other recycling requirements, be
required to recycle grease and/or cooking oil created in the processing
of food or food products, and maintain such records as may be
prescribed, for inspection by any code enforcement officer.
F. Those nonresidential facilities which do not comply with the terms of
this section will be subject to the penalties set forth in § 168-12.
A. Any application to the Planning Board of the Township of Washington
for subdivision or site plan approval for the construction of multifamily
dwellings of three or more units, single-family developments of 50 or
more units or any commercial, institutional, or industrial development
for the utilization of 1,000 square feet or more of land must include a
recycling plan. This plan must contain, at a minimum, the following:
(1) A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of
solid waste and recyclables generated at the proposed
development; and
§ 168-6 WASHINGTON CODE § 168-7
155:466
§ 168-8. Prohibitions.
(2) Locations documented on the application's site plan that provide
for convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants, and
occupants. The recycling area shall be of sufficient size and
convenient location and contain other attributes (signage, lighting,
fencing, etc.) as may be determined by the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator.
B. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Township of
Washington, the owner of any new multifamily housing or commercial,
institutional, or industrial development must supply a copy of a duly
executed contract with a private recycler for the purposes of the
collection and recycling of source-separated recyclable materials, in
those instances where the municipality does not otherwise provide this
service.
C. Provision shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage and
pickup of solid waste, to be approved by the Municipal Engineer.
A. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for solid waste
collectors to collect solid waste that is mixed with, or contains visible
signs of, designated recyclable materials. It is also unlawful for solid
waste collectors to remove for disposal those bags or containers of solid
waste which visibly display a warning notice sticker or some other
device indicating that the load of solid waste contains designated
recyclable materials.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the resident or occupant to properly
segregate the uncollected solid waste for proper disposal or recycling.
Allowing such unseparated solid waste and recyclables to accumulate
will be considered a violation of this article and the local sanitary code.
C. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to
deposit any material at the designated recycling centers which is not a
designated material.
D. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to
deposit recycling materials outside of the designated containers or
areas at the designated recycling centers.
E. Once placed at the curbside or at the designated recycling centers in
Washington Township as provided by this article, or any rules or
regulations promulgated pursuant to this article, the designated
materials shall be and will become the property of the Township of
Washington or its authorized agents. It shall be a violation of this article
for any person, other than those authorized by the municipality, to
tamper with, collect, remove, or otherwise handle designated
recyclable materials. Each such collection in violation hereof from one
or more properties shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
punishable as hereinafter provided. Nothing contained herein, however,
§ 168-7 SEWERS § 168-8
155:467
§ 168-9. Promulgation and communication of regulations;
enforcement.
§ 168-10. Class B recyclables.
Class B recyclables shall not be disposed of at designated recycling centers
but rather shall be disposed of at a location or in a manner as may be
designated from time to time by resolution of the Township Committee.
shall be construed to prevent authorized private recyclers from
removing recyclables from the Township, provided that the private
recyclers furnish tonnage and volume reports in accordance with
§ 168-6D(2), or to limit volunteers or charitable organizations from
conducting recycling drives. The date, time, place and nature of
collection shall be presented, in writing, to the Department of Public
Works prior to any such drive taking place. Regularly scheduled or
established collections need only be reported once, at the beginning of
each calendar year. In no event shall residents remove recyclables in
bulk from the Township.
A. The Department of Public Works shall promulgate reasonable
regulations establishing the collection of recyclable materials,
including the manner, dates and times of collection of the same in
accordance with the terms of this article. Any such regulations
promulgated by the Department of Public Works shall be approved by
the Township Committee of Washington Township and may be changed,
modified, repealed or amended, in whole or in part, by majority vote of
the Township Committee. Upon adoption of these regulations, citizens
of the Township of Washington shall be advised of the regulations
through every possible means of communication available. Thereafter,
all citizens shall be responsible to comply with the requirements of this
article.
B. The Department of Public Works Superintendent or his/her duly
authorized designee is hereby designated and authorized as the
enforcement officer for this article. The enforcing agent is hereby
authorized and directed to perform random inspections of garbage set
out for disposal in order to determine whether recyclables are included
therein. An inspection may consist of sorting through containers and
opening of solid waste bags to detect, by sound or sight, the presence of
any recyclable material. Such inspections shall be conducted at a
minimum rate of 10% of residential units per quarter, 10% of
commercial/institutional establishments per quarter and 10% of the
multifamily/single-family development per quarter, until such time as
the Township of Washington shall have, in accordance with state and
County of Morris criteria, reached a fifty-percent reduction rate in the
amount of solid waste disposed. The inspections shall be reported and
identified on the annual tonnage reports provided to the County
Recycling Coordinator and to the State Department of Environmental
Protection.
§ 168-8 WASHINGTON CODE § 168-11
155:468
§ 168-11. Private recyclers.
§ 168-12. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person or group of persons wishing to collect recyclable materials
shall register with the Department of Public Works as a private recycler.
B. No private recycler shall conduct recycling collection activities except
pursuant to a contract with the homeowner or commercial, industrial or
institutional establishment being provided with recycling collection
services.
C. Private recyclers may deposit recyclables at a designated recycling
center or sell the same in a private market.
D. An ongoing condition of collection activities within the Township shall
be compliance with § 168-6.
A. Any person, firm, entity or corporation who or which violates or
neglects to comply with any provision of this article or any regulations
promulgated thereto shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a
fine not less than $25 per offense and shall be subject, upon conviction,
to the penalties provided in § 1-3 of the Code of the Township of
Washington.
B. Each and every day that said violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
§ 168-11 SEWERS § 168-12
155:469

ARTICLE II
Bulky Waste Cleanup Fees
[Adopted 4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 12-03; amended in its entirety
2-20-2006 by Ord. No. 02-06]
§ 168-13. Fee schedule.
The following fee schedule is hereby adopted for the bulky waste cleanup
program:
Item Fee
Passenger cars $15 per load
Standard SUV's and passenger vans $20 per load
Large size SUV's (e.g. Suburban/Excursion) and
compact pickups
$30 per load
Full size pickups/trade vans/trailers $35 per load
Dump/flatbed/box trucks (not to exceed one ton/10,000
pound GVW)
$55 per load
6 tires per household, rims removed, up to 16 1/2 inches $2.00 per tire
§ 168-13 SEWERS § 168-13
155:471
Chapter 170
STORMWATER CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 92.
Sewers — See Ch. 155.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 175.
§ 168-13 WASHINGTON CODE § 168-13
155:472
ARTICLE I
Stormwater Management
[Adopted 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 46-05]
§ 170-1. Purpose.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural best management practices
(BMPs). Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management measures and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural measures include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site. Source control plans should be developed based upon physical
site conditions and the origin, nature and the anticipated loading of
potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be
necessary to achieve the established performance standards for water
quality, quantity and groundwater recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development.
C. Applicability.
(1) This article shall be applicable to any site plan or subdivision that
requires preliminary or final subdivision or site plan review as
follows:
(a) Nonresidential major development; and
(b) Aspects of the residential major developments that are not preempted
by the Residential Site Improvements Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This article shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by any federal, state, interstate agency, county or
municipal government or school district whose jurisdiction is
partially or entirely within the State of New Jersey.
(3) This article and the design standards contained herein shall apply
to all projects that meet the definition of "major development" or
"minor development" herein, even if site plan or subdivision
approval is not required. [Added 3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 03-19]
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued pursuant to this article are to be
considered an integral part of development approvals under the
subdivision and site plan review process and do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals
for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act or
ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
§ 170-1 SEWERS § 170-1
155:473
§ 170-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this article its most reasonable application.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A state development and redevelopment plan
center as designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban,
regional, town, village or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for which permission
is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
In the case of development of agricultural lands, development means: any
activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed by the County
Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural Development
Committee (SADC); and municipal review of any activity not exempted by
the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A 4:1C-1 et seq.
article shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion
of the public health, safety and general welfare. This article is not
intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule
or regulation, statute or other provision of law except that, where
any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those
imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation or other provision
of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards shall control.
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A. 58:16A-55.5
if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to approve
conditionally approve or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
§ 170-1 WASHINGTON CODE § 170-2
155:474
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater, sediments
or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body or to a
particular point along a receiving water body.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CONSTRAINED AREA — The following areas where
the physical alteration of the land is in some way restricted, either through
regulation, easement, deed restriction or ownership such as: wetlands,
floodplains, threatened and endangered species sites or designated
habitats, and parks and preserves. Habitats of endangered or threatened
species are identified using the Department's Landscape Project as
approved by the Department's Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
EXEMPT DEVELOPMENT — Any development that creates less than 2,000
square feet of new impervious area and disturbs less than 5,000 square feet
of land. Further, an exempt development shall not meet the definition of
"minor development."[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 03-11]
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land or increasing impervious surface by
one-quarter acre or more. Disturbance for the purpose of this rule is the
placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement of soil or
bedrock or clearing, cutting or removing of vegetation. Projects undertaken
by any government agency which otherwise meet the definition of "major
development" but which do not require approval under the Municipal Land
Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., are also considered major development.
MINOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that results in the creation
of 2,000 square feet or more of new impervious area or one that disturbs
more than 5,000 square feet of land area. Further, a minor development
shall not meet the definition of "major development" in N.J.A.C. 7:8.[Added
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 03-11]
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Washington, County of Morris.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
§ 170-2 SEWERS § 170-2
155:475
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state and any state, interstate or
federal agency.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state or to a
domestic treatment works.
POLLUTANT — Includes both hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin
or infiltration basin) retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin) or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers resulting from precipitation.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
§ 170-2 WASHINGTON CODE § 170-2
155:476
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
§ 170-3. General standards. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 03-11]
Design and performance standards for stormwater management measures
shall be as follows:
A. Exempt developments. Any project meeting the definition of "exempt
development" shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
B. Minor developments. Minor developments shall be designed to include
the following stormwater management measures:
(1) Water quality. Soil erosion and sediment control measures shall be
installed in accordance with the Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey.
(2) Rate/volume control. Seepage pits or other infiltration measures
shall be provided with a capacity of three inches of runoff for each
square foot of new impervious area. Stone used in the infiltration
devices shall be two-and-one-half-inch clean stone, and a design
void ratio of 33% shall be used. The infiltration measures shall be
designed with an overflow to the surface which shall be stabilized
and directed to an existing stormwater conveyance system or in a
manner to keep the overflow on the developed property to the
greatest extent feasible. If the new impervious surface is not roof
area, an equivalent area of existing roof may be directed to the
infiltration system. This shall be permitted where the existing roof
is not already directed to infiltration devices.
C. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality standards in
this section. To the maximum extent feasible, these standards shall be
met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies
into the design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these
standards, structural stormwater management measures necessary to
meet these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
D. The standards in this article apply only to new minor and major
development and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater
runoff on water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies
and maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new
major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
§ 170-2 SEWERS § 170-3
155:477
§ 170-3.1. Review fees for minor developments. [Added 9-19-2011
by Ord. No. 13-11]
An escrow review fee shall be required in the amount of $700 for review of
the design plan for a minor development by the Township Engineer or any
other professional retained by the Township in connection with the above
design. The balance of the escrow fee deposit, if any, shall be refunded
to the applicant upon completion and final inspection of the applicable
stormwater control measure. The escrow fee deposit shall be administered
by the Township in accordance with the requirements set forth in the
Municipal Land Use Law, N. J. S.A. 40:55D-53.1.
§ 170-4. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
management plan or water quality management plan adopted in
accordance with Department rules. Such alternative standards shall
provide at least as much protection from stormwater-related loss of
groundwater recharge, stormwater quantity and water quality impacts
of major development projects as would be provided under the
standards in this article.
E. For site improvements regulated under the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS) at N.J.A.C. 5:21, the RSIS shall apply in
addition to this section except to the extent the RSIS are superseded by
this section or alternative standards applicable under a regional
stormwater management plan or water quality management plan
adopted in accordance with Department rules.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 170-10.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department' Landscape Project or Natural Heritage
Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
13:1B-15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or
Clemmys muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
C. Exemptions. The following linear development projects are exempt
from the groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity and
stormwater runoff quality requirements at Subsections F and G.
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
§ 170-3 WASHINGTON CODE § 170-4
155:478
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. Waivers. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater
recharge, stormwater runoff quantity and stormwater runoff quality
requirements at Subsections F and G may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad, or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Subsections F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
at Subsections F and G, existing structures currently in use, such
as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate for requirements of
Subsections F and G that were not achievable on-site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsections F
and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies at Subsection E into the design. The
applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures incorporated
into the design of the project. If the applicant contends that it is not
feasible for engineering, environmental or safety reasons to
incorporate any nonstructural stormwater management measures
identified in Subsection E(2) below into the design of a particular
project, the applicant shall identify the strategy considered and
provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management measures incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss.
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces.
§ 170-4 SEWERS § 170-4
155:479
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation.
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed.
(e) Minimize land disturbance, including clearing and grading.
(f) Minimize soil compaction.
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides.
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas.
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. These source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under Subsection E(d)(i)[2] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash and other floating, suspended or settleable solids. For
exemptions to this standard see Subsection E(3)(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
§ 170-4 WASHINGTON CODE § 170-4
155:480
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches or
is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates and grates of
spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges),
driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks,
lawns, fields, open channels and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches or be no greater than
two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection G(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in Subsection G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
§ 170-4 SEWERS § 170-4
155:481
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c),
that action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Subsections F and
G shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate county Clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management measures is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 170-7 or found on the Department's website
at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 170-4, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to postconstruction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
§ 170-4 WASHINGTON CODE § 170-4
155:482
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan; and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels; and lubricants, solvents and detergents that
are related to process, manufacturing or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[3] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
down gradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 170-5, complete one of the
following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that, for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten- and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events.
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
§ 170-4 SEWERS § 170-4
155:483
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten- and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area.
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten- and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the postconstruction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at § 170-2 shall be submitted to the
appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
postconstruction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater
runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the developed site,
expressed as an annual average. Stormwater management
measures shall only be required for water quality control if an
additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to
any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric
effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in
a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of
rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of
runoff may take into account the implementation of nonstructural
and structural stormwater management measures.
§ 170-4 WASHINGTON CODE § 170-4
155:484
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.625
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 170-7, or found on the Department's website
at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources of
technical guidance are listed in § 170-7. TSS reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2
below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B — (AXB)/100
Where
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs, and
§ 170-4 SEWERS § 170-4
155:485
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90
Constructed stormwater wetland 90
Extended detention basin 40-60
Infiltration structure 80
Manufactured treatment device See § 170-6C
Sand filter 80
Vegetative filter strip 60-80
Wet pond 50-90
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Subsections F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 170-7.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage. These
areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
§ 170-4 WASHINGTON CODE § 170-4
155:486
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or center
line of the waterway where the bank is undefined. All
encroachments proposed under this subsection shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the standard for off-site stability in the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
standard for off-site stability in the Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
§ 170-4 SEWERS § 170-4
155:487
§ 170-5. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS
postconstruction removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall
a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
special water resource protection area to less than 150 feet as
measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) This subsection does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
§ 170-4 WASHINGTON CODE § 170-5
155:488
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4, Hydrology and
Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Subsection A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at Subsection A(1)(b). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing
condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design
engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the
site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover has
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the
time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the
land use type is pasture, lawn or park), with good cover (if the land
use type is woods) or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release-55, Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
§ 170-5 SEWERS § 170-5
155:489
§ 170-6. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Geological Survey Report
GSR-32, A Method for Evaluating Ground- Water Recharge Areas in
New Jersey, incorporated herein by reference as amended and
supplemented. Information regarding the methodology is available
from the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual, at http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/, or at New Jersey
Geological Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New
Jersey 08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas; wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one-inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 170-7D.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed and installed to be strong, durable and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
5:21-7.4, and 5:21-7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of two and one-half inches in
diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 170-8.
§ 170-5 WASHINGTON CODE § 170-6
155:490
§ 170-7. Sources for technical guidance.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 170-4 of this article.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 170-4, provided the pollutant removal rates are verified by the New
Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and certified by the
Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsection A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the Soil Conservation District or any of the
Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609)
292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306; and
(3) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
§ 170-6 SEWERS § 170-7
155:491
§ 170-8. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609)
292-5540.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A "trash rack" is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable and corrosion resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per foot
square.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable and corrosion resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per feet
square.
(3) For purposes of this subsection, "escape provisions" means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
§ 170-7 WASHINGTON CODE § 170-8
155:492
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
Subsection 8C, a freestanding outlet structure may be
exempted from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than two and one-half feet. Such safety ledges
shall be comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four feet to
six feet in width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2
feet below the permanent water surface, and the second step
shall be located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water
surface. See Subsection D for an illustration of safety ledges in
a stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment or berm shall not be
steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing
agency (municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin
§ 170-8 SEWERS § 170-8
155:493
§ 170-9. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this article, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan at Subsection C below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this article.
(3) The applicant shall submit 15 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
Subsection C of this article.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult with the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board
§ 170-8 WASHINGTON CODE § 170-9
155:494
(as appropriate) to determine if all the checklist requirements have
been satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set
forth in this article.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet
or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map as
appropriate may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category 1
waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines and significant natural and
manmade features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 170-3
through 170-6 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
§ 170-9 SEWERS § 170-9
155:495
§ 170-10. Maintenance and repair.
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for
the design storms specified in § 170-4 of this article.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soil types present at the location
of the control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 170-10.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this article may, in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Subsections C(1) through C(6) of this article
when it can be demonstrated that the information requested is
impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant
to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review pursuant to § 170-1C of this
article shall comply with the requirements of Subsections B and C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
§ 170-9 WASHINGTON CODE § 170-10
155:496
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris or trash removal; and the name,
address and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project unless such owner or tenant owns or leases
the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Subsection B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice
removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and revise the plan as
needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
§ 170-10 SEWERS § 170-10
155:497
§ 170-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-16-2007 by Ord. No.
9-07]
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this article shall be
subject, upon conviction, to the penalties provided in § 1-3 of this Code.
Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.
plan and the documentation required by Subsections B(6) and (7)
above.
(9) The requirements of Subsections B(3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance, the municipality shall so notify the responsible
person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible
person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and repair of the
facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal Engineer or
his designee. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 170-10 WASHINGTON CODE § 170-11
155:498
ARTICLE II
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Adopted 10-18-2010 by Ord. No. 21-10]
§ 170-12. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require the retrofitting of existing storm
drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property,
to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles,
cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Township of Washington so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 170-13. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Washington or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff; includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curb-opening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 170-14. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 170-12 SEWERS § 170-14
155:499
§ 170-15. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 170-14 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this subsection, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see
Subsection C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 170-15 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Grates.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate.
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT
Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and
Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than seven square inches, or is no
greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest dimension.
(2) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
square inches, or be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
§ 170-14 WASHINGTON CODE § 170-15
155:500
§ 170-16. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or Construction
Official of the Township of Washington.
§ 170-17. Penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to the penalties set forth in § 1-3 of the Code of the
Township of Washington for each storm drain inlet that is not retrofitted to
meet the design standard.
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New-Jersey-Register-listed historic property.
§ 170-15 SEWERS § 170-17
155:501
Chapter 172
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Moving of buildings over streets — See Ch.
60.
Littering on streets — See Ch. 114.
Guarding of open pits and trenches — See Ch.
132.
Street obstructions — See Ch. 140.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 175.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 203.
§ 170-17 WASHINGTON CODE § 170-17
155:502
ARTICLE I
Specifications for Street Acceptances
[Adopted 12-20-1971 as Sec. 13-2 of the Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 172-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
STREET — Includes one or more streets, public thoroughfares, roads,
highways, lanes and alleys, or any part thereof.
ENGINEER — The authorized representative of the Planning Board.
§ 172-2. Plans.
§ 172-3. Clearing of site.
A. If a new street is to be constructed within the Township for use by the
public, the person owning the land upon which the street is to be
constructed shall submit to the Planning Board or its duly authorized
representative, before work is started, a comprehensive plan
containing the information hereinafter set forth.
B. The plan shall show an outline of the entire property or section of the
same as it is to be subdivided, locations and widths of proposed streets,
and location and widths of existing connecting streets.
C. The plan shall show the plan and profile of the proposed roadway,
typical cross sections and details of manholes, inlets, curbs, culverts,
sewers, sewer lines, waterlines, underground electric and telegraph
lines, proposed fire hydrants and other construction details. The plan of
the road shall show curve data, proposed pavement line, proposed
curbline, property line and the location of storm drains, culverts,
subdrains and other items of construction.
D. The approval of any plan shall not be construed as an acceptance of any
street; nor shall such approval in any way obligate the Township to
maintain or exercise jurisdiction over the street.
A. Within the limits of the right-of-way and outside thereof within slope
areas to be graded, or as otherwise prescribed, the ground surface shall
be cleared of trees, brush, weeds, roots, matted leaves, small
structures, debris and other unsuitable matter before construction
work is commenced, except that trees which do not interfere with the
project, in the opinion of the Engineer, shall not be removed but shall be
protected during the progress of the work. Branches of trees
overhanging the traveled way shall be cut off to a height of 14 feet
above it and cuts more than one inch in diameter shall be painted. Tree
stumps shall be grubbed out within areas to be graded where the
subgrade will be less than 3 1/2 feet above the ground surface. They
§ 172-1 SEWERS § 172-3
155:503
§ 172-4. Roadway excavation.
may elsewhere remain extending not more than one foot above the
ground surface.
B. Existing bridges and other structures within the project which are to be
removed by the owner shall be taken down and disposed of as may be
specified. If needed for maintenance of traffic until new structures have
been built, they shall not be removed until provisions for traffic have
been made which are satisfactory to the Engineer.
A. No excavation shall be made and no embankment shall be formed
within slope easement areas at any particular location until specific
approval has been given by the Engineer. Before grading work is
commenced the vegetation and underlying topsoil of the existing
ground surface within excavation and embankment areas, where shown
on the plans, shall be stripped off to a depth of not less than four inches
and not more than six inches. Stripped-off material which is suitable for
topsoil shall be stored if needed for that purpose.
B. Roadway excavation shall be carried to the lines, grades and slopes
shown on the plans, except that rock and boulders shall be excavated to
a depth of not less than one foot below roadway subgrade between
outside edges of shoulders or curbs, and the space left shall be refilled
to subgrade level with material and in a manner satisfactory to the
Engineer. Rock slopes shall be finished to a fairly uniform surface, and
pieces of rock which have been loosened or may become loose in the
opinion of the Engineer, on account of the owner's operations within or
outside the pavement lines, shall be removed without cost to the
Township. Earth slopes, shoulders and other formed surfaces shall have
a neat finish. When permission is given to widen an excavation to obtain
additional embankment material, the slopes and other surfaces of the
widened work shall be smooth and neatly finished to the lines
prescribed by the Engineer. Roadway excavation shall be carried out so
that the subgrade throughout the work is kept properly drained. Unless
otherwise directed, a plow furrow six inches deep shall be cut in the
existing ground surface four feet outside the slope line at the top of the
excavation and turned toward the excavation.
C. Excavated material shall be placed in embankment when suitable or
shall be used for backfill or other purposes as may be directed by the
Engineer, except that material in excess of that required shall be
disposed of by the owner at locations provided by him. Pavements over
which excavated materials are being transported shall be maintained
clean of such materials.
D. The following slopes shall be adhered to:
(1) For cut in earth, 1 1/2:1.
(2) For cut in rock, 1 1/2:1.
§ 172-3 WASHINGTON CODE § 172-4
155:504
§ 172-5. Embankment.
(3) For fill up to three feet six inches, 3:1.
(4) For fill over three feet four inches, 1 1/2:1.
A. Embankment shall include the placing in embankment of suitable
materials obtained from the various scheduled items of excavation, at
the prescribed locations, and conforming to the prescribed lines,
grades, cross sections and dimensions and to the plans and
specifications as approved by the Planning Board.
B. Materials used for embankment shall be suitable therefor and shall be
free from stumps, wood, brush, roots, sod, rubbish, garbage and other
matter that may decay. The materials shall be those available from
roadway excavation. When more material is needed it shall be obtained
from borrow excavation. Embankment material used adjacent to bridge
abutments and similar structures shall be porous, permitting free
percolation of water, and shall be acceptable to the Engineer. It shall be
selected from available excavation material unless otherwise
prescribed.
C. Before placing the embankment material, the underlying ground
surface shall be stripped as provided in § 172-4, and the stripped-off
surface shall be compacted by rolling. Except as hereinafter provided,
the embankment shall be formed in successive layers not more than 12
inches deep, and each layer shall be compacted by rolling until it is firm
and unyielding before the next layer is placed. The rolling shall be done
by means of three-wheel power rollers, weighing not less than 10 tons
and having a load of not less than 330 pounds per linear inch width of
the rear wheels, as well as by tamping rollers of a design approved by
the Engineer and having a load of not less than 200 pounds per square
inch of bearing surface when a complete row of tampers is in contact
with a level and plane surface. When the required consolidation cannot
be obtained by rolling alone, watering, puddling and other methods and
equipment may be required by the Engineer. Embankment adjacent to
abutments and other structures shall be formed in the same manner
whenever practicable, and if not practicable other means satisfactory to
the Engineer shall be used to secure the required consolidation.
D. Embankment under water or on wet and unstable ground shall be
constructed by end dumping so that the soft underlying material is
forced to the sides and not to the front of the areas to be filled. End
dumping shall be used to such an elevation only that will permit the use
of compacting equipment and the remainder shall be formed in layers
as above described. End dumped material shall be properly compacted
in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer. End dumping shall not be
started until the suitability of the surface on which the embankment is
to be placed has been approved by the Engineer, and it shall then
proceed immediately and continuously. When interrupted for a period
of 24 hours no dumping shall be done until the suitability of the surface
§ 172-4 SEWERS § 172-5
155:505
§ 172-6. Subgrade. [Amended 5-19-1975]
has been reapproved by the Engineer. When the embankment material
is partly rock and partly earth, the rock shall as far as possible be
placed so as to form the lower part of the embankment, and the earth
shall be conserved so that not less than three feet of the top of the
embankment is earth or earth and rock placed in such a manner that all
voids are filled, and the upper part of the rock fill shall be chinked so
as to make it earthtight, provided that the topmost material in all cases
shall be earth to a depth of not less than one foot.
E. When the embankment is to be placed against the slope on an existing
embankment or hill, the existing slope shall be plowed or stepped as the
Engineer may direct. No material shall be placed above the top of an
existing embankment until the new embankment has been formed to
that level. When embankment material is to be placed behind walls and
other structures, the slope of the adjoining embankment shall be
stepped to avoid wedge action. Embankment around culverts and piers
and over arch structures shall be formed simultaneously on both sides
to approximately the same elevation. The slopes, earth shoulders and
other surfaces of embankments, and of widenings of embankments
permitted by the Engineer to dispose of surplus material, shall be neatly
dressed and finished to the required lines. Collars of houses removed,
grub holes and other similar depressions shall be filled with suitable
material, thoroughly compacted by tamping, puddling and rolling.
A. Subgrade shall include the preparing of the surface for pavements and
shoulders which are to be placed thereon, at the locations and to the
lines and grades shown on the plans, in accordance with the
requirements of the specifications and as approved by the Planning
Board.
B. Subgrade connection shall be done after the underlying drains and
other subsurface structures have been placed and the backfill has been
properly consolidated. Unstable places of embankment within the
subgrade area shall be excavated, refilled with suitable material and
consolidated without cost to the Township. Where existing macadam
and gravel pavements underlie the subgrade, they shall be thoroughly
scarified unless the subgrade level is more than one foot above the
surface of such pavements.
C. The subgrade shall be shaped to conform to the required grade and
contour and shall be thoroughly consolidated by means of rollers
weighing not less than 330 pounds per linear inch of tread of rear
wheels, except when the material is not susceptible to heavy rolling, in
which case other means shall be used as may be approved by the
Engineer.
D. The finished subgrade shall be at the proper grade and contour, firm,
smooth and properly drained, and shall be so maintained until the
pavement is placed thereon.
§ 172-5 WASHINGTON CODE § 172-7
155:506
§ 172-7. Slope protection.
§ 172-8. Subbase. [Amended 5-19-1975; 5-20-1985 by Ord. No.
17-85]
Where required by the Superintendent of Public Works or the Township
Engineer due to soft or unstable conditions, subbase shall be installed as
follows: The subbase shall consist of six inches compacted thickness of
bank-run sand and gravel Type 4, Class B, or Type 5, Class A, soil aggregate.
The subbase shall be constructed in accordance with Division 2, Section 9,
of the New Jersey Department of Transportation specifications.
§ 172-9. Base course. [Amended 5-20-1985 by Ord. No. 17-85]
A. Riprap slope protection shall include the furnishing and placing of
stones on slopes according to the prescribed lines and grades, at the
required locations and in accordance with the plans and specifications.
B. The stones shall be of durable rock approved by the Engineer and shall
weigh not less than 50 pounds and not more than 150 pounds each, and
not more than 40% shall weigh more than 100 pounds each.
C. The slope on which the protection is to be placed shall be shaped to an
even surface. The stones shall be placed with their longest axis
perpendicular to the slope and in close contact and shall be firmly
bedded in the slope. Open spaces between stones shall be filled with
spalls firmly rammed in place. The larger stones shall be used in the
lower courses. The finished surface shall be even and to the required
lines.
A. The base course shall consist of 5 1/2 inches compacted thickness of
bituminous stabilized Base Mix No. 2, installed in two lifts concurrently.
The materials and method of construction shall comply with Division 3,
Section 2(a), and the amendments thereto, of the New Jersey
Department of Transportation specifications. [Amended 2-20-1995 by
Ord. No. 3-95]
B. All utility structures and appurtenances, including manhole frames,
catch basin frames and valve box covers, shall be installed flush with
the top surface of the base course paving. At the time of the wearing
course installation, all structures shall be raised accordingly, with
approved type risers.
C. All inlets shall be installed flush with the top of the base course (eightinch
curb face). At the time of top course installations, the pavement
shall be feathered to the inlet.
D. Base course shall not be installed between November 20 and April 1
except when the ambient air temperature is at least 40º F. and rising as
determined by the Superintendent of Public Works or the Township
Engineer. [Added 2-20-1995 by Ord. No. 3-95; amended
12-18-1995 by Ord. No. 39-95]
§ 172-7 SEWERS § 172-10
155:507
§ 172-10. Top course. [Amended 5-20-1985 by Ord. No. 17-85]
§ 172-11. Drainage.
Installation of all drainage structures shall be subject to the approval of the
Planning Board regarding type, location and quantity and shall be in strict
accordance with the New Jersey State Highway Specifications Division 5,
Miscellaneous Structures, Section 1-5 inclusive and Section 9-12 inclusive.
§ 172-12. Catch basins, inlets and manholes. [Added 5-20-1985 by
Ord. No. 17-85]
All catch inlets and manholes being part of the stormwater conveyance
system shall be precast concrete structures, except that where, in the
opinion of the Township Engineer, special considerations so dictate,
concrete block structures may be substituted for precast units, catch
basins, inlets and manholes shall be in accordance with the dimensions and
specifications as shown on the applicable standard detail drawings.
§ 172-13. Materials.
A. Bituminous concrete top course shall be a plant mix bituminous
concrete mix No. 5 having a compacted thickness of two inches. The
material and methods of construction shall be as set forth in Addendum
A of the New Jersey State Highway Department specifications.
[Amended 2-20-1995 by Ord. No. 3-95]
B. In new construction, the materials shall be applied when the surface is
properly shaped and compacted and when notice is received from the
Engineer that it is in condition for the application. Immediately before
the application, the surface shall be thoroughly cleaned, and all loose
and foreign material that might interfere with proper penetration of the
bituminous material shall be swept off.
C. The bituminous material shall not be applied when the surface is wet. If
dust remains that cannot be removed by sweeping, the surface shall be
sprinkled with water. Application shall not be made unless the condition
of the surface is acceptable to the Township Engineer.
D. Top course shall not be installed between November 1 and April 20
except when the ambient air temperature is at least 40º F. and rising as
determined by the Superintendent of Public Works or the Township
Engineer. [Added 2-20-1995 by Ord. No. 3-95; amended
12-18-1995 by Ord. No. 39-95]
A. It is the intent of these specifications that all materials and
appurtenances, unless otherwise approved by the Township, shall
comply with the requirements set forth in the current New Jersey State
Highway Specifications. [Amended 2-20-1995 by Ord. No. 3-95]
§ 172-10 WASHINGTON CODE § 172-13
155:508
§ 172-14. Inspection. [Amended 2-20-1995 by Ord. No. 3-95]
The work shall be inspected throughout the course of construction by the
Township or its duly authorized agent.
§ 172-15. Width of pavement and curbs.
B. Delivery slips for all materials used in constructing the road and
appurtenances thereto shall be turned over to the Township Committee
or its duly authorized representative for tabulation and inspection.
C. When, in the opinion of the Township Committee or its duly authorized
representative, materials are in need of testing, they shall be tested by
an approved testing laboratory at the expense of the contractor/
developer. [Amended 2-20-1995 by Ord. No. 3-95]
A. Width of pavement. [Amended 3-20-1978]
(1) Streets shall be paved for the full width between curbs with a
minimum width of 30 feet.
(2) The governing body may permit a minimum width of pavement of
26 feet for dead-end and looped streets of limited length in the R-5
Washington Township Conservation Zone, provided that the
Planning Board makes such recommendation to the governing
body. [Amended 4-20-1981 by Ord. No. 15-81; 6-17-2002 by
Ord. No. 22-02]
B. Curbs are hereby required for all streets hereafter constructed in
accordance with the following specifications:
(1) White concrete curbs and headers shall be constructed in
accordance with Section 6 of the New Jersey State Highway
Specifications, dated 1941, and addenda thereto and revisions.
Curbs shall be 20 inches in height, eight inches in width at the top
and nine inches in width at the bottom.
(2) Granite block, formerly referred to as "Belgian block," shall be of
the best quality medium- or fine-grained granite and shall be
dressed so that all faces are approximately rectangular and
measure not less than four inches by six inches on the top and
bottom and not less than 10 inches in depth.
(3) The concrete to be used shall be Class C concrete.
(4) The granite block shall be laid in concrete with the longest
dimension vertical. Sufficient concrete shall be laid beneath the
block to provide a total curb height of 18 inches. Concrete shall
also be placed on both the front and rear of the block to provide
sufficient support. The concrete in front of, to the rear of and
underneath the block shall be of a monolithic pour. A form
consisting of one-inch by ten-inch boards shall be used on both
§ 172-13 SEWERS § 172-15
155:509
§ 172-16. Street name, warning, direction and caution signs.
sides of the curb to ensure a uniform width and depth of the
concrete. The concrete beneath the block shall be 12 inches in
width.
(5) Joints shall measure 1/2 in width and shall be pointed and tooled as
directed by the Engineer, with mortar consisting of one part
portland cement and two parts sand.
(6) The curb shall be constructed to show a vertical face of six inches
above the finished pavement.
(7) The curb at all driveway openings shall be depressed to a point two
inches above the finished pavement.
(8) All block shall be clean and free from mortar, bituminous materials
or other substances.
(9) The curb shall be laid in a workmanlike manner as directed by the
Engineer.87
A. Metal street-name sign posts shall be of steel 2 1/2 inches in diameter,
eight feet high with name plates of metal or wood set one above the
other with a minimum clearance of seven feet.
B. The post shall be set in concrete three feet six inches in the ground.
Suitable backfill material shall be placed in the hole around the post in
successive layers not to exceed 12 inches in depth, measured loose.
Each layer of backfill shall be thoroughly tamped to secure maximum
practical density so that the post will be plumb and rigid. Street names
shall be painted or stenciled on the name plates in black letter.
C. The post shall be so located so as to be visible for both pedestrian and
vehicular traffic.
D. Posts shall not be installed in freezing or thawing weather.
E. Warning and caution signs shall be installed, the type, location and
quality to be recommended and approved by the Planning Board.
F. All signs shall be on metal, baked enamel similar to lyle signs or an
approved equal.
G. All sign posts shall be made of rail steel, two pounds per foot and
erected to an elevation of not less than three feet six inches above the
finished center-line elevation of the street to the midpoint of the sign
and not less than six feet from the edge of the paved surface.
87.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 13-2.15, Driveways, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 12-15-80 by Ord. No. 68-80.
§ 172-15 WASHINGTON CODE § 172-17
155:510
§ 172-17. Final acceptance of subdivision.88
When the project has been completed, the owner shall so notify the
Engineer. If it is not acceptable to the Engineer, he shall advise the owner
as to the particular defects to be remedied before final acceptance is made.
88.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 13-2.17, Cost of Field Inspection, was repealed 4-20-81
by Ord. No. 15-81.
§ 172-17 SEWERS § 172-17
155:511

ARTICLE II
Sidewalk Construction
[Adopted 12-20-1971 as Sec. 13-3 of the Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 172-18. Construction of sidewalks.
Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications
contained in this article and shall conform to lines and grades approved by
the Township Engineer.
A. Materials.
(1) Cement. Air-entrained Portland cement ASTM Designation C-175
(Type 111-A) shall be used.
(2) Aggregates. Fine and coarse aggregates shall conform to the ASTM
specifications for concrete aggregates, Designation C-33.
(3) Subbase material. Crushed stone or bank-run gravel shall be used
in the preparation of subbase or any other such materials as may be
designated by the Township Engineer.
(4) Water. The water used in mixing concrete shall be clean, free of
acid, alkali, vegetable or other organic matter.
(5) Joint filler. The joint filler shall be of nonextruding joint material
conforming to the ASTM specification for performed expansion
joint fillers for concrete, Designation D-544.
B. Mixing. All concrete shall be mixed in a truck mixer unless manual
mixing or stationary batch mixing is authorized by the Township
Engineer.
C. Concrete. [Amended 5-20-1985 by Ord. No. 17-85]
(1) Concrete used for sidewalk construction shall be air-entrained and
shall develop a minimum of 3,500 pounds per square inch. All
concrete which does not have 3,500 pounds per square inch
strength at the end of 28 days as shown on the test to be performed
shall be rejected. Upon notice of the Township Engineer, the
property owner shall remove such rejected concrete and replace it
with concrete of approved quality, all at his own expense.
(2) Unless otherwise specified by the Township Engineer, three-fourthinch
coarse aggregate shall be used. All materials used for making
concrete shall be as specified in Subsection A of this section.
D. Foundation.
(1) Subgrade. All soft and spongy places shall be removed and all
depressions filled with suitable material as specified in Subsection
§ 172-18 SEWERS § 172-18
155:513
C, which shall be thoroughly compacted in layers not exceeding six
inches in thickness.
(2) Subbase. The subbase shall consist of one of the materials specified
in Subsection C and shall be spread to a depth of at least four
inches and thoroughly compacted.
E. Dimensions.
(1) The slabs shall have an area of not more than 64 square feet.
Length of slab shall be equal to the width, and in no case shall the
width be less than four feet. [Amended 5-20-1985 by Ord. No.
17-85]
(2) Minimum thickness shall be four inches. At driveway openings to
dwellings, the minimum thickness of concrete slab shall not be less
than six inches. The minimum thickness of the concrete slab at
driveway openings to alleys and commercial and industrial
establishments shall be not less than eight inches.
F. Forms.
(1) Forms may be of wood or metal and shall be free from warp and of
sufficient strength to resist springing out of shape.
(2) Forms shall be properly wetted or oiled and free of foreign matter
before depositing any concrete against them.
(3) The forms shall be well-staked or otherwise held firmly to the
established lines and grades, and their edges shall conform to the
established lines and grade of the walk and shall be so aligned as to
provide a transverse slope toward the street of one foot four inches
per foot.
G. Joints.
(1) Construction joints shall be provided to separate the slabs and shall
be cut to a depth equal to at least one-third of the slab thickness.
The edges of the joint shall be rounded.
(2) A one-half-inch expansion joint filled with joint filler as specified in
Subsection A shall be provided at least every 20 feet and between
all sidewalks and adjoining backs of curbs and between the
intersection of two sidewalks and between all sidewalks and
adjoining driveways. Sidewalks in business districts shall be
separated from abutting buildings by a similar joint. [Amended
5-20-1985 by Ord. No. 17-85]
H. Placing and deposition of concrete. Concrete shall be deposited as near
as practical to its final position to avoid segregation due to rehandling
of flowing. No concrete that has been pay hardened or contaminated by
foreign material shall be used. When concreting is once started, it shall
be carried on in a continuous operation to the next expansion joint. The
§ 172-18 WASHINGTON CODE § 172-18
155:514
concrete shall be spaded and tamped into place in such a manner that
the forms are completely filled and free from voids. The use of vibrators
for compaction of concrete placed for sidewalks shall be prohibited.
Before initial set, exposed surfaces shall be finished as specified in
Subsection I.
I. Finishing.
(1) After the concrete is placed, it shall be tamped, screened and
finished to provide a true grade and surface without depressions.
The finish shall be made with a wood float, followed by brushing
with a wet, soft hair brush to a neat and workmanlike surface. The
addition of dry cement or aggregates, or both, to the surface is
prohibited.
(2) All exterior edges shall be neatly rounded with a one-half-inch
radius. All interior edges shall be neatly rounded with a one-fourthinch
radius.
J. Protection and curing.
(1) Concrete shall not be deposited when it appears likely that the air
temperature may fall below 40º during the pouring or within the
following 24 hours unless preparations are made to prevent any
damage to the concrete resulting from the low temperature.
(2) Concrete shall not be deposited on a frozen foundation or
subgrade.
(3) As soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently to prevent
damage, the finished surface shall be sprinkled with water or
covered with sand or earth or other suitable material, and in any
case kept wet for at least three days. A chemical curing agent
applied in strict accordance with the manufacturer's specifications
may be authorized by the Township Engineer.
K. Setback. The near edge of the sidewalk shall be five feet six inches from
the face of the curb. [Amended 3-19-1979 by Ord. No. 37-79]
§ 172-18 SEWERS § 172-18
155:515

ARTICLE III
Driveway Construction
[Adopted 12-20-1971 as Sec. 13-4 of the Revised General
Ordinances; amended 4-17-1978]
§ 172-19. Permit required. [Amended 9-17-1979 by Ord. No. 66-79;
7-21-1980 by Ord. No. 31-80; 11-21-1983 by Ord. No. 26-83;
3-18-1985 by Ord. No. 7-85; 5-20-1985 by Ord. No. 17-85;
11-18-1985 by Ord. No. 39-85; 10-19-1987 by Ord. No. 18-87;
5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 20-02; 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 22-02;
4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 9-03; 2-16-2004 by Ord. No. 2-04; 8-16-2004
by Ord. No. 17-04; 6-20-2016 by Ord. No. 10-16; 5-20-2019 by Ord.
No. 11-19]
No driveway shall be constructed, no existing driveway shall be altered,
no additional dwelling(s) or building(s) or building addition(s) that result in
the creation of an additional dwelling unit shall be connected to an existing
driveway, and no new dwelling or building shall be constructed to replace
a residential dwelling or building that has been substantially demolished
and which was served by an existing driveway, within, along or connected
to an existing or future street or road right-of-way, without first obtaining a
driveway construction permit in accordance with the following:
A. The applicant shall apply for a driveway permit, shall submit a plan of
the proposed driveway per § 172-25, an application fee in the amount of
$100 and an escrow fee deposit as follows:
(1) Except for permits to pave or resurface an existing driveway only
pursuant to Subsection F below, an escrow fee deposit in the
amount of $500 shall be paid to the Township for each driveway
permit for engineering review and inspections. The escrow fee
deposit shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of
§ 159-53E and F, which provide for additional deposit requirements
and return of unused escrow deposits.
B. Permits shall be reviewed and issued by the Township Engineer or a
consulting engineer retained by the Township for driveway application
and road opening review purposes (hereinafter "consulting engineer").
C. A driveway permit issued hereunder shall be valid for period of two
years from the date of issuance.
D. Major subdivisions requiring construction plans and inspection fees
shall, by Township ordinance, be exempt from the above permit fee
requirements; however, major subdividers shall comply with all other
applicable sections of this chapter. Permits shall be required in major
subdivisions where construction is not by the subdivider or his
successor.
§ 172-19 SEWERS § 172-19
155:517
§ 172-20. General requirements. [Amended 9-15-1980 by Ord. No.
35-80; 12-15-1980 by Ord. No. 68-80; 5-20-1985 by Ord. No. 17-85;
10-19-1987 by Ord. No. 18-87]
A construction plan shall be submitted with the application showing
provisions for compliance with the following minimum requirements:
E. Driveway construction in the Township right-of-way in accordance with
the approved driveway permit shall not require a Township road
opening permit.
F. A fee of $100 shall be paid for a permit to pave or resurface an existing
driveway only.
A. All driveways shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner as
to prevent erosion of the soil from them and its deposition upon the
streets or road and in gutters, catch basins, inlets, drains or culverts.
B. All driveways constructed or altered shall be constructed in such a
manner as not to interfere with the drainage along the existing
pavement or traveled way, nor shall runoff from a driveway discharge
beyond an existing ditch onto the traveled way. Where curbs are
installed and no ditch or gutter exists, water may not be discharged
more than two feet beyond the curb. Under no circumstances shall the
driveway be allowed to extend beyond the edge of the existing
pavement and traveled way thereby creating a hump or uneven driving
surface on the pavement or traveled way.
C. All driveways shall meet the abutting roadway at a horizontal angle of
not less than 60º. All driveways shall have a minimum sight distance of
oncoming vehicles in each direction of 250 feet when observed at a
point 10 feet back from the existing pavement at a height of three feet
above the ground. Where the posted speed limit along the roadway is
greater than 25 miles per hour, the minimum sight distance shall be 10
feet for each mile per hour. [Amended 11-18-1996 by Ord. No.
29-96]
(1) All applicants shall take the required action to obtain the minimum
required sight distance after receipt of initial permit approval and
prior to approval for a building permit.
(2) Any and all actions taken to obtain the required minimum sight
distance shall be done in a lasting and permanent manner.
D. Driveways at corner lots shall be located at least 125 feet from the
center line of the road intersections.
E. No portion of any driveway shall be constructed at a grade exceeding
15%. Provision shall be made for a standing area extending a distance
of not less than 30 feet from the edge of the pavement at a grade not to
exceed 5%. A standing area extending not less than 20 feet from the
garage shall be installed at a grade not to exceed 5%. Changes in
§ 172-19 WASHINGTON CODE § 172-20
155:518
§ 172-21. Waivers.
vertical grades shall be made with smooth vertical curves not less than
12 feet in length.
F. Where driveways are at a higher elevation than the street and where
the driveway grade exceeds 8% at any point within 250 feet of the
public right-of-way, the following shall be performed:
(1) The driveway shall be paved in accordance with § 172-23C.
(2) The pavement shall extend from the right-of-way line to a point at
which the grade is less than 8% or for a two-hundred-fifty-foot
distance, whichever is less.
(3) The above pavement shall be in addition to the required pavement
within the street right-of-way.
(4) Where applicable, the applicant should submit a detail showing the
above, including details of storm drainage system to control runoff.
G. Where driveways pass over culverts, said culverts shall extend at least
five feet beyond the edge of the driveway.
(1) Driveway length is measured along the center line of the driveway
from the dwelling to the road surface edge.
A. Upon written request of any applicant for a driveway permit, the
Township Committee may grant a waiver of the sight distance
requirements of § 172-20C and the location of driveways on corner lots
requirements of § 172-20D in individual cases and upon a showing of
hardship or inability to comply with these requirements, provided that
the protection to the applicant and the public sought by the
requirements from which a waiver is requested is not significantly
reduced, and provided that such a waiver may be granted without
detriment to the applicant or the public in general. An Advisory
Driveway Ordinance Waiver Review Board is hereby established for the
purpose of reviewing waiver requests made pursuant to this subsection
and recommending, in writing, to the Township Committee the granting
or denial of such requests. Said Board shall consist of the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works, or his designee, the
Chief of Police, or his designee, and the Township Engineer or
consulting engineer. The Township Committee shall consider the
recommendations of the Board when deciding on waiver requests made
pursuant to this article. [Added 8-15-1983 by Ord. No. 20-83;
amended 5-18-1992 by Ord. No. 5-92; 8-16-2004 by Ord. No.
17-04]
B. Application. The request from the applicant for a waiver shall be
submitted to the Township Clerk, in duplicate, with the following:
[Added 3-18-1985 by Ord. No. 7-85]
§ 172-20 SEWERS § 172-21
155:519
§ 172-22. Gutter construction.
The construction of a properly sized dish-type gutter shall be required,
provided that the existing gutter flow line will not be blocked, altered
or changed in any manner unless otherwise approved by the Township
Committee or its authorized agent. The installation of a suitable size pipe
or culvert will be required in the event that the existing flow line or ditch
cannot be crossed with a dish-type gutter. The size of the pipe or culvert
required shall be determined by the Township Committee or its authorized
agent.
§ 172-23. Construction within road rights-of-way. [Amended
5-20-1985 by Ord. No. 17-85]
All driveways constructed or altered within road rights-of-way shall be
constructed as follows:
(1) A written description, detailing the reasons a waiver is needed, to
be considered only when no complying alternatives can be found.
(2) An application fee of $200.
(3) A scaled plot plan, showing proposed locations, dimensions, sight
distances which will be attained and reference points, such as
telephone pole numbers.
(4) A center-line profile for the proposed driveway, showing existing
and proposed grades at twenty-five-foot intervals and the overall
percentage of grade to be achieved.
(5) A review fee deposit of $500. [Added 11-21-2011 by Ord. No.
16-11]
C. Upon receipt of all the required information and fees, the appropriate
officials will review and inspect the proposed locations and report all
findings to the Mayor and Township Committee within 30 days. [Added
3-18-1985 by Ord. No. 7-85]
A. Fillets with a minimum radius of five feet and constructed of the same
material as the driveway shall be installed where the edge of the
driveway intersects the edge of the existing pavement or traveled way.
The width of the driveway at the edge of the existing pavement or
traveled way shall have a minimum width equal to the driveway width,
plus 10 feet. [Amended 10-19-1987 by Ord. No. 18-87]
B. Driveways entering onto unpaved roads shall be six inches compacted
thickness of Type 5, Class A, quarry-processed stone, thoroughly rolled
and compacted, except where pavement is required by § 172-20F.
C. Driveways entering onto paved roads shall be constructed as follows:
[Amended 10-19-1987 by Ord. No. 18-87; 9-19-2005 by Ord. No.
37-05]
§ 172-21 WASHINGTON CODE § 172-23
155:520
§ 172-24. Construction outside of road rights-of-way. [Added
5-20-1985 by Ord. No. 17-85; amended 10-19-1987 by Ord. No.
18-87]
(1) Where one or both sides of the road have concrete sidewalks,
driveway aprons shall be constructed of six-inch minimum
thickness concrete, per Article II, Sidewalk Construction.
(2) Where no sidewalks are required, the driveway apron material
shall be as follows:
(a) Base course, four inches minimum compacted thickness of
Type 5, Class A, quarry processed stone, thoroughly rolled and
compacted.
(b) Surface course: two inches compacted thickness of fine
aggregate bituminous concrete, FABC; or concrete pavers,
installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications,
provided that the installation of concrete pavers is solely at the
property owner’s own risk and the Township shall not be liable
for any damage to concrete pavers installed in lieu of asphalt
for a surface course as a result of snowplowing or other road or
street maintenance activity.
A. Except as required by § 172-20F, driveway construction shall be as
follows: The base shall be a minimum of four inches compacted
thickness of Type 5, Class A, quarry processed stone, shale or 3/4 inch
to 1 1/2 inches road stone or a combination of each. Additional stone
thickness may be required by the inspecting official where subbase
materials are judged to be substandard. Washed gravel or sand and
gravel shall not be an acceptable alternative.
B. Driveways less than 200 feet in length shall have the minimum
improved width of 12 feet.
C. Driveways of 200 feet or more in length shall be cleared and graded to a
width of 16 feet and shall be improved to a width of 12 feet. Horizontal
curves shall have a minimum outside radius of 60 feet.
D. In addition, driveways which exceed 400 feet in length shall have one or
more passing areas, within sight of each other and not more than 200
feet apart. Such passing areas shall be cleared and graded to a width of
22 feet and shall be improved to a width of 18 feet. The length of this
widened area shall be 25 feet, with fifteen-foot tapers on each end.
Horizontal curves shall have an increased improved width along the
curves of 14 feet. [Amended 9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 23-00]
E. Any portion of the driveway utilized by more than two dwellings, shall
have a minimum improved width of 16 feet and a graded width of 20
feet.
§ 172-23 SEWERS § 172-24
155:521
§ 172-25. Submission of plans. [Amended 4-21-2003 by Ord. No.
9-03; 8-16-2004 by Ord. No. 17-04]
All applicants shall submit engineered plans or a sketch, drawn to scale, to
the Township Engineer or consulting engineer for his approval prior to the
issuance of the driveway permit. The plans shall be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer and shall show or include the following information.
F. Driveways of 400 feet or more in length shall have facilities suitable for
fire-engine turnaround within 200 feet of the dwelling, and all
driveways with intersections shall have facilities for fire-engine
turnaround without regard to the distance to the dwelling, consisting of
the following: [Amended 9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 23-00; 6-20-2016
by Ord. No. 10-16]
(1) K-turn with fifty-foot depth, fourteen-foot width and fifty-foot
center-line radius;
(2) Looped driveway of fourteen-foot width and 50 feet or more centerline
radius; or
(3) Other equivalent facilities approved by the Township Engineer or
consulting engineer. [Amended 4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 9-03;
8-16-2004 by Ord. No. 17-04]
G. Driveways with intersections shall have permanent markers listing the
house numbers/direction to each dwelling. The above requirement is in
addition to building numbering requirements.
H. Lots which are presently occupied with a conforming driveway staff in
use shall be deemed exempt from the terms hereof, except where
additional usage by another party occurs. [Amended 5-20-2019 by
Ord. No. 11-19]
I. There shall be no more than four lots served by a common driveway.
Driveways serving five lots or more shall be constructed in accordance
with the residential site improvement standards for public streets.
When the owners of two or more adjoining lots elect to construct one
driveway access, each deed shall reference the appropriate easement
for the multiple-use driveway, and a copy of the recorded deed shall be
filed with Washington Township. In addition, prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for any of the lots served by the common
driveway, it shall be necessary to file with Washington Township a copy
of the proposed deed for the lot and a copy of the cooperative
maintenance agreement as recorded in the office of the Morris County
Clerk, executed by all parties. The legal form of the cooperative
maintenance agreement must be approved by the Township Attorney
prior to the issuance of a construction permit for any lot to be served by
a common driveway. [Amended 8-19-2002 by Ord. No. 30-02;
5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 13-04]
§ 172-24 WASHINGTON CODE § 172-25
155:522
§ 172-26. Responsibility for expenses incurred by Township.
Any person or persons or firm or corporation violating any provision of this
article which results in damage to or obstruction of any street or road,
gutter, storm drain, catch basin, inlet or culvert shall be responsible for all
expenses incurred by the Township in repairing such damage or removing
the obstruction, in addition to any penalties provided in this Code.
A. A plot or site plan at a scale of one inch equals 30 feet showing the
driveway for its entire length and showing its relation to the street or
road and showing existing and proposed two-foot contours.
B. A profile of the driveway showing existing and proposed center line
grades and elevations for its entire length.
C. A plan showing the type of storm drainage to be constructed at the
driveway entrance to the street or road, i.e., dish-type gutter, pipe or
culvert; size of pipes; culverts and gutters; grades, elevations and
typical cross sections; construction details; and any other information
deemed necessary to the project.
§ 172-25 SEWERS § 172-26
155:523

ARTICLE IV
Removal of Snow and Ice
[Adopted 5-15-1972 (Sec. 6-6 of the Revised General Ordinances)]
§ 172-27. Time limit for removal. [Amended 12-19-1983 by Ord. No.
34-83; 8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 20-09]
The owner, occupant or tenant of any premises, whether residential or
nonresidential, included within the shaded area shown on Schedule A89 of
this article shall promote public safety by removing snow and ice from the
full width and length of all abutting sidewalks and at the intersection of
two or more sidewalks constituting a corner and/or a crosswalk, from the
sidewalk to the plowed section of the roadway, within 24 hours after the
same falls or is formed thereon, provided that the Township Administrator
is authorized to suspend this requirement or extend the period of removal
when, in his/her opinion, unusual and extreme conditions warrant such
action. Ice which is so frozen as to make removal impractical may be
thoroughly covered with sand, ashes or similar material.
§ 172-28. Casting of snow or ice. [Amended 8-17-2009 by Ord. No.
20-09]
No owner, tenant, occupant or agent of an owner, tenant, or occupant
shall throw, place or deposit snow or ice onto any sidewalk or into any
street, it being the intent and purpose of this provision to prohibit all such
persons from throwing, casting, plowing or depositing snow and ice which
accumulates on private property upon sidewalks or streets of the Township.
§ 172-29. Authority to remove. [Amended 8-17-2009 by Ord. No.
20-09]
In case such snow or ice is not removed from the sidewalks or is cast
or deposited thereon or placed upon the sidewalks or the street by the
owner, tenant or occupant of any premises or his/her agent as hereinabove
provided, the same shall be removed under the direction of the
Superintendent of Public Works, and the cost of removal, as nearly as can
be ascertained, shall be certified by the Superintendent of Public Works
to the Director of Finance. The Township Committee shall examine the
certification and, if found to be correct, shall cause the cost to be charged
against the real estate abutting or bordering upon such sidewalks, and the
amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien and a tax in the same
manner as the taxes next to be levied and assessed upon the premises and
shall bear interest and be enforced and collected by the same officers and
in the same manner as other taxes. The imposition of and collection of a
fine or other penalty for violation of any of the provisions of this article shall
not constitute any bar to the right of the Township to collect the cost, as
certified, for the removal of snow or ice in the manner herein authorized.
89.Editor's Note: Schedule A, Map of Snow and Ice Removal Areas is included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 172-27 SEWERS § 172-30
155:525
§ 172-30. Handicapped parking spaces. [Amended 10-17-1994 by
Ord. No. 21-94]
No owner or operator of premises having parking spaces reserved for
handicapped drivers and no tenant, contractor or other person may block
access to such parking stalls reserved for handicapped drivers by the
plowing, piling or placement of snow or ice in such spaces.
§ 172-30 WASHINGTON CODE § 172-30
155:526
ARTICLE V
Street Openings
[Adopted 8-18-1975 (Sec. 13-1 of the Revised General Ordinances);
amended in its entirety 8-16-2004 by Ord. No. 17-04]
§ 172-31. Permit required.
A. No person shall open, excavate or tear up the surface of any public
road, street, road shoulder, curb, sidewalk or right-of-way under the
control of Washington Township, or otherwise endanger or obstruct the
normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, by the placing of any
barricade, structure or material or equipment that is not normally
designed to be operated on the public highway, without first obtaining a
written permit from the Township Engineer or consulting engineer. The
application shall indicate the proposed date upon which the operation
will start and the proposed date upon which the operation will be
completed. These dates will be contingent upon weather conditions and
approval of the application. A permit for a specific project will require
completion of the project no later than 10 consecutive days from the
starting date. "Specific project" shall mean a single installation, such as
a waterline, a storm sewer or other utility, each of which will constitute
a separate project and require a separate permit. Upon a
demonstration of special or unusual conditions, an application for a
permit may be approved for not more than 30 consecutive days subject
to such conditions as may be imposed by the Township Engineer or
consulting engineer, pursuant to a recommendation from the
Department of Public Works and the Police Department. If the work is
not completed within this period, a new permit shall be required along
with the appropriate fees. A separate application shall be filed for each
road to be affected, if multiple roads are included in the same project.
B. No opening or excavation shall be permitted within the surface of any
public road, street or right-of-way under the control of the Township
upon which a permanent pavement has been placed within five years of
the date of the application of such pavement, except as noted in
§ 172-38. [Amended 6-20-2005 by Ord. No. 23-05]
C. Street openings within the paved or improved surface of any road,
street or right-of-way shall be restricted between November 1 and April
20, except that the Township Engineer or consulting engineer, after
consultation with the Superintendent of Public Works, shall have the
authority to waive these requirements in instances where he
determines that suitable weather conditions exist.
D. The applicant shall supply a current New Jersey "One-Call"
confirmation number, to document compliance with the underground
utility location law.
§ 172-31 SEWERS § 172-32
155:527
§ 172-32. Application; fee.
Application shall be made in writing for a permit for any excavation within
any roadway, the maintenance of which is the responsibility of the
Township, for any purpose whatsoever. The application shall state the
purpose of the excavation, namely, sewer, water, gas, telephone or any other
purpose. The application shall be accompanied by an engineered plan, or
sketch, drawn to scale, of the area to be disturbed, including proposed
dimensions and restoration details, and shall also be accompanied by an
application fee of $100 and an escrow deposit of:
§ 172-33. Restoration deposit.
A. Three hundred dollars for all openings up to 50 linear feet.
B. Five hundred dollars for all openings consisting of from 50 to 100 linear
feet.
C. One thousand dollars for openings more than 100 linear feet.
D. One hundred fifty dollars for utility service connections for approved
utilities (utilities where restoration and maintenance guarantees are
covered by annual bonds).
A. No person shall be granted a permit to open any street or roadway or do
any work within a Township right-of-way until a restoration deposit in
accordance with the following schedule has been submitted to
guarantee the proper restoration, replacement or repair of property
damaged or destroyed by the permittee:
(1) Lawn areas: $6 per square yard.
(2) Shoulder areas: $12 per square yard.
(3) Paved roads: $24 per square yard.
(4) Sidewalks: $50 per square yard.
(5) Curbings: $18 per linear foot.
(6) Dirt or gravel roads: $12 per square yard.
B. A minimum payment shall not be less than $500, and the Township
Engineer or consulting engineer may set fees higher than those listed
above when, in his opinion, cost will exceed the stipulated amounts.
C. In lieu of posting a cash payment for restoration deposit, the permittee
may post a combination of cash and bond, except for the minimum fee
of $500, which shall be all cash. The cash portion shall be 50% of the
total amount required and in the form of a certified check or money
order. The remaining 50% shall be guaranteed by the posting of a
surety bond. Upon written request by a permittee, the Township
Engineer or consulting engineer shall cause an inspection of the
§ 172-32 WASHINGTON CODE § 172-33
155:528
§ 172-34. Maintenance guaranty.
excavation to be made and shall submit his recommendations to the
Township Committee for acceptance of satisfactory restoration.
D. In the event that a utility company or other similar entity will be
regularly excavating within the Township, a restoration deposit in the
form of a bond may be posted with the Township Clerk. The form and
amount of said bond shall be approved by the Township Engineer or
consulting engineer prior to the issuance of any street opening permits.
A. Minimum.
(1) A minimum of $200, either in cash or certified check or money
order, shall be retained by the Township for a period of not less
than one year from the date of acceptance of the restoration
completed by the applicant for work within the municipal right-ofway
that does not affect improved areas of the pavement, curb,
sidewalk or other appurtenances. Said acceptance shall be made by
the Township Engineer or consulting engineer.
(2) A minimum of $500, either in cash or certified check or money
order, shall be retained by the Township for a period of not less
than two years from the date of acceptance of the restoration
completed by the applicant for work within the municipal right-ofway
that disturbs improved areas of the pavement, curb, sidewalk
or other appurtenances. Said acceptance shall be made by the
Township Engineer or consulting engineer.
B. In the case of a large street opening requiring extensive restoration,
either the Township Engineer or consulting engineer may require a
maintenance bond or certified check in an amount of 15% of the amount
of the restoration deposit, which is to be retained for two years from the
date of acceptance, provided that in no event shall the amount retained
be less than $500.
C. In the event that repairs become necessary to the restored excavation
area during the maintenance period, the Township shall notify the
applicant and shall expect the necessary repairs to be completed within
48 hours of notification. If these repairs are not completed within 48
hours, the Township shall complete the necessary repairs and charge
the expenses of the same against the maintenance guaranty.
D. After passage of the applicable time period set forth in § 172-34A and
upon written request from the applicant, the Township Engineer or
consulting engineer may recommend acceptance of a satisfactory
restoration, after which all deposits shall be released by the Township
and will not include interest accrued.
§ 172-33 SEWERS § 172-34.1
155:529
§ 172-34.1. Certificate of insurance.
A permit shall not be issued unless and until the applicant has delivered
to the Township a certificate of insurance evidencing that the applicant
has obtained a comprehensive general liability insurance policy, including
underground excavation coverage, a workman's compensation and
employer's liability policy and a comprehensive automobile insurance policy
and guaranteeing notification to the Township in the event of cancellation
thereof. The comprehensive general liability and automobile insurance
policies shall have limits of at least $1,000,000 for bodily injury to each
person, $2,000,000 in the aggregate for each accident, property liability
of $500,000 for each accident and $1,000,000 aggregate property damage.
Since the permittee's insurance certificates do not cover subcontract work,
all subcontractors employed by the permittee must submit their own
insurance certificates in the amounts required above.
§ 172-35. Submission of plans; inspection.
§ 172-36. Guarding.
It shall be the duty of the permittee to properly guard any excavation
and storage piles by erecting suitable bafflers during the day and lights
during the night, or warning signs and providing a watchman if deemed
necessary by the police and/or the Superintendent of Public Works, or his
designee, and/or the Township Engineer or consulting engineer. All traffic
control devices used on road or street construction or maintenance work
shall conform to Chapter IV, "Work Zone" of the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices (MUTCD). The permittee shall be liable for any neglect in
safeguarding the traveling public. If the excavation extends the full width of
the road, only 1/2 of it shall be made at one time, and it shall be backfilled
before the other half is excavated, so as not to interfere with traffic.
§ 172-37. Restoration of surface.
A. The permittee shall submit blueprints or plans in duplicate to the
Township for approval, and if it is considered necessary or desirable, a
general inspection may be directed by the Township to be made by the
Township Engineer or consulting engineer. After the approval of the
blueprint or plan, if in the course of the proposed construction shown
thereon any changes or deviations become necessary in the work, the
permittee shall obtain the approval of the Township Engineer or
consulting engineer before making the changes or deviations. Upon
completion of the entire work, the permittee shall file plans with the
Township Engineer or consulting engineer showing in full detail all the
work after its completion (as-built).
B. In addition to the general inspection by the Township Engineer or
consulting engineer, an inspector may be placed on the work site by the
Township if deemed necessary and desirable, at the expense of the
permittee and at the prevailing rate of wage paid by the Township.
§ 172-34.1 WASHINGTON CODE § 172-37
155:530
§ 172-38. Emergency opening.
Emergency street openings may be made without the necessity of a written
application in emergency situations, such as broken or frozen water mains
or other situations which would endanger public life, health and safety,
provided that notice shall be immediately given to the Police Department
A. Any Township road surface, sidewalk, curb, gutter, shoulder or grassed
areas disturbed or destroyed by the permittee shall be restored by and
at the total expense of the permittee to as good as or better condition
than it was before commencement of the work. The road surface shall
be replaced in accordance with the requirements of Subsections C and
D. Upon completion of the restoration work and after approval of the
work by the Township Engineer or consulting engineer, the permittee
shall maintain the work in an acceptable condition at his expense for
two years after the approval of the work. No roads shall be encumbered
for a longer period than is necessary to execute the work. If the work is
not satisfactorily completed within a reasonable time, and after due
notice to the permittee, the Township Public Works Department may
finish the work and deduct the cost of the same from the total deposit,
as required in § 172-33. After the work is completed by the Township,
any balance remaining from the total deposit shall be returned to the
permittee.
B. Within any traveled way, the entire excavation shall be backfilled with
dense graded aggregate, or other suitable, well-drained, select
material. The Township Engineer or consulting engineer shall approve
all backfill material used by the permittee. The backfill material shall be
placed and tamped in layers not exceeding one foot in depth.
C. All new pavement replacement shall be made in kind, except that in no
case shall it be less than a total of six inches compacted thickness. All
new pavement shall consist of a minimum of four inches compacted
thickness of bituminous stabilized base, Mix No. 1, and a wearing
surface of two inches compacted thickness of FABC, Mix No. 5.
Pavement replacement in areas requiring more than six inches overall
thickness shall consist of a minimum of three lifts of asphalt, and in no
case shall one individual lift exceed four inches compacted thickness.
Prior to installing the final wearing surface, the edges of the existing
pavement shall be cut straight and painted with asphaltic cement,
Grade RC-70, to provide a waterproof joint and adhesion between the
existing and new pavement.
D. On all other roads, the surface course shall be six inches compacted
thickness of Type 5, Class A, soil aggregate, or dense graded aggregate
(DGABC).
E. All materials and methods of construction shall comply with the New
Jersey Department of Transportation Standard Specification for Road
and Bridge Construction, dated 1988, and all revisions and
amendments thereto.
§ 172-37 SEWERS § 172-38
155:531
and Department of Public Works and that written application for a permit
shall be made to the Department of Public Works for approval by the
Township Engineer or consulting engineer as soon as practical and, in any
event, not exceeding 48 hours from the start of the excavation.
§ 172-39. General rules and regulations.
A. No person shall place material of any description whatsoever, or
vehicles or other equipment of any nature, upon any road or street, so
as to interfere with the flow of water along the gutters or with traffic.
B. No excavation shall be opened for a distance of more than 200 feet at
any one time. From November 1 to April 20, all excavations shall be
backfilled and all equipment removed from the public right-of-way at
the end of each day's work and at such times as may be required for
noninterference with snow removal.
C. The Township Engineer or consulting engineer, Department of Public
Works and the Police Department shall be notified 24 hours in advance
of the exact time of starting work on all excavations, and 24 hours in
advance of the replacement of the pavement base and surface courses.
D. All work performed and material furnished shall be in compliance with
the rules, regulations and specifications of the Township.
§ 172-38 WASHINGTON CODE § 172-39
155:532
ARTICLE VI
Existing Streets
[Adopted 9-19-1977; amended 7-16-1990 by Ord. No. 24-90 (Sec.
13-5 of the Revised General Ordinances)]
§ 172-40. Alternate road improvements.
Where existing streets adjoin or are included in major subdivisions or site
plans, and where the existing streets are required to be paved and improved
in accordance with Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land, § 175-31, General, or
in accordance with applicable provisions of Chapter 111, Site Plan Review,
the Township shall have the right to waive any requirements as stated in
Article I, Specifications for Street Acceptances, and Article II, Sidewalk
Construction, provided that:
§ 172-41. Payments in lieu of construction.
Where construction of the alternate road improvements, per § 172-40,
would become the responsibility of more than one party or cannot feasibly
be installed by the time estimated for final subdivision or site plan approval:
A. The Township Engineer has recommended that the paving and
improvement requirements should be modified in the interest of the
development and the public safety and welfare and has specified, in
writing, the revised paving and improvement requirements.
B. The value of the work to be performed in existing streets under the
above revised requirements is approximately equal to that required
under the Township specifications.
C. The developer has agreed in writing to the revised paving and
improvements.
D. The Planning Board resolution has specifically recommended the
waiver and modification after finding the same to be in the interest of
and consistent with the development and the Master Plan circulation
element.
E. The Township agrees to the revised paving and improvements on
existing streets by the adoption of a resolution by the Township
Committee.
F. The alternate or revised paving and improvement on existing streets
shall be restricted between November 1 and April 20 pursuant to
§§ 172-9D and 172-10D of this chapter. 90 [Added 2-20-1995 by Ord.
No. 3-95]
90.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 13-5.1g, regarding completion of alternate
improvements, which immediately followed this subsection, added 2-20-1995 by Ord. No.
3-95, was repealed 12-18-1995 by Ord. No. 39-95.
§ 172-40 SEWERS § 172-41
155:533
A. The developer may request that it make payment of estimated cost of
improvements in lieu of constructing the same.
B. The Township Committee, at its sole option, may accept this request
subject to the following conditions:
(1) These funds shall be dedicated exclusively for the alternate road
improvements.
(2) Funds shall be paid as a precondition for the final development
approval.
(3) Contracts shall be let, property acquisition commenced or design of
improvements commenced.
(a) For subdivision, within five years of acceptance of other
dedicated development lands and improvements in the
development.
(b) For site plans, within five years of final approval of the final
phase.
C. If Subsection B(3) is not complied with timely, the funds shall be
returned to the developer, less sums expended, if any, without interest.
§ 172-41 WASHINGTON CODE § 172-41
155:534
ARTICLE VII
Water on Township Roads
[Adopted 11-8-1978 by Ord. No. 30-78 (Sec. 13-6 of the Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 172-42. Prohibition.
No person, firm or corporation shall divert, direct, pump or discharge water
onto the surface of any Township road or Township right-of-way, wherein
said road will cause unsafe traveling conditions and/or cause the road
surface to deteriorate and/or cause erosion of the same.
§ 172-42 SEWERS § 172-42
155:535

ARTICLE VIII
Sight Distance91
[Adopted 6-18-1990 by Ord. No. 21-90 (Sec. 6-7.26 of the Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 172-43. Obstructions prohibited.
§ 172-44. Existing obstructions.
§ 172-45. Application.
This article shall not apply to signs, such as traffic signs, installed by the
state, county or Township or newspaper and mailboxes on standard posts.
A. Every owner or tenant of lands lying within the Township adjoining a
roadway, not within the road right-of-way and/or sight easement, is
prohibited from installing any obstructions, including but not limited to
a fence, wall, sign or piles of soil, higher than 2 1/2 feet above the near
edge of any traveled portion of any adjacent roadway, or any physical or
visual obstruction within 10 feet of any roadway or within 25 feet of the
intersection of two roadways.
B. Every owner or tenant of lands, lying within the Township, which land is
within a road right-of-way and/or a sight easement, is prohibited from
installing any obstructions of any kind within the road right-of-way and/
or sight easement.
A. Any obstructions in existence at the time of adoption of this article
which may require repair or replacement of 50% or more shall be
considered new construction and, as such, shall not be permitted.
B. Any obstruction in existence at the time of adoption of this article which
is declared a safety hazard by the Chief of Police or his designee must
be removed with 30 days of notification to the owner or tenant of the
affected lands.
C. Any obstruction within a road right-of-way and/or sight easement must
be removed within 30 days of notification to the owner or tenant of the
affected lands.
91.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded Ord. No. 36-84, adopted 12-17-1984 and Ord.
No. 42-85, adopted 12-16-1985.
§ 172-43 SEWERS § 172-45
155:537

ARTICLE IX
Traffic Control at Construction Sites
[Added 6-17-1985 by Ord. No. 21-85 (Sec. 6-15 of the Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 172-46. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONTRACTOR — Construction companies, excavators, land developers and
any and all persons connected with construction affecting traffic conditions,
including the owner and/or resident of affected property.
STREET — Any road, highway, way, alley, easement or right-of-way over
which the public travels or to which the public has access, whether publicly
or privately maintained and/or owned, including dedicated but unaccepted
subdivision streets.
§ 172-47. Barricades required.
All excavations shall be kept properly barricaded at all times, and during
the hours of darkness shall be provided with reflective material or warning
lights. This regulation shall not excuse the contractor from taking any other
precaution(s) necessary for the protection of persons or property.
§ 172-48. Street closings.
All work shall be done in such a manner as to cause a minimum of
interference with travel on the street affected. No street shall be closed to
traffic unless such closing is approved by the Chief of Police or his designee.
The Chief of Police or his designee shall specify the time and date of the
closure and reopening of the roadway, with no deviation permitted. The
Police Department and Department of Public Works shall be informed of all
street closings at least 24 hours in advance, except that where work is of an
emergency nature notice shall be given to the police and the Department of
Public Works when work commences.
§ 172-49. Construction equipment.
No person shall position, store or park any construction equipment on any
street after working hours, except with approval by the Chief of Police or
his designee.
§ 172-50. Flagmen.
A. The Chief of Police or his designee may, in his discretion, require the
contractor to supply flagmen on the job site. If the contractor is so
required to supply flagmen and requests uniformed police officers to
perform that function, all arrangements for same shall be made through
§ 172-46 SEWERS § 172-50
155:539
§ 172-51. Lighting.
Lighting in construction areas shall be required from 1/2 hour after sunset
to 1/2 hour before sunrise and at any other time when there is not sufficient
light to see persons and vehicles for a distance of at least 500 feet.
§ 172-52. Signing and other traffic control devices.
the Chief of Police or his designee, who shall assign the said officer(s)
as needed, at his discretion.
B. The purpose of a flagman shall be to direct traffic around construction
areas, but shall not include the changing of direction of any vehicle or
pedestrian. If it is necessary to require the changing of direction of any
vehicle or pedestrian, a uniformed traffic or police officer shall be used
at the direction of the Chief of Police.
C. Flagmen, when used in construction work areas, shall be equipped with
the following:
(1) An orange cap and vest which shall be reflectorized, except during
warm weather when orange tee shirts may be substituted, provided
that they are reflectorized.
(2) A red flag, measuring at least 24 inches by 24 inches. For night and
darkness conditions, lights shall be used in place of said flag.
(3) Sign paddles consisting of stop/slow messages, as per the Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways,
current edition. When used at night or in darkness, the stop/slow
faces shall be reflectorized.
A. All signing and other traffic control devices shall be placed on selfsupporting
structures and shall not be affixed to trees, utility poles or
traffic devices which are the property of the Township. All signing and
other traffic control devices shall conform to the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, current edition. All
signing and other traffic control devices shall be kept clean and distinct
and free from grease, dust or other blurring matter, so as to be plainly
visible at all times of the day and night. No signing or other traffic
control device shall be permitted to be obscured by trees or parked
vehicles.
B. When an application for a construction or road opening permit has been
made, the types of proposed traffic control devices to be utilized for the
project in question shall be shown by a diagram and/or written list,
which shall be returned with the application for signature and
agreement by the contractor or permittee. A copy of said diagram and/
or list shall be made a part of the permit and shall be kept at the job site
at all times for possible review. The proper implementation of traffic
control devices as deemed necessary by the Chief of Police or his
§ 172-50 WASHINGTON CODE § 172-52
155:540
§ 172-53. Bond required.
No construction work for which traffic control devices are required to be
used shall commence until the contractor has filed a bond in an amount
determined to be sufficient by the Township Committee. The Township
Committee may waive the requirements of this section in the case of public
utilities upon the presentation of satisfactory proof that such utility is
capable of meeting any claims against it, up to the amount of the bond
which would otherwise be required. The bond shall be executed by the
contractor as principal and a surety company licensed to do business in the
State of New Jersey as surety and shall be conditioned as follows:
§ 172-54. Violations and penalties.
Failure to comply with the requirements of this article may subject a project
to immediate closure by the Police Department and may subject the
contractor to the penalties and procedures set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, § 1-3, General penalty.
designee shall be deemed an integral part of any permit issued by a
Washington Township official.
C. Where it is not necessary for a contractor to make application for a
permit due to the nature of the construction involved, the contractor
shall be required to install all necessary traffic control devices as per
the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways, current edition. This shall include work which is performed
on lands not included in the definition of "street," if such work
interferes with the travel of vehicles or pedestrians on a street.
A. To indemnify and hold harmless the Township from all loss, damage,
claim or expense, including expenses incurred in the defense of any
litigation arising out of injury to any person or property resulting from
any work being done by the contractor.
B. To indemnify the Township for any expense incurred in enforcing any of
the provisions of this article.
C. To indemnify any person who shall sustain personal injuries or damage
to his property as a result of any act of omission of the contractor, his
agent, employees or subcontractors done in the course of any work.
§ 172-52 SEWERS § 172-54
155:541
Chapter 175
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 56.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 92.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 111.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 137.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 148.
Sewers — See Ch. 155.
Site plan review — See Ch. 159.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 172.
Zoning — See Ch. 217.
§ 172-54 WASHINGTON CODE § 172-54
155:542
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 175-1. Long title.
This chapter consists of "An ordinance establishing rules, regulations and
standards governing the subdivision of land within the Township of
Washington pursuant to the authority set forth in the Municipal Land Use
Law, Chapter 291 of the Laws of 1975, and amendments and supplements
thereto, setting forth the procedure to be followed by the Planning Board
in applying and administering these rules, regulations and standards and
providing penalties for the violation thereof."
§ 175-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Subdivision
Ordinance of the Township of Washington."
§ 175-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations and
standards to guide land subdivision in the Township of Washington in order
to promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of
said Township and to carry out the objective of the Municipal Land Use
Law.92 It shall be administered to ensure the orderly growth and
development, the conservation, protection and proper use of land and
adequate provisions for circulation, utilities and services and the
conservation and environmental protection of all land, water and air
resources within the jurisdiction of Washington Township.
§ 175-4. Approving agency. [Amended 5-18-1981 by Ord. No. 16-81]
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the Township of
Washington Planning Board or, in certain instances, by the Washington
Township Zoning Board of Adjustment, as provided by and in accordance
with the Municipal Land Use Law, Chapter 291 of the Laws of 1975, as
amended and supplemented.
§ 175-5. Definitions. [Amended 12-17-1979 by Ord. No. 74-79;
12-15-1980 by Ord. No. 53-80; 10-15-1990 by Ord. No. 34-90]
As defined under Chapter 111, Land Use Procedures, Article VI, Definitions.
92.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 175-1 SEWERS § 175-5
155:543

ARTICLE II
Administration
§ 175-6. Minimum requirements.
These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the Township of Washington.
§ 175-7. Criteria.
Any action taken by the Planning Board under the terms of this chapter shall
give primary consideration to the matters mentioned in § 175-6 above.
§ 175-8. Exceptions in application of regulations.
The Planning Board, when acting upon applications for minor or preliminary
subdivision approval, shall have the power to grant such exceptions from
the requirements for subdivision approval as may be reasonable and within
the general purpose and intent of this chapter if the literal enforcement of
one or more provisions of this chapter is impracticable or will exact undue
hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question.
§ 175-9. Simultaneous review.
The Planning Board shall have the power to review and approve or deny
conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with review for subdivision
approval without the developer's being required to make further application
to the Planning Board, or the Planning Board's being required to hold
further hearings. The longest time period for action by the Planning Board,
whether for subdivision, conditional use or site plan approval, shall apply.
Whenever approval of a conditional use is requested by the developer
pursuant to this section, notice of the hearing on the plat shall include
reference to the request for such conditional use.
§ 175-10. Certificate of approval.
Certificates of approval shall be issued by the Township Clerk in accordance
with the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
§ 175-11. Required fees. [Amended 12-18-1978 by Ord. No. 35-78;
12-17-1979 by Ord. No. 74-79; 2-18-1980 by Ord. No. 1-80;
11-17-1980 by Ord. No. 51-80; 3-16-1981 by Ord. No. 7-81;
7-20-1981 by Ord. No. 29-81; 12-21-1981 by Ord. No. 50-81;
2-21-1983 by Ord. No. 1-83; 12-17-1984 by Ord. No. 33-84;
4-21-1986 by Ord. No. 8-86; 7-21-1986 by Ord. No. 23-86;
12-21-1987 by Ord. No. 28-87; 7-18-1988 by Ord. No. 25-88;
7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 12-92]
A. Application for minor subdivision.
§ 175-6 SEWERS § 175-11
155:545
(1) The following application fees covering administration and
overhead shall be charged to the subdivider for a minor subdivision
and shall be collected by the Township Clerk at the time of
submission of an application to the Planning Board for approval:
(a) Lot line adjustment not creating an additional building lot:
$500. [Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 23-02]
(b) Minor subdivision creating one or more new lots: $500.
[Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 23-02]
(c) Amendment of minor subdivision approval: $150.
(2) The following deposits shall be submitted by the developer at the
time of submission of an application to the Planning Board for
approval. Said deposit shall cover the cost of engineering, legal and
professional planner review and documentation fees and
disbursements. [Amended 8-16-1993 by Ord. No. 24-93;
2-19-1996 by Ord. No. 4-96]
(a) Lot line adjustment: $250 per lot involved.
(b) Minor subdivision: $1,500 for the first new lot; $1,000 for each
additional lot.
(c) Amendment of minor subdivision approval: 25% of minor
subdivision review fee.
(d) In addition to the fees required above, for any application
involving a geologic investigation pursuant to § 175-30, $200
for each lot included in the Carbonate Area District. [Added
4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 4-98]
(3) Tabulation and appeal of review fees. [Amended 12-18-1995 by
Ord. No. 38-95]
(a) The Chief Financial Officer shall tabulate the costs of the
Engineer, planner and attorneys, their staffs and any outside
consultants required when an application is of a nature beyond
the scope of the expertise of the professionals normally utilized
by the Township, for a proper review and documentation
pursuant to vouchers submitted by the professionals
identifying the personnel performing the service, and stating
the date the services were performed, the hours spent to onefourth-
hour increments, the hourly rate and the expenses
incurred. All charges and fees shall be established by
resolution of the governing body. Expenses shall be actual outof-
pocket expenses of any such professionals or consultants,
including normal and typical expenses incurred in processing
applications. Vouchers shall be submitted monthly to the Chief
Financial Officer with a copy to the developer. These costs shall
be deducted from the engineering/planning/legal review fee
§ 175-11 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-11
155:546
escrow deposit and paid to the professionals by the Chief
Financial Officer. Where the reasonable and necessary review
costs exceed or are anticipated to exceed the review fee
deposit, the developer shall pay the additional amount prior to
the signing of any plat. Failure to remit the additional required
deposit within 15 days of the request shall render the
application incomplete, and no further proceedings or action
shall be taken by the Planning Board until after compliance.
(b) The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare and send to the
developer a statement which shall include an accounting of
funds listing all deposits, interest earnings, disbursements and
the cumulative balance of the escrow account. This statement
shall be provided quarterly, if monthly charges are $1,000 or
less, or monthly, if monthly charges exceed $1,000.
(c) After the final plat has been signed, the developer shall send
written notice, by certified mail, to the Chief Financial Officer,
the Planning Board, the Township Engineer and other relevant
professional that the application is completed. After receipt of
such notice, the Engineer and/or other professional shall
submit a final voucher to the Chief Financial Officer within 30
days with a copy to the developer. The Chief Financial Officer
shall render a written final accounting to the developer on the
status of the escrow within 45 days of receipt of the final bill,
together with any balance remaining in the account, including
interest in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1.
(d) Within 15 days of the tabulation of review costs and
notification of the developer by the Chief Financial Officer, the
developer shall have the right to appeal said tabulation by so
notifying the Township Committee, in writing, with copies to
the Chief Financial Officer, the Planning Board and any
relevant professional, provided that any additional fees or
amounts required by the Planning Board to be paid prior to the
signing of any plat must be paid by the developer prior to the
bringing of any such appeal. Upon receipt of any such appeal,
the Planning Board shall review the same and make a
recommendation thereon to the Township Committee within 45
days. The Township Committee shall then decide the proper
review fee to be charged, based upon information provided by
both the developer and the Planning Board. If the matter is not
resolved to the satisfaction of the developer, the developer may
appeal to the County Construction Board of Appeals,
established under P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127), any
charge to an escrow account or a deposit by any municipal
professional or consultant pursuant to the procedure set forth
in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2.
B. Application for major subdivision.
§ 175-11 SEWERS § 175-11
155:547
(1) The following application fees covering administration and
overhead shall be charged to the subdivider for a major subdivision
and shall be collected by the Township Clerk at the time of
submission of an application to the Planning Board for approval:
(a) Sketch plat for major subdivision: $500.
(b) Preliminary plat for major subdivisions:
[1] Six hundred dollars, plus $200 per lot. [Amended
6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 23-02]
[2] Amendment or extension of preliminary subdivision
approval: 25% of the preliminary subdivision application
fee.
(c) Final plat for major subdivisions:
[1] Six hundred dollars, plus $100 per lot. [Amended
6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 23-02]
[2] Amendment or extension of final subdivision approval:
25% of final subdivision application fee.
(2) The following deposits shall be submitted by the developer at the
time of submission of an application to the Planning Board for
approval. Said deposit shall cover the cost of engineering, legal and
professional planner review and documentation fees and
disbursements. [Amended 2-19-1996 by Ord. No. 4-96]
(a) Sketch plat:
[1] Major subdivision: $100 per lot for the first five lots; $75
for each additional lot.
[2] Major subdivision/conventional/cluster: $100 per lot for
the first five lots; $75 for each additional lot.
(b) Preliminary plats:
[1] Preliminary plat for major subdivision/cluster: $1,000 per
lot. [Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 23-02]
[2] Amendment or extension of preliminary subdivision
approval: 25% of preliminary plat deposit.
(c) Final plats:
[1] Final plat for major subdivision: $400 per lot for the first
five lots: $50 for each additional lot.
[2] Amendment or extension of final subdivision approval:
25% of final plat deposit.
§ 175-11 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-11
155:548
(3) Tabulation and appeal of review fees. [Amended 12-18-1995 by
Ord. No. 38-95]
(a) The Chief Financial Officer shall tabulate the costs of the
Engineer, planner and attorneys, their staffs and any outside
consultants required when an application is of a nature beyond
the scope of the expertise of the professionals normally utilized
by the Township, for a proper review and documentation
pursuant to vouchers submitted by the professionals
identifying the personnel performing the service, and stating
the date the services were performed, the hours spent to onefourth-
hour increments, the hourly rate and the expenses
incurred. All charges and fees shall be established by
resolution of the governing body. Expenses shall be actual outof-
pocket expenses of any such professionals or consultants,
including normal and typical expenses incurred in processing
applications. Vouchers shall be submitted monthly to the Chief
Financial Officer with a copy to the developer. These costs shall
be deducted from the engineering/planning/legal review fee
escrow deposit and paid to the professionals by the Chief
Financial Officer. Where the reasonable and necessary review
costs exceed or are anticipated to exceed the review fee
deposit, the developer shall pay the additional amount prior to
the signing of any plat. Failure to remit the additional required
deposit within 15 days of the request shall render the
application incomplete, and no further proceedings or action
shall be taken by the Planning Board until after compliance.
(b) The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare and send to the
developer a statement which shall include an accounting of
funds listing all deposits, interest earnings, disbursements and
the cumulative balance of the escrow account. This statement
shall be provided quarterly, if monthly charges are $1,000 or
less, or monthly, if monthly charges exceed $1,000.
(c) After the final plat has been signed, the developer shall send
written notice, by certified mail, to the Chief Financial Officer,
the Planning Board, the Township Engineer and other relevant
professional that the application is completed. After receipt of
such notice, the Engineer and/or other professional shall
submit a final voucher to the Chief Financial Officer within 30
days with a copy to the developer. The Chief Financial Officer
shall render a written final accounting to the developer on the
status of the escrow within 45 days of receipt of the final bill,
together with any balance remaining in the account, including
interest in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1.
(d) Within 15 days of the tabulation of review costs and
notification of the developer by the Chief Financial Officer, the
developer shall have the right to appeal said tabulation by so
notifying the Township Committee, in writing, with copies to
§ 175-11 SEWERS § 175-11
155:549
the Chief Financial Officer, the Planning Board and any
relevant professional, provided that any additional fees or
amounts required by the Planning Board to be paid to the
signing of any plat must be paid by the developer prior to
the bringing of any such appeal. Upon receipt of any such
appeal, the Planning Board shall review the same and make
a recommendation thereon to the Township Committee within
45 days. The Township Committee shall then decide the proper
review fee to be charged, based upon information provided by
both the developer and the Planning Board. If the matter is
not resolved to the satisfaction of the developer, the developer
may appeal to the County Construction Board of Appeals,
established under P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127), any
charge to an escrow account or a deposit by any municipal
professional or consultant pursuant to the procedure set forth
in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2.
C. Inspection fees. [Amended 7-19-1993 by Ord. No. 21-93;
12-18-1995 by Ord. No. 38-95]
(1) Amount of fees; installment payments.
(a) The inspection fee deposit shall be the greater of $500 or 5% of
the estimated cost of improvements as set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53h. Payment shall be made prior to the start of
construction. [Amended 5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 12-01]
(b) For those developments for which the reasonably anticipated
inspection fees are less than $10,000, fees may, at the option of
the developer, be paid in two installments. The initial amount
deposited shall be 50% of the reasonably anticipated fees as
calculated by the Township Engineer. When the balance on
deposit drops to 10% of the reasonably anticipated fees
because the amount deposited by the developer has been
reduced by payments to the Township Engineer and Attorneys
in connection with inspections, the developer shall deposit the
remaining 50% of the anticipated fees immediately upon
receipt of a request from the Chief Financial Officer.
(c) For those developments for which the reasonably anticipated
inspection fees are $10,000 or greater, fees may, at the option
of the developer, be paid in four installments. The initial
amount deposited by a developer shall be 25% of the
reasonably anticipated fees as calculated by the Township
Engineer. When the balance on deposit drops to 10% of the
reasonably anticipated fees because the amount deposited by
the developer has been reduced by payments to the Township
Engineer and Attorneys in connection with inspections, the
developer shall make additional deposits of 25% of the
reasonably anticipated fees. The Township Engineer shall not
perform any inspection except required health and safety
§ 175-11 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-11
155:550
inspections if sufficient funds to pay for those inspections are
not on deposit.
(2) Tabulation and appeal of inspection fees.
D. Fees for inspection of fire-protection systems installed pursuant to
§ 175-50. The inspection fee shall be $175 per tank, which shall cover
all inspections prior to acceptance of the fire-protection system by the
Township. Payment shall be made at the same time as the engineering
inspection fees. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 18-02]
(1) The Chief Financial Officer shall tabulate the costs of the Township
Engineer, attorneys, their staff and any outside consultants
required for construction inspection and related costs. Related
costs shall include travel time, conferences and review of plans
relating to inspection and engineering/attorney costs relating to
developer's agreements, including extension agreements, deeds,
posting of guaranties, release of guaranties, acceptance and any
other out-of-pocket costs related thereto. The costs shall be
pursuant to vouchers submitted by the professionals identifying the
personnel performing the service and stating the date the services
were performed, the hours spent to one-fourth-hour increments,
the hourly rate and expenses incurred. All such charges and costs
shall be established by resolution of the governing body. Vouchers
shall be submitted monthly to the Chief Financial Officer with a
copy to the developer. The cost shall be deducted by the Chief
Financial Officer from the inspection fee deposit and paid to the
professionals by the Chief Financial Officer. Where the reasonable
and necessary inspection costs exceed or are anticipated to exceed
the inspection fee deposit, the developer shall pay the additional
amount within 15 days of request by the Chief Financial Officer.
(2) The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare and send to the developer
a statement which shall include an accounting of funds listing all
deposits, interest earnings, disbursements and the cumulative
balance of the inspection fee deposit account. This statement shall
be provided quarterly, if monthly charges are $1,000 or less, or
monthly, if monthly charges exceed $1,000.
(3) After the improvements have been approved by the Township
Committee, the developer shall send written notice, by certified
mail, to the Chief Financial Officer and the Planning Board, the
Township Engineer and other relevant professional that the
application is complete. After receipt of such notice, the Engineer
and/or other professional shall submit a final voucher to the Chief
Financial Officer within 30 days with a copy to the developer. The
Chief Financial Officer shall render a written final accounting to
the developer on the status of the inspection fee escrow within 45
days of receipt of the final bill, together with any balance remaining
in the account, including interest in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53-1.
§ 175-11 SEWERS § 175-11
155:551
§ 175-12. Construction permits and certificates of occupancy.
[Amended 5-18-1981 by Ord. No. 16-81; 4-15-2002 by Ord. No.
14-0293]
(4) Within 15 days of the tabulation of costs of inspections and
notification of the developer of such costs by the Chief Financial
Officer, the developer shall have the right to appeal the same by so
notifying the Township Committee, in writing, with copies to the
Chief Financial Officer, the Planning Board and any relevant
professional, provided that any costs required to be paid prior to
the start of construction or prior to any inspection shall be paid
prior to the commencement of any such appeal. Upon receipt of
such appeal, the Township Administrator shall review the same and
make a recommendation thereon to the Township Committee
within 45 days. The Township Committee shall then decide the
proper inspection fee to be charged based upon information
provided by both the developer and the Township Administrator. If
the matter is not resolved to the satisfaction of the developer, the
developer may appeal to the County Construction Board of Appeals
established under P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127) any
charge to an inspection fee account or a deposit by an municipal
professional or consultant pursuant to the procedure set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2.
A. No construction permits before final approval.
(1) No construction permit shall be issued in the subdivision or section
thereof for which final approval was obtained until the complete
installation of all required improvements, including the filing with
the Township Engineer of all as-built plans and profiles of all
utilities, including stormwater management facilities, with a
certification as to the actual construction, except the following:
(a) The final bituminous surface course of streets;
(b) Sidewalks;
(c) Dry wells and swales as may be required;
(d) Monuments;
(e) Shade trees; and
(f) Detention basin landscaping.
(2) The subdivider should complete all top-course paving, sidewalks,
shade trees and landscaping prior to the onset of cold weather
conditions, which preclude their proper installation.
93.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that any subdivision which received
preliminary subdivision approval prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall be
exempt from the provisions of this ordinance.
§ 175-11 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-12
155:552
§ 175-13. Conditional approvals.
B. Certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy for any dwelling,
building or structure shall be granted unless all required improvements
in the subdivision or section thereof for which final approval was
obtained have been installed or completed, except as noted below.
C. Exception. A certificate of occupancy may be issued if all improvements
for the subdivision or section thereof for which final approval was
obtained have been installed or completed, except for those listed in
§ 175-12A(1)(a) through (f), provided that the final 10% (rounded up to
the next whole numeral) of the certificates of occupancy for all lots in
the subdivision or a section thereof, as the case may be, shall not issue
until the completion of all improvements in the subdivision or section
thereof for which final approval was obtained, to the satisfaction of the
Township Engineer. The maintenance guaranty period required by
§ 175-36 shall not begin until all of the improvements have been
accepted by the Township.
D. Waiver. Pursuant to a written request demonstrating extraordinary
circumstances, the Township Engineer may waive the requirements of
§ 175-12C with respect to the issuance of the final 10% of certificates of
occupancy provided that the Township Engineer finds that:
(1) The incomplete improvement(s) is of a minor nature;
(2) Completion has been delayed for reasons beyond the control of the
subdivider, which reasons shall exclude cold weather conditions;
and
(3) The incomplete improvement(s) does not adversely impact the
health, safety or welfare of the residents of the subdivision and the
municipality.
A. In the event that a developer submits an application for subdivision
approval proposing a development that is barred or prevented, directly
or indirectly, by a legal action instituted by any state agency, political
subdivision or other party to protect the public health and welfare or by
a directive or order issued by any state agency, political subdivision or
court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public health and welfare,
the Planning Board shall process such application in accordance with
this chapter and, if such application complies with all Township
regulations, the Planning Board shall approve such application
conditioned on removal of such legal barrier to development.
B. In the event that development proposed by an application for
subdivision approval requires an approval by a governmental agency
other than the Planning Board, the Planning Board shall, in appropriate
instances, condition its approval upon the subsequent approval of such
governmental agency. The Planning Board shall make a decision on any
application for subdivision approval within the time period provided in
§ 175-12 SEWERS § 175-13
155:553
§ 175-14. Period of approval extended.
In the event that during the period of approval heretofore or hereafter
granted to an application for subdivision approval the developer is barred
or prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
otherwise permitted under such approval by a legal action instituted by
any state agency, political subdivision or other party to protect the public
health and welfare or by a directive or order issued by any state agency,
political subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public
health or welfare and the developer is otherwise ready, willing and able to
proceed with said development, the running of the period of approval under
this chapter shall be suspended for the period of time said legal action is
pending or such directive or order is in effect.
§ 175-15. Planning Board review in lieu of Board of Adjustment.
[Amended 5-18-1981 by Ord. No. 16-81]
The Planning Board, when reviewing applications for subdivision, shall have
the power to grant, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions
as the Board of Adjustment, variances from lot area, lot dimensions, setback
and yard requirements. Said variances shall be granted where, by reason
of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of
property or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or by reason
of other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece
of property, the strict application of any zoning regulation would result in
peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue
hardship upon, the developer of such property. The variance granted from
such strict application of such regulation shall relieve such difficulties or
hardship; provided, however, that no variance shall be granted under this
section to allow a structure or use in a district restricted against such
structure or use.
this chapter or within an extension of such period as has been agreed
to by the applicant unless the Planning Board is prevented or relieved
from so acting by the operation of law.
§ 175-13 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-15
155:554
ARTICLE III
Hearings, Notices, Decisions and Appeals
§ 175-16. When required.
§ 175-17. Maps, documents and exhibits on file.
A complete set of maps, documents and exhibits shall be on file at least 10
days prior to the date of the hearing at the office of the Planning Board.
§ 175-18. Public notice of application.
A. Hearings shall be required as part of preliminary approval for all major
subdivisions.
B. Public notice only to property owners set forth in § 175-18C(12) shall be
required for a minor subdivision proposing to create one or more flag
lots.
A. When required. A public notice shall be required for preliminary
approval of all major subdivision applications and approval of all minor
subdivision applications requiring a zoning variance to be granted by
the Planning Board.
B. Contents of notice. Notices shall state the date, time and place of the
hearing, the nature of the matters to be considered and an
identification of the property proposed for subdivision by street
address, if any, or by reference to lot and block numbers as shown on
the current tax duplicate in the Township Tax Assessor's office, and the
location and times at which any maps and documents for which
approval is sought are available.
C. To whom notice is required; how served. The applicant shall be required
to give public notice as follows:
(1) By publication in the official newspaper of the Township.
(2) The owners of all real property as shown on the current tax
duplicate, located within 200 feet in all directions of the entire
property which is the subject of such hearing.
(3) Notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on the property
owner as shown on said current tax duplicate, or his agent in
charge of the property, or by mailing a copy thereof, by certified
mail, to the property owner at his address as shown on said current
tax duplicate.
(4) Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any
partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon
its president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized
by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation.
§ 175-16 SEWERS § 175-18
155:555
(5) Upon the written request of an applicant and payment of $10, the
Township Clerk shall, within seven days, make and certify a list
from said current tax duplicates of names and addresses of owners
to whom the applicant is required to give notice. The applicant
shall be entitled to rely upon the information contained in such list,
and failure to give notice to any owner not on the list shall not
invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
(6) Notice of all hearings on applications for subdivision approval
involving property located within 200 feet of an adjoining
municipality shall be given, by personal service or certified mail, to
the Clerk of such municipality.
(7) Notice shall be given, by personal service or certified mail, to the
County Planning Board of a hearing on an application for
subdivision approval of property adjacent to an existing county
road or proposed road shown on the Official County Map or on the
County Master Plan, adjoining other county land or situated within
200 feet of a municipal boundary.
(8) Notice shall be given, by personal service or certified mail, to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
subdivision approval of property adjacent to a state highway.
(9) Notice shall be given, by personal service or certified mail, to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning of a hearing
on an application for subdivision approval of property which
exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling units. Such notice shall include
a copy of any maps or documents required to be on file with the
Planning Board pursuant to § 175-17.
(10) The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof(s) of service with the
Planning Board on the application for subdivision.
(11) Any notice made by certified mail shall be deemed complete upon
mailing.
(12) When required by the Minor Subdivision Committee of the
Planning Board, in those instances where there may be an effect of
prohibiting future flag lots on nearby lots, a minor subdivision
applicant with flag lots will be required to serve notice to owners of
real property on the same side of the street as the proposed flag lot
or lots and within a distance in either direction of any proposed flag
lot equal to twice the minimum lot width for the zone, per the
Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements in Chapter 217,
Zoning.94 [Added 4-21-1986 by Ord. No. 8-86]
94.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 16-4.4, Decisions, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 10-20-1980 by Ord. No. 44-80.
§ 175-18 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-18
155:556
ARTICLE IV
Procedure for Subdivision Approval
§ 175-19. Applicant to attain approval.
Any applicant wishing to subdivide or resubdivide land within the Township
of Washington shall apply for and obtain the approval of the Planning
Board in accordance with the following procedure. The applicant or his
agent shall appear at all regular meetings of the Planning Board whenever
the application is being considered. Failure to appear shall constitute
withdrawal without prejudice; provided, however, that the Board may waive
said failure to appear for good cause shown. The Planning Board may act on
minor subdivisions without the applicant or his agent being present.
§ 175-20. Submission of sketch plat. [Amended 6-18-1979 by Ord.
No. 56-79; 2-18-1980 by Ord. No. 2-80; 8-18-1986 by Ord. No.
26-86]
§ 175-21. Submission of minor subdivision. [Added 8-18-1986 by
Ord. No. 26-86]
A. Procedure. An applicant for the subdivision of land may submit to the
Planning Board Clerk an application for subdivision, the required
application fee as specified in § 175-11 herein and sufficient copies of a
sketch plat and reverse line sepia containing the information required
in Article V, Plat Details.
B. Recommendation. After review, the Planning Board may make
recommendations to the developer as to the suitability of the proposed
development or, if alternate proposals are offered, which proposal is
preferred.
A. Procedure. The applicant shall submit applications and plat in number
and forms as required by Chapter 111, Land Use Procedures, § 111-9,
and official forms. The Planning Board Clerk shall retain two copies of
the plat and forward copies of the plat to the following for review and
comment:
(1) The Township Engineer.
(2) The County Planning Board.
(3) The Township Health Officer.
(4) The Township Construction Official.
(5) The Township Tax Assessor.
(6) Other agencies as may be determined.
B. The Chairman shall determine whether applications are to be heard by
the full Planning Board or its Minor Subdivision Committee. (See
Chapter 111, Land Use Procedures, § 111-12.)
§ 175-19 SEWERS § 175-21
155:557
C. The Planning Board or the Minor Subdivision Committee shall have the
authority to approve a minor subdivision without the necessity of such
referral to other agencies as may be designated pursuant to Subsection
A(6).
D. In order to facilitate review of subdivisions, the applicant or his
representative must be available to walk the tract with the
representative of the Planning Board or Minor Subdivision Committee
or, alternatively, must have all boundaries and proposed boundaries
clearly marked so that they may be readily ascertained by such
representatives.
E. Action.
(1) The Planning Board or the Minor Subdivision Committee shall not
approve or conditionally approve the minor subdivision until either
receipt of comments by the above agencies or officials or the lapse
of 30 days from referral without any comments, whichever comes
first.
(2) Where there is a question of the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors such as rock formations, soil
conditions, steep slopes, streams, watercourses, flood conditions,
high-water table and/or other environmentally sensitive factors,
the Planning Board or the Minor Subdivision Committee may
require the applicant to submit information satisfactory to it on any
or all of the above factors. Upon receipt and review of the above
information, it shall have the right to grant approval conditional on
one or all of the following:
(a) Compliance with specific actions to render the lot(s) suitable
for the intended use.
(b) Compliance with specific drainage and/or conservation
easements restricting portions of the lot(s) from the intended
use.
(c) Compliance with construction and/or design techniques which
would render the proposed structure compatible with the
specific unsuitability factor, including but not limited to slab
construction or foundation piling.
(3) If approved, a notation to that effect shall be made on the plat, and
it shall be signed by the Chairman of the Planning Board or Minor
Subdivision Committee and the Planning Board Clerk and returned
to the subdivider when the provisions of Subsection H have been
met. No approval shall be granted unless the applicant secures a
statement from the Tax Collector that all taxes have been paid to
date on the property. If rejected, the reasons for rejection shall be
set forth in the resolution of denial.
§ 175-21 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-21
155:558
F. Filing with County Recording Officer. If approved as a minor
subdivision, a plat drawn in compliance with Chapter 141 of the Laws of
196095 or a deed stamped with the date of Planning Board approval
shall be filed with the county recording officer within 190 days from the
date of approval. Failure to file within 190 days shall void said
subdivision approval.
G. Lands resulting from subdivisions. Any lands, lots or parcels resulting
from a minor subdivision, including remaining lands, shall not be
resubmitted as a minor subdivision for a twenty-four-month period from
the date of final approval as a minor subdivision.
H. Approved minor subdivisions; municipal distribution. Before the
Planning Board Clerk returns any approved minor subdivision to the
subdivider, the applicant shall provide the Clerk with a certificate of
filing from the County Clerk's office. The Clerk shall distribute copies of
the approved subdivision to each of the following:
(1) The Township Clerk.
(2) The Township Engineer.
(3) The Township Construction Official.
(4) The Township Tax Assessor.
I. Planning Board action. The Planning Board or Minor Subdivision
Committee shall grant or deny a minor subdivision within 45 days after
submission of a complete application to the Planning Board Clerk or
within such time as may be consented to by the applicant.
J. Effect of minor subdivision approval. The granting of minor subdivision
approval shall guarantee that the zoning requirements and general
terms and conditions, whether conditional or otherwise, upon which
minor subdivision approval was granted shall not be changed for a
period of two years after the date of minor subdivision approval,
provided that the approved minor subdivision shall have been duly
recorded.
K. Developer's agreement. The Planning Board may require, as a condition
of subdivision approval, that the developer enter into an agreement
with the Township with regard to compliance with Township ordinances
and such other matters, including but not limited to the installation of
any public improvements which may be required pursuant to the
resolution of subdivision approval. The developer's agreement, which
shall be drafted by the Township Attorney, shall be executed by all
parties and accepted by the Township Committee prior to the
commencement of any construction. [Added 12-21-1998 by Ord. No.
42-98]
95.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 175-21 SEWERS § 175-22
155:559
§ 175-22. Submission of major subdivision for preliminary approval.
A. Submission. Legible prints of the plat containing all data required in
Article V, Plat Details, together with application forms and checklist for
preliminary approval, and all appropriate fees as required in § 175-11
herein shall be submitted to the Planning Board Clerk at least two
weeks prior to the regular Planning Board meeting at which it is to be
considered. The Planning Board shall determine at that meeting
whether a complete application with all required exhibits has been
submitted. If not, the applicant shall be so notified, in writing, by the
Planning Board Clerk within 45 days of the original submission of said
application.96 [Amended 11-18-1996 by Ord. No. 30-96]
B. Distribution. Copies of the preliminary plat and exhibits shall be
forwarded immediately upon receipt to the following persons:
[Amended 11-18-1996 by Ord. No. 30-96]
(1) The Township Engineer.
(2) The Township Planner.
(3) The Township Board of Health.
(4) The Township Construction Code Official.
(5) The County Planning Board.
(6) The Subdivision Committee.
(7) The Municipal Utilities Authority.
(8) The Police Department.
(9) The Fire Department.
(10) The Township Environmental Consultant.
(11) Any other official or agency which may be affected by the proposed
subdivision or required to be notified by law.
C. Review. The officials and agencies cited in Subsection B shall forward
their views and recommendations, in writing, to the Planning Board
within 30 days from the receipt of the plat. The preliminary plat shall be
referred to the Subdivision Committee for review and
recommendations. The Subdivision Committee may recommend certain
changes based on their review and the comments of other officials and
agencies. A full report of all meetings, recommendations and
discussions shall be forwarded to the Planning Board within 30 days
after receipt of the plat by the Committee. [Amended 11-18-1996 by
Ord. No. 30-96]
96.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 16-5.3b, Exhibits Required with Preliminary Plat, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 11-18-1996 by Ord. No. 30-96.
§ 175-22 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-22
155:560
D. Notice of public hearing. After all comments have been received, or
after 30 days have elapsed, and after the applicant has revised the plat
to meet required changes, the Planning Board shall, after a review of
said plat and if all requirements are met and said application is
complete, set the date for the public hearing in accordance with Article
III, Hearings, Notices, Decisions and Appeals, and shall notify the
subdivider of such date. [Amended 11-18-1996 by Ord. No. 30-96]
E. Exhibits required prior to scheduling of public hearing. Prior to
scheduling the public hearing, the following shall be submitted to the
Planning Board by the applicant: [Amended 5-18-1981 by Ord. No.
16-81; 11-18-1996 by Ord. No. 30-96]
(1) Water supplier. Where public water is proposed for the subdivision,
the applicant shall submit a letter from the water supplier stating
that the water system, as proposed, is adequate for the
development and all future extensions thereof. The letter shall
state the present number of users expressed in equivalent single
family homes, the present safe daily yield of the system, the
expected demand by the development on the system, the current
demand of existing users, and the remaining safe daily yield of the
system at the minimum sustained pressure specified by the fire
underwriters.
(2) Fire Department. Where public water is proposed for the
subdivision, the applicant shall submit a letter from the Fire
Department signed by the Chief of the Department stating that the
proposed waterlines and fire hydrants are adequate for protection
from fire in the proposed development and that the type of hydrant
to be installed has been approved by them.
(3) Municipal Utilities Authority. A letter from the Municipal Utilities
Authority approving any proposed connections to the public
sewage disposal system. The letter shall indicate the present
number of users, expressed in equivalent single-family homes, the
present daily flow, the total capacity of the system and the decrease
in excess capacity as a result of the development.
(4) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, in the
case of all proposed subdivisions within a residential district,
approved percolation tests and soil logs in accordance with the
provisions of § 175-27.
F. Time limitation.
(1) The Planning Board shall act on the plat within 45 days after
submission of a complete application including all fees, maps and
exhibits for 10 or fewer lots and within 95 days for a subdivision of
more than 10 lots. If the application for development is found to be
incomplete, the developer shall be notified within 45 days of
submission or it shall be deemed to be properly submitted. Failure
§ 175-22 SEWERS § 175-22
155:561
of the Planning Board to act within the above time periods or within
a time extension mutually agreed upon shall be considered an
approval. If the Planning Board disapproves a plat, the reasons for
the disapproval shall be communicated, in writing, to the applicant
within 10 days of the date of the decision and advertised. No action
shall be taken until receipt of County Planning Board review or
until 30 days have elapsed from date of referral to the county.
(2) If substantial changes or amendments are required as a result of
the public hearing or of the Planning Board deliberations, the
applicant may be required to resubmit the plat for preliminary
approval.
G. Planning Board action. The Planning Board shall approve, conditionally
approve or reject the application. Approval or conditional approval
confers upon the applicant the following rights for a three-year period
from the date of approval or conditional approval:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements, layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks, lot size, yard dimensions and off-tract
improvements, except that nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent the Township from modifying by ordinance such general
terms and conditions of preliminary approval as relate to public
health and safety.
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat.
(3) Other required approvals. If either the Planning Board or County
Planning Board disapproves a plat, the reasons for disapproval
shall be remedied prior to further consideration. If approval is
required by any other officer or public body, the same procedure as
applies to submission and approval by the County Planning Board
shall apply. The Planning Board may grant conditional approval
subject to the subsequent approval of other officers or public
bodies.
(4) Signatures. If the Planning Board favorably acts and grants
preliminary approval, the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning
Board shall affix their signatures to the plat with a notation that it
has received preliminary approval and shall return the same to the
subdivider for compliance with final approval requirements. Where
conditional approval is granted, the Chairman and the Secretary of
the Planning Board shall affix their signatures to the plat only when
all conditions required for approval have been met.
H. Extension.
§ 175-22 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-22
155:562
(1) The applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year but not to exceed a total extension of two years,
provided that if the design standards have been revised by
ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
(2) In the case of a subdivision for an area of 50 acres or more, the
Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in Subsection G
above for such period of time longer than three years as shall be
determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable, taking into
consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under preliminary approval; economic conditions;
and the comprehensiveness of the development. The applicant may
apply for thereafter and the Planning Board may thereafter grant
an extension to preliminary approval for such additional period of
time as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be
reasonable, taking into consideration the above factors, provided
that if the design standards have been revised, such revised
standards may be required by the Planning Board.
I. Modification of general terms and conditions of preliminary subdivision
approval. [Added 8-16-1982 by Ord. No. 19-82]
(1) The following design standards, improvements designed pursuant
to the same and improvements (among others) are specifically
found to be related to and required for the protection of public
health and safety: those set forth in:
(a) Section 175-46E.
(b) Section 175-49.
(c) Section 175-34A.
(d) Section 175-34I.
(e) Section 175-27R.
(f) Section 175-27T.
(g) Section 175-34C(7). [Added 7-17-1989 by Ord. No. 18-89]
(h) Section 175-50. [Added 7-17-1989 by Ord. No. 18-89]
(2) The general terms and conditions of all preliminary subdivision
approvals prior to any date of enactment or modification of any
section referred to in Subsection I(1) above are hereby modified to
require improvements and measures to conform to such sections.
This section shall not apply to subdivisions which have heretofore
received final subdivision approval.
J. Developer's agreement. The Planning Board may require, as a condition
of preliminary subdivision approval, that the developer enter into an
§ 175-22 SEWERS § 175-22
155:563
§ 175-23. Submission of final plat of major subdivision.
agreement with the Township with regard to compliance with Township
ordinances and such other matters, including but not limited to the
installation of any public improvements which may be required
pursuant to the resolution of preliminary subdivision approval. The
developer's agreement, which shall be drafted by the Township
Attorney, shall be executed by all parties and accepted by the Township
Committee prior to the commencement of any construction. [Added
12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 42-98]
A. Submission.
(1) The final plat shall be submitted to the Planning Board for final
approval within three years from the date of preliminary plan
approval or within such extension as provided in § 175-22I.
(2) One original tracing, one translucent cloth copy, two cloth prints
and 10 black-and-white prints with three copies of an application
for final approval and the appropriate fees as required in § 175-11
herein shall be submitted to the Planning Board Clerk at least two
weeks prior to the regular meeting of the Planning Board.
(3) The final plat, detailed drawings, specifications and estimates shall
have incorporated all changes required by the Board, including
conditions of preliminary approval and all changes required by
§ 175-22J. The applicant shall submit a statement indicating the
required changes, if any, and that the final plat, detailed drawings,
specifications and estimates comply with the following sections as
amended to date: [Amended 8-16-1982 by Ord. No. 19-82]
(a) Section 175-46E.
(b) Section 175-49.
(c) Section 175-34A.
(d) Section 175-34I.
(e) Section 175-27R.
(f) Section 175-27T.
(g) Section 175-34C(7). [Added 7-17-1989 by Ord. No. 18-89]
(h) Section 175-50. [Added 7-17-1989 by Ord. No. 18-89]
(4) There shall also be submitted to the Planning Board an original and
two copies of an affidavit, signed and sworn to by the applicant,
that the final plat is drawn and presented exactly the same as the
preliminary plat approved by the Planning Board, and if there are
any changes, all such changes shall be set forth in the affidavit as
exceptions to the general statement.
§ 175-22 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-23
155:564
B. Exhibits required prior to final approval. The following exhibits shall
constitute part of the application for final approval, in addition to any
other exhibits that may have been required by the Board as a condition
of final approval:
(1) Township Engineer. A letter from the Township Engineer
indicating:
(a) That the Engineer is in receipt of a map showing all utilities in
exact location and elevation identifying those portions already
installed and those to be installed.
(b) That the installation or construction of improvements has been
accomplished in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter and Township specifications.
(c) In the event that improvements remain to be installed or
constructed, the Township Engineer shall submit to the
Planning Board a copy of the letter to the Township Clerk
listing the improvements and costs thereof to be covered by a
performance guaranty.
(d) All items and amounts required for the corporate surety
maintenance guaranty.
(e) That the final plat conforms to the preliminary plat as
submitted and approved.
(2) Board of Health. Letter from the Township Board of Health stating
that for each proposed lot, percolation tests meeting all standards
of § 175-27; and Board of Health requirements have been
performed and acceptable soil log and other data required by said
section have been received. [Amended 10-19-1981 by Ord. No.
36-81]
(3) Tax Collector. That all taxes have been paid to date on the property.
(4) Clerk.
(a) A letter from the Township Clerk indicating that the amount,
form and content of the performance guaranty has been
accepted by the governing body and that a developer's
agreement has been properly executed.
(b) A letter from the Township Clerk, where appropriate, pursuant
to § 175-38 of this chapter, that moneys as provided therein
have been paid the Township as reimbursal for construction
inspection costs incurred since preliminary approval.
(c) That deeds have been received, free and clear of all mortgages
and encumbrances, for land or improvements to be turned over
to the Township.
§ 175-23 SEWERS § 175-23
155:565
(d) A letter indicating that a maintenance agreement for all
completed and accepted improvements has been posted and
accepted.
(e) The Planning Board may require some or all of the above
information in conjunction with preliminary approval or as a
precondition for final plat execution. [Added 10-19-1981 by
Ord. No. 36-81]
(5) Water supplier and utilities authority. The applicant shall submit
current letters from the water supplier and appropriate utilities
authority updating the information required in § 175-22F of this
chapter. [Amended 11-18-1996 by Ord. No. 30-96]
C. Distribution. Copies of the final plat shall be distributed to the
following:
(1) The Planning Board Clerk.
(2) The Township Engineer.
(3) The Township Construction Official.
(4) The Township Tax Assessor.
(5) The County Planning Board.
(6) The Township Board of Health and/or Municipal Utilities Authority.
(7) Other municipal and county agencies or authorities as may be
required.
D. Review. No action shall be taken until such time as the above officials
review said plat or 30 days has elapsed from date of referral.
E. Time limitation.
(1) The Planning Board shall act within 45 days of submission of a
completed application, at a regular meeting, or within such further
time as may be mutually agreed upon. If the Planning Board
approves the final plat, a notation to that effect shall be made on
each plat and signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the
Planning Board.
(2) Failure of the Planning Board to act within the allotted time or a
mutually agreed-upon extension shall be deemed to be favorable
approval, and the Township Clerk shall issue a certificate to that
effect.
F. County Planning Board. Any plat which requires County Planning Board
approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-6 2 shall be forwarded to the
County Planning Board for its action. The Planning Board may grant
final approval subject to approval by the County Planning Board.
§ 175-23 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-23
155:566
G. Filing.
(1) The final plat approval shall be filed by the subdivider with the
county recording officer within 95 days from the date of such
approval. If any final plat is not filed within that period, the
approval shall expire. For good cause shown, the Planning Board
may extend the period for filing for an additional period not to
exceed 190 days from the date of signing of the plat.
(2) No plat shall be accepted for filing by the Clerk of the County of
Morris unless it has been duly approved by the Township of
Washington Planning Board and signed by its Chairman and
Secretary.
H. Effect of final approval. The granting of final approval shall confer upon
the applicant that the zoning requirements applicable to the
preliminary approval first granted and all other rights conferred upon
the developer, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed
for a period of two years after the date of final approval; provided,
however, that these rights shall expire if the plat has not been duly
recorded within the prescribed time period.
I. Extensions.
(1) If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final
approval and has duly recorded the plat as required by this chapter,
the Planning Board may extend such period of protection for
extensions of one year, but not to exceed three extensions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the granting
of final approval terminates the time period of preliminary approval
for the section granted final approval.
(2) In the case of a subdivision for 150 acres or more, the Planning
Board may grant the rights referred to in § 175-23H of this chapter
for such period of time longer than two years as shall be
determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable, taking into
consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under final approval, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development. The developer may apply
for thereafter and the Planning Board may thereafter grant an
extension of final approval for such additional period of time as
shall be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable, taking
into consideration the above factors.
J. Developer's agreement. The Planning Board may require, as a condition
of final subdivision approval, that the developer enter into an
addendum to the developer's agreement executed at the time of
preliminary approval pursuant to § 175-22J of this chapter. The
addendum agreement, which shall be drafted by the Township Attorney,
shall be executed by all parties and accepted by the Township
Committee prior to the exercise by the developer of any rights
§ 175-23 SEWERS § 175-23
155:567
conferred by final subdivision approval. [Added 12-21-1998 by Ord.
No. 42-98]
§ 175-23 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-23
155:568
ARTICLE V
Plat Details
§ 175-24. Size requirements. [Amended 2-20-1989 by Ord. No. 1-89]
All maps, plats and sketch plats required to be submitted by this chapter
shall be 24 inches by 36 inches in size.
§ 175-25. Sketch plats.
All plats shall be based on accurate information at a scale of not more
than one inch equals 100 feet and shall show or include the following
information, except that the Planning Board may waive any requirement or
request additional information where, in its judgment, it is necessary to the
particular application.
A. Location and key map. The entire tract to be subdivided, giving the
accurate location of all existing and proposed property and street lines,
including a key map at a scale where one inch equals 500 feet, showing
the entire subdivision, including proposed street layouts, and its
relation to all features shown on the Official Map and Master Plan,
including greenway plan and trails, and located within 1/2 mile of the
extreme limits of the subdivision and of adjacent land. All existing flag
lots or those which have received preliminary approval within 500 feet
on the same side of the street shall be shown. [Amended 6-18-1979
by Ord. No. 54-79; 12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 36-00; 9-20-2004 by
Ord. No. 22-04]
B. Structures, wooded areas, topography and soil information. [Amended
2-18-1980 by Ord. No. 3-80; 6-19-1995 by Ord. No. 18-95;
12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 36-00]
(1) The location of existing houses, buildings and other structures,
with accurate dimensions from all existing and proposed lot lines,
topography, delineated flood hazard areas, buffer zones, wetlands
and transition areas, ridgelines, minimum improvable lot areas and
soils information within the portion to be subdivided and within 200
feet thereof. The limits of wooded areas location/species/condition
of all trees 10 inches or more in diameter measured 4.5 feet from
the grade where said trees are in the area of proposed disturbance
plus 50 feet surrounding the proposed area of disturbance. For all
tracts with slopes in excess of 15%, slope information shall be
submitted per Chapter 217, Zoning, § 217-38, Steep slopes and
ridge protection. [Amended 8-20-2001 by Ord. No. 22-01]
(2) Topography shall be at a two-foot contour interval. Soils
information shall be shown on the plat with soils classifications and
boundaries per the Soil Survey of Morris County, New Jersey,
prepared by the Soil Conservation Service of the United States
Department of Agriculture. In addition, a tally in each class so
§ 175-24 SEWERS § 175-25
155:569
§ 175-26. Information required for minor subdivision plats.
designated shall be provided. [Amended 2-15-2010 by Ord. No.
05-10]
C. Owners. The name of the owner, all adjoining property owners and
those across existing or proposed streets as disclosed by the most
recent municipal tax records.
D. Identity. The Tax Map sheet, date of revision, block and lot numbers and
zone district.
E. Streets, easements, watercourses and rights-of-way. The location of
existing and/or proposed streets, roads, utility poles and pole numbers,
easements, public rights-of-way, streams, bridges, culverts, drainage
ditches and natural watercourses in and within 200 feet of the
subdivision. [Amended 2-18-1980 by Ord. No. 4-80]
F. Lots. The original and proposed lot layout, lot dimensions, all required
setback lines and lot areas of each lot in square feet and acreage. Flag
lots shall include individual area of lot exclusive of flagstaff. Lots shall
be designated by letter, for minor subdivisions and by consecutive
numbers for major subdivisions until given official lot number
designations by the Township. For minor subdivisions, house numbers
as approved by the Construction Code Official shall be shown for all
lots. [Amended 7-15-1985 by Ord. No. 25-85; 6-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 18-95]
G. Wetlands. Wetlands and their classification shall be delineated per
§ 175-27V. [Added 8-19-1991 by Ord. No. 26-91]
H. Percolation/permeability tests. In the event that public sewers are not
available and individual septic systems are proposed, the sketch plat
shall show the following information: [Amended 12-18-1978 by Ord.
No. 34-78; 8-19-1991 by Ord. No. 26-91]
(1) Major subdivisions. For all proposed lots in Califon, Cokesbury and
other soils with severe septic limitations, as set forth in the soil
survey for Morris County, satisfactory percolation/permeability
tests and soil logs per § 175-27J.
(2) Minor subdivisions. Satisfactory percolation/permeability tests and
soil logs per § 175-27J.
I. Other information.
(1) The date of original preparation and date of revision, if any, of plat,
as well as old name if submitted previously under different title.
(2) A statement that the applicant intends to submit a full development
impact statement or a statement setting forth specific reasons why
the applicant requests a waiver of all or part of the requirements
for a development impact statement.97
§ 175-25 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-26
155:570
A. If the sketch plat is being submitted for minor subdivision approval, it
shall contain the information required under § 175-25 and shall be a
certified survey map drawn by a licensed New Jersey land surveyor. It
shall include a zoning table which compares the land use, density,
setback distances and any other related data between that which is
required in the Municipal Zoning Ordinance98 and that which is
proposed on the subdivision plat. The plat shall provide for
endorsement by the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board. If
the plat is to be filed in accordance with § 175-21F, it shall meet the
requirements of the Map Filing Act.99 [Amended 9-20-2004 by Ord.
No. 22-04]
B. Where there is a question of the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors such as rock formations, soil conditions,
steep slopes, streams, watercourses, flood conditions, diversion or
increase of water onto nearby properties, high-water table and/or other
environmentally sensitive factors, the Planning Board may require the
applicant to submit information satisfactory to the Planning Board on
any or all of the above factors. Upon receipt and review of the above
information, the Planning Board shall have the right to grant approval
conditional on one or both of the following: [Amended 5-10-1989 by
Ord. No. 14-89; 6-20-1994 by Ord. No. 10-94]
(1) Compliance with specific actions to remedy the lot(s) suitable for
the intended use.
(2) Compliance with specific drainage and/or conservation easements
restricting portions of the lot(s) from the intended use.
(3) For Cokesbury, Califon Turbotville, alluvial and muck soils,
compliance with the Shimel Report, a copy of which is on file at the
Planning Board office.
C. The minor subdivision plat shall show the following driveway
information to assist in the required driveway permit application:
[Added 3-20-1989 by Ord. No. 5-89]
(1) Driveway location, utilizing dimensions from utility poles.
(2) Speed limit along street.
(3) Sight distance in each direction, measured in accordance with
Chapter 172, Streets and Sidewalks, § 172-20C.
(4) Details of clearing/excavation, if required, to achieve sight
distance.
97.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 16-6.2j, regarding recreation plans, which immediately
followed this subsection, added 6-17-1991 by Ord. No. 16-91, was repealed 8-21-1995 by
Ord. No. 27-95.
98.Editor's Note: See Ch. 217, Zoning.
99.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 175-26 SEWERS § 175-26
155:571
§ 175-27. Plat submitted for preliminary approval. [Amended
6-18-1979 by Ord. No. 54-79]
The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at
a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. Preliminary plats shall
be drawn by a licensed New Jersey professional engineer or land surveyor.
Contour maps and preliminary construction plans, including road profiles
and utility plans, shall be submitted as part of the preliminary plat. Separate
maps may be required by the Board for topography, utilities and road
details. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan and a grading plan
of at least one inch equals 100 feet shall be included. The grading plan
shall show the existing, as well as the proposed, contours. The plat shall be
designed in compliance with the provisions of Article VII, Design Standards,
and shall show or be accompanied by the following information:
(5) Typical location of dwelling and alignment of driveway from
dwelling to street. Show driveway center line radius for all bends.
(6) Proposed dimensions and type of construction, including pavement
limits per Chapter 172, Streets and Sidewalks, Article III, Driveway
Construction.
(7) Center-line profile showing existing and proposed grades at fiftyfoot
intervals where grades exceed 8%.
(8) Proposed drainage improvements.
(9) Erosion control improvements for all designs exceeding 8%, both
temporary and permanent.
(10) Proposed easements for multiple-use driveways and note
indicating mutual maintenance agreements to be provided.
(11) Note indicating that it shall comply with all applicable portions of
Chapter 172, Streets and Sidewalks, Article III, Driveway
Construction.
A. Location and key map. The entire tract to be subdivided, giving the
accurate location of all existing and proposed property and street lines,
including a key map at a scale where one inch equals 400 feet, showing
the entire subdivision, including proposed street and lot layouts, and its
relation to all features shown on the Official Map and Master Plan,
including overlay zones, greenway plans, trails, limestone areas,
acquifer recharge areas, public wells and prior major subdivisions and
located within 1/2 mile of the extreme limits of the subdivision and the
zoning classifications of the proposed subdivision and of adjacent land.
All existing flag lots or those which have received preliminary approval
within 500 feet on the same side of the street shall be shown.
[Amended 6-18-1979 by Ord. No. 54-79; 12-18-2000 by Ord. No.
36-00]
§ 175-26 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-27
155:572
B. Proposed lots. Lot layout, lot dimensions, all required setback lines and
individual lot areas in square feet and acreage. Flag lots shall include
individual area of lot exclusive of flagstaff. Lots shall be designated by
consecutive letters until given an official lot number designation by the
Township. House numbers as approved by the Construction Code
Official shall be shown for all lots. [Amended 4-19-1982 by Ord. No.
9-82; 7-15-1985 by Ord. No. 25-85; 6-19-1995 by Ord. No. 18-95]
C. Other contents. The tract name, Tax Map sheet and date or revision,
block and lot numbers, date of plat preparation, reference meridian,
scale, graphic scale and the following names and addresses:
(1) Record owner or owners of property to be subdivided; if other than
an individual, the corporate officers or partners or other statutory
agent.
(2) Subdivider.
(3) Person who prepared the map, Official Seal and license numbers.
(4) Owners of property within 200 feet of entire tract being subdivided.
D. Acreage. Acreage of the tract to be subdivided to the nearest hundredth
of an acre and acreage of streets and/or public areas to be dedicated to
the Township and/or public agencies in feet and acreage. The
preliminary plat shall include a certified survey map drawn by a
licensed New Jersey land surveyor. [Amended 4-17-1989 by Ord. No.
10-89]
E. Topography, elevations and soils information. Sufficient elevations and
contours at two-foot vertical intervals for all slopes to determine the
general slope and natural drainage of the land and the high and low
points for a distance of 200 feet around the entire tract boundary. Soils
information shall be shown on the plat with soils classifications and
boundaries per the Soil Survey of Morris County, New Jersey, prepared
by the Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of
Agriculture. In addition, a tally in each soil's class so designated shall
be provided. For all tracts with slopes in excess of 15%, slope
information shall be submitted per Chapter 217, Zoning, § 217-38,
Steep slopes ridgeline, mountainside, hillside and viewshed protection
areas. [Amended 2-18-1980 by Ord. No. 4-80; 6-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 18-95; 2-15-2010 by Ord. No. 05-10]
F. Existing and proposed locations. The location of existing and proposed
property lines, streets, utility poles and pole numbers, buildings,
watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts, drainpipes, sanitary sewers,
water mains, gas mains, power lines and any natural features such as
rock formations, delineated flood hazard areas and buffers, wetlands
and transition areas, ridgelines and minimum improvable lot areas. The
limits of wooded areas, location/species/condition of all trees 10 inches
or more in diameter measured 4.5 feet from the grade where said trees
are in area of proposed disturbance plus 50 feet surrounding the
§ 175-27 SEWERS § 175-27
155:573
proposed area of disturbance. This data shall be determined by field
and/or photogrammetric survey. [Amended 2-18-1980 by Ord. No.
3-80; 12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 36-00]
G. Streets.
(1) Preliminary plans and profiles at a scale of not more than one inch
equals 50 feet horizontally and one inch equals five feet vertically,
including cross sections every 50 feet or as specified by the
Township Engineer of all proposed streets, curbs and gutters
within the subdivision and proposed connection with existing or
future continuing streets. The distances and radii of all curves
along all street lines shall be shown.
(2) All topographic surveys and profiles shall be based on the United
States Coast and Geodetic Survey Datum, and the developer's
engineer shall so certify the plans submitted. Plans shall indicate a
minimum of two permanent benchmarks with location and
elevation of the same.
H. Utilities. Preliminary plans and profiles of proposed utility layouts shall
be at a scale of not more than one inch equals 50 feet horizontally and
one inch equals five feet vertically (water, storm and sanitary sewers)
showing connections to existing or proposed utility systems.
[Amended 6-18-1979 by Ord. No. 54-79]
I. Sewers, drains, ditches. Preliminary plans and profiles at a scale of one
inch equals 50 feet horizontally and one inch equals five feet vertically
of all proposed and existing sanitary sewers, storm drains, drainage
ditches and streams within the subdivision, together with the locations,
sizes, elevations, grades and capacities of any existing sanitary sewer,
storm drain, drainage ditch or stream or watercourse to which the
proposed facility shall be connected. When brook or stream channel
improvements are proposed or required, the plans for such
improvement shall be approved by the State Department of
Environmental Protection or the Morris County Planning Board, where
applicable.
J. Percolation/permeability tests and soil logs. [Amended 12-21-1981 by
Ord. No. 48-81; 8-19-1991 by Ord. No. 26-91]
(1) No subdivision or part thereof proposed to be serviced by
individual sewage disposal systems shall be approved where
results of the required tests per N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1.1 et seq. do not
meet with the established requirements of this chapter or other
applicable ordinances or regulations, nor shall any subdivision or
part thereof be considered where other physical characteristics of
the land would cause septic conditions unsanitary to the public or
contrary to the requirements of this chapter or other applicable
ordinances or regulations. Any remedy proposed to overcome such
§ 175-27 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-27
155:574
situations shall first be approved by the appropriate local and state
health agency.
(2) The following requirements shall be met:
(a) Two passing percolation/permeability tests and two acceptable
soil logs shall be conducted on each lot at the applicant's
expense by a person authorized by state law to conduct such
test. The location of these tests shall be within the proposed
disposal field and shall be set forth on the preliminary plat.
(b) The percolation/permeability tests shall be witnessed by a
representative of the Township Health Department, who shall
be notified at least 48 hours prior to the conducting of any test.
(c) The results of all passing, unsatisfactory and abandoned tests
shall be submitted to the Township Health Department and to
the Planning Board. The location of these passing,
unsatisfactory and abandoned tests shall be set forth on the
preliminary plat.
(d) No percolation/permeability test or soil log shall be located
closer than 100 feet from the highest elevation of seasonal
surface water.
(e) In areas where on-site or on-tract recharge of the aquifer by
stormwaters is proposed, additional percolation/permeability
tests may be required by the Township Engineer or Planning
Board.
(f) In areas of questionable percolation/permeability, the
Township Health Department may establish the conditions
under which the percolation/permeability tests may be
undertaken, including the month of the year and location.
(g) Where lot lines change during the Planning Board review,
additional percolation/permeability tests and soil logs may be
required by the Township Health Department or the Planning
Board.
(h) Where an existing dwelling is part of the proposed subdivision,
the exact location of the well and septic system shall be shown
on the preliminary plat. For individual disposal systems
constructed prior to January 1, 1990:
[1] The existing system shall be tested by a licensed
professional engineer, who shall certify, in writing, that the
system is in proper working order.
[2] A reserve area shall be shown on the plat for future septic
system replacement, if required. Percolation/permeability
tests and soil logs shall be performed for the reserve area
per § 175-27J.
§ 175-27 SEWERS § 175-27
155:575
K. Private sewage disposal. Plans for a typical individual or package
sewage disposal system where the same is proposed. Said plans shall be
approved by the appropriate local and/or state agency.
L. Off-tract improvements. When the development of the subdivision or
improvements within the subdivision are contingent upon
improvements outside the boundaries of said subdivision, information
shall be supplied by the subdivider prior to Planning Board
consideration for preliminary approval that the improvements outside
the subdivision are installed and will be available to the subdivider.
M. Setback lines. All front, rear and side yard lines shall be shown for all
lots.
N. Deed restrictions. A copy of any protective covenants or deed
restrictions applying to the land being subdivided shall be submitted
with the preliminary plat.
O. Open space. Any open spaces proposed to be dedicated for public use or
playgrounds or other public purpose and the location and use of all such
property shall be shown on the plat.
P. Support capability. When deemed necessary to determine the suitability
of the soil to support new construction, the Planning Board shall
require test holes or borings to be made by a New Jersey licensed
engineer or an approved testing laboratory at the expense of the
subdivider under the direction of the Township Engineer.
Q. Development impact statement. [Amended 5-18-1981 by Ord. No.
14-81; 2-17-1997 by Ord. No. 5-97]
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the development impact statement is to
provide comprehensive information needed to properly evaluate
the effect of a proposed project upon the community and the
environment.
(2) The statement should be prepared in accordance with Subsection
Q(4) below by a person or firm having expertise in planning and
economics in the environmental field by virtue of training,
experience or education.
(3) The applicant shall submit six copies of the development impact
statement to the Planning Board Clerk. Any amendments,
addendums or supplements to the statement must also be
submitted in triplicate.
(4) The development impact statement shall contain the following:
(a) Name and qualifications of the persons or firm preparing the
statement.
(b) An abstract or summary of the major points and conclusions of
the statement.
§ 175-27 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-27
155:576
(c) An inventory of existing conditions for the project site, the
surrounding area and other areas affected by the project. In
the presentation, attention should be given to the identification
and description of critical impact areas, including but not
necessarily limited to streams and stream corridors, swamps,
marshes, steep slopes, highly erodible soils, areas of highwater
table, floodprone areas, aquifer recharge areas, unique
stands of native vegetation and important wildlife feeding or
breeding grounds. The inventory should include, but not
necessarily be limited to, an analysis of the following.
[Amended 12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 36-00; 8-20-2001 by
Ord. No. 22-01; 3-18-2002 by Ord. No. 6-02]
[1] Soils and their properties to be mapped on page 1 of the
plat.
[2] Topography.
[3] Geology.
[4] Groundwater hydrology.
[5] Surface water.
[6] The size of the subwatershed and the location of the site
within the subwatershed(s).
[7] Vegetation, wildlife and aquatic species and communities.
[8] Land use.
[9] Air quality.
[10]Water quality.
[11] Ambient noise level.
[12] Aesthetic features.
[13] Historical and archaeological features. This segment shall
be prepared by a trained professional archaeologist who
meets the professional qualification standards of the
Secretary of the Interior's Standards and Guidelines for
Archaeology and Historic Preservation established
pursuant to The National Historic Preservation Act of
1966, 16 U.S.C. 470 et seq., as amended, and the
regulations adopted thereto, as amended.
(d) A description of the services and/or natural resources to be
utilized by the project. The discussion should include, but not
necessarily be limited to, the following: [Amended
12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 36-00]
[1] Water supply (including the use of individual wells).
§ 175-27 SEWERS § 175-27
155:577
[2] Sewage facilities (including the use of on-site disposal
systems, with soil logs and all percolation test results).
[3] Stormwater management and drainage.
[4] Solid waste disposal.
[5] Energy.
[6] Transportation/traffic.
[7] School and educational facilities.
[8] Public safety and health services.
[9] Recreation and cultural facilities.
[10] Tax revenues and costs of services.
(e) For residential subdivisions with 50 or more units and all
industrial subdivisions or site plans, a project description
should be provided which shall specify the method of
construction and operation of the proposed project and include
a timetable for construction.
(f) A listing and assessment of the probable impact of the project
on the environment and community including both adverse and
beneficial effects, based on the pertinent items enumerated
under Subsection Q(4)(c) and (d).
(g) A thorough discussion of steps to be taken, during and after
construction, to minimize adverse impacts as described under
Subsection Q(4)(f).
(h) Alternatives to the proposed project that might avoid some or
all of the adverse impacts as described in Subsection Q(4)(f).
(i) A listing of all licenses, permits and other approvals required
by law and the status of each.
(j) A listing of all sources of information used in the preparation of
the statement.
(k) A discussion of how the applicant's design will conserve energy
use.
(l) Alternatives. Alternatives to the arrangement of the proposed
development shall be discussed. The board of jurisdiction shall
reserve the right to require alternative arrangements of land,
buildings and infrastructure to determine a design of lesser
impact. [Added 12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 36-00]
(m) Provide information on the off-site secondary impacts as
follows: [Added 12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 36-00]
§ 175-27 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-27
155:578
[1] Surface runoff and flooding.
[2] Nonpoint source pollution.
[3] Sedimentation and erosion.
[4] Water supply quality and quantity.
[5] Traffic congestion.
[6] Habitat fragmentation.
(n) Circulation impact study. Circulation impact studies, when
required, shall conform to the following provisions: [Added
12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 36-00]
[1] When required, a circulation impact study shall be
submitted for all general development plans, preliminary
major subdivisions and for preliminary major site plans.
[Amended 8-20-2001 by Ord. No. 22-01]
[2] Submission format. Circulation impact studies shall
consist of two components, a planning report and a traffic
impact report.
[a] Planning report. The planning report component of
the circulation impact study shall include the
following:
[i] An introduction indicating the applicant, the
location of the site in question and a description of
the site from a land use and transportation
perspective.
[ii] The extent to which any proposed street system
meets requirements for street hierarchy, right-ofway
and cartway width and sidewalks.
[iii] The extent to which the proposed circulation
system conforms to the Circulation Element of the
Master Plan.
[iv] The extent to which internal circulation for
vehicles, people and the movements of goods is
adequate.
[v] The extent to which the safety of pedestrians,
bicyclists and the traveling public is protected.
[vi] The provisions made to provide connectivity to
the street system, pedestrian generators and the
local and regional greenway network.
§ 175-27 SEWERS § 175-27
155:579
[b] Traffic impact report. The traffic impact report
component of the circulation impact study shall
include the following:
[i] A description of the project phasing, access points
and connection to other existing or proposed
developments.
[ii] An analysis of existing conditions, including:
[A] A description of the study area and the
rationale behind choosing this area.
[B] A description of the study area's roadway
facilities, including number of lanes,
functional classification, condition, location
and type of traffic signals, and location of
other traffic signals, and location of other
traffic control devices or signs.
[C] The location of transit routes and stops and
any transit facilities, including on-street, offstreet
and private facilities, and service
frequency.
[D] The location of school bus routes and stops.
[E] The location of pedestrian crosswalks,
sidewalks and bicycle pathways.
[F] Traffic volume data, including turning
movement counts at key intersections during
the peak periods of the day, truck movements,
pedestrian counts and transit use.
[G] Volume/capacity analysis and an assessment
of existing conditions.
[iii] Traffic characteristics of the site:
[A] Traffic generation of the proposed uses in the
development.
[B] Traffic distribution.
[iv] Future demands on the transportation system:
[A] Traffic projection of non-site-related traffic to
the build-out year or years of the site (base
conditions).
[B] Projection of all traffic, including site traffic,
to the build-out year or years of the site.
§ 175-27 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-27
155:580
[v] Impact analysis and recommendations.
[A] Levels of service shall be computed for each
analysis year both with or without the
inclusion of site traffic.
[B] Comparison of levels of services conditions
with site traffic, and with site traffic after
recommended improvements are
constructed.
[C] Recommendations for automobile reduction
techniques.
[D] Schematic plan of any recommended
improvements.
[vi] Site plan analysis, if applicable:
[A] Location of access points.
[B] Demand for parking and loading.
[C] Sight distance analysis.
R. Site grading and drainage plan. Site grading and drainage plan shall be
required by the Planning Board, in order to provide more suitable sites
for building and other uses, to improve drainage and to control erosion
and sedimentation. The following requirements shall be met:
(1) All lots, tracts, parcels and all land in major subdivisions shall be
graded to provide proper drainage away from the buildings and
improvements. No ponding of surface water shall be permitted,
except where approved by the Planning Board.
(2) The site grading and drainage plan shall include the following note
and shall show existing and proposed contours necessary to
accomplish the following:
"All lots shall be graded to drain away from the building(s) on said
lot. The grading shall have a minimum slope of 2% away from the
building and shall extend for the distance as required to provide
a minimum drop of one foot in elevation from the ground adjacent
to the building.
Where the ground beyond the limits of the above grading rises
in elevation, the grading shall include a swale parallel to the
building. Said swale shall have a minimum slope of 1%."
(3) All drainage provisions shall be of such a design so as to adequately
handle the surface runoff and carry it to the nearest suitable outlet
such as a curbed street, storm drain or watercourse. Where
drainage swales are used to divert surface waters away from
buildings, they shall be sodded or planted or otherwise controlled
§ 175-27 SEWERS § 175-27
155:581
as required. The slope, shape and capacity of such drainage swales
shall conform to good engineering practice and principles.
(4) Concentration of surface water runoff shall only be permitted in
swales, ditches, storm sewers or watercourses, unless otherwise
approved by the Planning Board, and only in accordance with
§ 175-34A.
(5) The site grading and drainage plan shall include the following note:
[Amended 11-19-1979 by Ord. No. 72-79]
"For all lots with the basement or lowest floor level above the
groundwater table, dry well shall be installed at each roof drain
leader. The dry wells shall be of five-foot minimum depth, shall
have a volume of at least one cubic foot per 10 square feet of
roof surface and shall be constructed in accordance with standard
practices. In those instances where a properly installed dry well
will have adverse effects, in the judgment of the Township
Engineer, he may approve an alternate means of disposing of
water from the roof drain leaders.
For all lots with the basement or lowest floor level below the
groundwater table, foundation drains shall be constructed in
accordance with detailed plans to be submitted to and subject
to the approval of the Township. Wherever possible, said drains
shall discharge to storm drainage piping or natural watercourses.
Where water is observed for more than 24 hours in a foundation
excavation or in a building under construction, it shall be
understood that foundation drains are required."
S. Separate performance guaranties required.
(1) Soil erosion and sedimentation control.
(a) Prior to the start of any major subdivision construction,
including but not limited to clearing or grading, a separate
cash performance guaranty for soil erosion and sedimentation
control shall be posted. The amount of the guaranty shall be
$200 per lot for subdivisions with typical soil erosion and
sedimentation control problems. However, the Township may
require an increased amount upon receiving written
recommendation from the Township Engineer citing critical
soil and/or slope conditions. In the event of noncompliance
with the provisions of this chapter and/or the approved soil
erosion and sedimentation control plan, the Township may
issue a written notice to the developer. After 72 hours have
lapsed from receipt of said notice, the Township shall have the
option to take corrective actions and charge the cost of
corrective actions against the cash performance guaranties.
[Amended 12-17-1979 by Ord. No. 74-79; 7-16-1990 by
Ord. No. 22-90]
§ 175-27 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-27
155:582
(b) In the event that the charges exceed the amount of the cash
performance guaranty, the deficit shall be paid by the
developer within 60 days. Upon acceptance of the subdivision
improvements by the Township, the remaining cash
performance guaranty balance shall be returned to the
developer.
(2) Lot improvements. Whereas the sidewalks, driveway aprons and/or
lot grading are normally required to be completed prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, it is recognized that weather
conditions could prevent their timely completion. Under said
conditions, a separate cash performance guaranty shall be posted
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy in accordance
with the following: The cash performance guaranty or the lot
grading shall be in an amount approved by the Township. The cash
performance guaranty shall be accompanied by a statement by the
developer listing the completion date for the lot grading and/or
other incomplete improvements. The cash performance guaranty
shall be further accompanied by a statement from the prospective
purchaser, acknowledging the incomplete improvements and
releasing the Township from all responsibility for the incomplete
improvements and for the amount of cash performance guaranty.
(3) Performance guaranty. [Added 10-16-1989 by Ord. No. 24-89]
(a) Prior to the start of any major subdivision construction, a
separate performance guaranty shall be posted where
applicable for the value of all proposed drainage, curbing and
pavement within existing Township rights-of-way. The purpose
of the guaranty is to insure that all work within the right-ofway,
when started, shall be continued in a timely manner to
maintain safe conditions for the traveling public and adjacent
residents.
(b) The amount of the guaranty shall be approved by the Township
Engineer and shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter and the Municipal Land Use Law.100
(c) This guaranty shall be terminated when an overall guaranty is
posted at time of final subdivision approval.
T. Surface water management. A stormwater management plan consistent
with the standards set forth within § 175-49A, which shall contain:
[Added 5-18-1981 by Ord. No. 14-81]
(1) The size of the subwatershed and the location of the site within the
subwatershed(s) as shown on the Watersheds Overlay Map No. 9 on
the Washington Township Natural Resource Inventory.
100. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 175-27 SEWERS § 175-27
155:583
(2) The location, description and qualification of significant natural
and man-made features on and within 200 feet of the site
boundaries, including topography, all impervious surfaces and soil
and drainage characteristics, with particular attention to the
location and description of presently existing surface water runoff
control devices, mechanisms or areas, swamps, floodplains, swales,
woods and vegetation, steep slopes and other features critical to
the purposes of this chapter.
(3) The size of the nearest culvert or bridge downstream of the
discharge area, profiles and a cross section of the stream channel
upstream of that structure, as well as profiles and cross sections of
the stream channel at all points from the site, as required by the
Township Engineer.
(4) The location, description and quantification of proposed changes to
the site, whether of a permanent or temporary nature, with
particular attention to impervious surfaces and interception of
presently dispersed flow which may have an impact upon the
capacity of the soil, vegetative cover and drainageways to absorb,
retard, contain or control surface water runoff.
(5) Designation of critical or other areas to be left undisturbed shall be
shown in sufficient detail to be accurately marked on the land.
(6) A computation of the total surface water runoff before, during and
after the disturbance of land and/or construction of impervious
surfaces.
(7) Proposed measures for surface water management.
(8) A schedule for the sequence of installation of the surface water
management plan, related to the starting and completion dates of
the project.
(9) A proposed maintenance schedule for all surface water
management structures stipulating current maintenance,
continued maintenance and responsibility for the same.
(10) All proposed revisions of required data, as well as such additional
data as the Planning Board may require.101
U. Conservation easements. [Added 9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 22-96]
(1) Where conservation values relating to scenic vistas, open space,
historical areas, rural historic roadways, soil types, steep slopes,
rock outcroppings, preservation of trees, protection of
watercourses, protection of stream corridors and open water
buffers, protection of wildlife habitat, protection of wetlands and
101. Editor's Note: Former Subsection 16-6.4u, Recreation Facilities, added 6-17-1991 by Ord.
No. 16-91, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 8-21-1995 by Ord.
No. 27-95.
§ 175-27 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-27
155:584
transition areas, protection of significant horticultural,
environmental or natural features and elimination of excessive
noise are deemed by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
to require special protection, said areas shall be located within a
conservation easement dedicated to the Township of Washington.
[Amended 7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 23-03; 4-21-2014 by Ord.
No. 05-14
(2) All such easements shall be in a form satisfactory to the Township
Attorney.
(3) The conservation easements shall be posted with markers stating
"Conservation Easement" in the manner set forth in § 175-27V(5),
(6) and (7).
(4) Any person violating any provision of this section or any provision
of a conservation easement required by this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the penalties provided in § 1-3 of the Code
of the Township of Washington. [Added 4-21-2014 by Ord. No.
05-14]
V. Wetlands. [Added 8-19-1991 by Ord. No. 26-91]
(1) The applicant shall have a wetlands expert perform the delineation
of and determine the classification of wetlands as defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:7A-2.5 on the tract and within 150 feet of the tract. Said
wetlands expert shall submit a written report on the wetlands
delineation, classification of wetlands and transition zone widths.
The report shall include a copy of a letter from Natural Heritage
Program indicating the presence or absence of threatened and/or
endangered species on the site. The report shall include a
statement of the expert's qualifications. The wetlands delineation,
classification and transition zone widths shall be shown on the plat.
(2) All wetlands shall be clearly marked in the field. The applicant's
wetlands expert shall accompany the Major Subdivision Committee
and the Planning Board environmental consultant on the site
inspection.
(3) The Planning Board environmental consultant shall issue a written
report recommending approval/disapproval of the wetlands
delineation, classification and transition zone widths.
(4) All privately owned wetlands/transition zones shall be located
within a conservation easement dedicated to the Township of
Washington, in a form satisfactory to the Township Attorney. This
requirement shall also apply to any variance application before the
Board of Adjustment. [Amended 9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 22-96;
7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 23-03]
(5) The conservation easement shall be posted with three inches by
three inches anodized aluminum markers with a protective coating.
§ 175-27 SEWERS § 175-27
155:585
The markers shall state "Conservation Easement" with a
Washington Township logo. The markers may be purchased from
the Township or from an approved vendor. [Amended 9-16-1996
by Ord. No. 22-96; 6-15-1998 by Ord. No. 22-98]
(6) The markers shall be attached to four-inch by four-inch posts made
of cedar, redwood or cypress lumber embedded in concrete. The
location and height of the markers shall be shown on the plat.
[Amended 9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 22-96; 6-15-1998 by Ord.
No. 22-98]
(7) The Planning Board or Board of Adjustment may waive the
markers/posts requirement for agricultural areas or other areas
where the markers/posts are determined to be not warranted.
[Amended 9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 22-96; 7-21-2003 by Ord.
No. 23-03]
W. Geologic investigation. All applicants filing for major subdivision
approval, conditional use approval or site plan approval (except minor
site plans) in the Carbonate Area District (CAD) shall undertake a
geologic investigation program, and shall complete the Phase I
Geologic Investigation Checklist provided at the end of Chapter 111,
Land Use Procedures. Submission of the Phase II Investigation Plan
shall be based on the recommendation of the Township Geotechnical
Consultant (TGC), which recommendation shall be based on the
analysis set forth in § 175-30. [Added 4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 4-98]
X. Geotechnical details. [Added 4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 4-98]
(1) The location of all sinkholes, disappearing streams or karst
features shown on documents submitted under the Phase I and/or
Phase II Geologic Investigations shall be drawn on all preliminary
and final plats and site plans. The plats shall also note any site
remediation techniques to be utilized to stabilize any solution
channels or subsidence karst features. Where applicable, all final
subdivision plats shall contain the following wording:
§ 175-27 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-27
155:586
§ 175-28. Final plat. [Amended 6-18-1979 by Ord. No. 54-79]
The final plat and all final construction plans and profiles of improvements
and other original exhibits shall be filed with the Planning Board Clerk at
least two weeks prior to the regular meeting of the Planning Board when
the plat is to be considered. The plat shall be drawn in compliance with the
provisions of the State Map Filing Act.102 The final plat shall show or be
accompanied by the following:
"Block ________ Lot _________ is underlain by limestone formations.
Limestone formations are susceptible to surface collapse (or
sinkholes) and subsidence caused by the physical erosion and
chemical alteration of the soil and bedrock. In limestone areas the
alteration and development of land may be hazardous with respect
to the foundation safety of structures, the creation of unstable
land as a result of changes in drainage and grading and the
contamination of ground and surface waters. The exact kinds of
sinkholes and/or subsidence is not always predictable. Despite any
geologic investigation or geotechnical evaluation which may have
been required in connection with the approval of this subdivision,
there is no warranty, finding, guarantee or assurance that a
sinkhole and/or subsidence will not occur on the property in this
subdivision. The municipality, its agents, consultants and
employees assume no liability for any damages which may result
from sinkhole activity. All persons should always make
independent investigations of these matters prior to using this
land for construction of a building or structure or any activity
which alters the soil and bedrock materials."
(2) A declaration of covenants and restrictions in a form satisfactory to
the Planning Board Attorney shall be filed in the office of the
County Clerk simultaneous with the filing of the final plat
specifying which lots are so affected and containing similar
language.
Y. The applicant shall provide driveway information in accordance with
§§ 172-25 and 175-26C for all driveways proposed to connect to existing
public streets or road rights-of-way. [Added 6-21-2004 by Ord. No.
14-04]
A. Identification. Date, name and key map of the subdivision, name of
owner, scale, graphic scale and reference meridian. The final plat shall
be drawn at a scale of not more than one inch equals 100 feet.
B. Other contents. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets,
street names, easements and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or
dedicated to public use, all lot lines with accurate dimensions, bearings,
distances, arc lengths, central angles, tangents and radii of all curves
102. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 175-27 SEWERS § 175-28
155:587
and areas of each lot and areas to be dedicated to public use in square
feet.
C. Public use. The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated
for public use shall be indicated and the proposed use of sites other
than residential shall be noted.
D. Block and lots. All block, lot and house numbers shall be approved by
the Township Engineer and the Tax Assessor and shall be related to
existing block and lot numbers as shown on the Official Tax Map of the
Township.
E. Monuments. Location and description of all monuments shall be shown.
F. Consent of owner. Certification that the applicant is agent or owner of
the land, or that the owner has given consent to file said map.
G. Approval. When approval of a plat is required by any officer or body,
whether municipal, county or state, approval shall be certified on the
plat.
H. Certifications. The following certifications shall appear on the final plat:
(1) I hereby certify that this map and the survey have been made under
my immediate supervision and comply with the provisions of the
Map Filing Law. (Include the following, if applicable:)
I do further certify that the monuments as designated and shown
hereon have been set.
_____________________________________________________
Licensed Land Survey (Affix Seal)
____________________
Date
(If monuments are to be set at a later date, the following
endorsement shall be shown on the map.)
I certify that a bond has been given to the Township of
Washington guaranteeing the future setting of the monuments
shown on this map and so designate.
______________________________
Township Clerk
____________________
Date
(2) I hereby certify that all of the requirements of the Washington
Township Board of Health have been complied with.
§ 175-28 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-28
155:588
______________________________
Health Officer
______________________________
Date
(3) I hereby certify that all of the requirements of the Municipal
Utilities Authority have been complied with.
______________________________
Chairman
______________________________
Date
(4) I have carefully examined this map and find it conforms with the
provisions of the Map Filing Law and the municipal ordinances and
requirements applicable thereto.
_____________________________________________________
Municipal Engineer (Affix Seal)
_____________________
Date
(5) This application No ........... is approved by the Washington
Township Planning Board as a major subdivision.
Chairman
_________________________________
Date
_________________________________
Secretary
_________________________________
Date
_________________________________
I. Affidavit. An affidavit signed and sworn to by the applicant that the final
plat is drawn and presented exactly the same as the preliminary plat
approved by the Planning Board, and if there are any changes, all
changes shall be set forth in the affidavit as exceptions to the general
statement. Said affidavit shall be submitted in an original and two
copies.
§ 175-28 SEWERS § 175-28
155:589
§ 175-29. Agricultural use overlay plat and submission details.
[Added 7-18-1994 by Ord. No. 15-94]
J. Utilities. A written instrument from each serving utility shall evidence
full compliance with the provisions of § 175-47C(1). [Added 6-15-1981
by Ord. No. 23-81]
K. Location of all passing, unsatisfactory and abandoned percolation tests
shall be shown on final construction plans. [Amended 12-21-1981 by
Ord. No. 48-81]103
L. Notice of farm use. [Added 3-19-2001 by Ord. No. 7-01]
M. In addition to the above required drawings, a CAD copy of the final plat,
certified by a New Jersey licensed surveyor, prepared in accordance
with the New Jersey Map Filing Act,104 shall be submitted. All required
information appearing on the digital version of the final plat shall
appear on separate layers of the drawing in accordance with the
adopted criteria as found in Appendix G, Digital Mapping Submission
Standards, of the County of Morris. All work shall be based upon the
New Jersey system of plane coordinates as defined in N.J.S.A. 51:3-7.
The drawing shall identify a minimum of three corners distributed
around the tract and shall indicate the grid coordinate values geo
referenced to within 0.3 feet of the National Geodetic Reference
Network, as amended and updated. The monumentation shall be in a
United States Survey Feet based upon the standard conversions from
meters to feet in accordance with adopted standards of the National
Oceanic Atmospheric Administration. [Added 9-20-2004 by Ord. No.
22-04]
A. The applicant shall submit the data and information required for a
preliminary and final plat as identified in §§ 175-25, 175-27 and 175-28,
with the exception of the following, which shall be waived:
(1) Development impact statement.
(2) Road improvements on existing roads.
(3) Surface Water Management Ordinance.
(4) Recreation Ordinance.
B. Conservation easements along streams and wetlands and transition
areas shall be required.
C. Fire protection facilities shall be provided. (See § 175-50.)
D. All utilities shall be placed below ground.
103. Editor's Note: Former Subsection 16-6.5, Paragraph I, regarding updated recreation plans
and alternatives, added 6-17-1991 by Ord. No. 16-91, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 8-21-1995 by Ord. No. 27-95.
104. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 175-28 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-29
155:590
§ 175-30. Geologic investigations. [Added 4-20-1998 by Ord. No.
4-98]
E. Preliminary and final approval may be requested and approved
simultaneously.
F. Private roads shall comply with standards set forth in § 175-51.
G. A public hearing and notice are required.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the investigation is to provide sufficient data to
define all existing geologic conditions for which appropriate site design
and/or engineering solutions may be necessary to minimize any adverse
public health, safety, general welfare or environmental impacts caused
by the project.
B. Applicability. This chapter shall be applicable to all development in the
Carbonate Area District requiring major subdivision, conditional use or
site plan approval (except minor site plans) and wastewater disposal
systems requiring state permits or treatment works approvals.
C. Procedures and submission requirements for the Carbonate Area
District.
(1) All applicants filing for preliminary major subdivision, conditional
use or preliminary site plan approval (except minor site plans) shall
complete and file with the approving authority and the Township
Geological Consultant (TGC) the Phase I, Geologic Investigation
Checklist. In the case of applications for site plans or subdivisions,
the Phase I Geologic Investigation Checklist may be completed and
filed prior to a formal application for preliminary approval.
(2) The geologic investigation checklist shall:
(a) Be prepared and conducted by the applicant's geological
consultant (AGC) who shall be a geologist or professional
engineer with experience in karst terrains.
(b) Identify the geologic nature of the materials underlying the
site.
(c) Be based on an on site/area field investigation and document
review and shall include a description of the site geology;
groundwater conditions such as depth to/direction of flow and
evaluation of the potential impact of the project on
groundwater quality; and identification of any karst/solution
features observed and the structural control of the same.
(d) Note karst/solution features which shall be flagged in the field.
(3) Both the TGC and the AGC will review the applicant's findings in
the field.
§ 175-29 SEWERS § 175-30
155:591
(4) The Phase I Geologic Investigation Checklist information shall be
reviewed by the TGC, and a review report shall be submitted by the
TGC to the approving authority within 30 days of the submission by
the applicant of the Phase I Investigation Checklist. The TGC's
report shall review the completeness of the Phase I Investigation
Checklist and shall recommend either that a Phase II Investigation
Plan be prepared and submitted or that portions or all of the
requirements of the Phase II Investigation be waived. The
recommendation shall be based on the data submitted, the review
of the data and other pertinent information by the TGC, the field
visit and the purposes of this chapter.
(5) The approving authority shall rule on the completeness of the
checklist within 35 days of the receipt of the TGC's review report.
(6) The approving authority shall determine whether a Phase II
Investigation Plan to further investigate karst/solution features and
address groundwater protection shall be required, based on the
data submitted, the recommendation of the TGC and the purposes
of this chapter. The purpose of the Phase II Investigation Plan is to
delineate and define karst features noted or suspected in the Phase
I Geological Investigation Checklist, to evaluate the effects of the
same on the proposed development and to propose methods of
remediation if needed. The approving authority may grant a waiver
from part or all of the geotechnical evaluation and report
requirements under § 175-30C upon recommendation of the TGC.
(7) If a Phase II Investigation Plan is required, the same shall be
prepared by the AGC and filed with the approving authority and the
TGC.
(8) The Phase II Investigation Plan shall include a narrative describing
the types of features to be investigated, their locations, the types of
direct/indirect methods to be used and the reasons for their use.
Direct methods shall include site reconnaissance, test pits, test
probes, test borings or other appropriate methods. Indirect
methods shall include aerial photography and geophysical
procedures. A site plan indicating the areas of investigation,
proposed locations of testing and types of testing shall accompany
the Phase II Investigation Plan.
(9) The Phase II Investigation Plan shall be reviewed by the TGC, and a
review report shall be submitted by the TGC to the approving
authority within 30 days of the submission by the applicant of the
Phase II Investigation Plan. The TGC's report shall review the
completeness of the Phase II Investigation Plan and shall also
indicate whether any proposed testing methodology is appropriate
and reasonable or is prohibited because of the potential danger the
methodology may pose to the integrity of the site or the health,
safety and welfare of the community. If the TGC recommends the
disapproval of the testing program, the recommendation shall
§ 175-30 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-30
155:592
include suggestions on alternate methodology which would provide
the requisite data. The recommendation shall be based on the data
submitted, the review of the data and other pertinent information
by the TGC, and the purposes of this chapter.
(10) The approving authority shall approve or disapprove the Phase II
Investigation Plan within 35 days of the receipt of the TGC's report.
Approval of the plan shall include a specification of the nature and
extent of the Phase II Investigation, the results of which shall be in
the Geotechnical Evaluation Report.
(11) After the Phase II Investigation Plan has been approved by the
approving authority, a permit shall be issued to the applicant by the
Township Engineer authorizing the commencement of the testing
procedure.
(12) The following protocol and procedures shall be utilized in
conducting the approved Phase II Investigation and geotechnical
evaluation by the applicant, with observation by the TGC:
(a) Any on-site evaluations and tests undertaken pursuant to this
chapter shall not begin until the applicant has received a
permit pursuant to § 175-30C(11).
(b) The applicant shall provide written notice to the Township
Clerk, the Township Engineer and the TGC, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, at least 15 days prior to the
commencement of any testing procedures.
(c) The proposed development site shall be subject to inspection
by the TGC, the Township Engineer or designated municipal
officials at any time.
(d) All testing data and results shall be made available to
municipal officials and inspectors on demand.
(e) All site investigations shall be properly closed in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 7:9-9.1 et seq.
(13) At the completion of the Phase II Investigation a formal
Geotechnical Evaluation Report shall be submitted which shall
include the following information gathered during the testing
protocol:
(a) Logs of all borings, test pits and probes, including evidence of
cavities, loss of drilling fluid circulation during drilling, voids
encountered and similar cavities.
(b) The type of drilling or excavation technique employed.
(c) Drawings of monitoring or observation wells as installed.
(d) The time and dates of exploration tests.
§ 175-30 SEWERS § 175-30
155:593
(e) Reports of chemical analyses of on-site surface and ground
water in cases of potential impact as determined by the TGC.
(f) The names and qualifications of individuals conducting the
tests.
(g) The analytical methods used on soils, water samples and rock
samples.
(h) A one-inch-equals-one-hundred-feet-scale topographic map of
the site (at a contour interval of two feet) locating all test pits,
borings, wells, seismic or electromagnetic conductivity or
other geophysical surveys and analysis of the groundwater,
including any potentiometric maps constructed from site data
or aquifer tests with rate and direction of flow, if required by
the approved Phase II Investigation Plan.
(i) A geologic interpretation of the observed subsurface
conditions, including soil and rock type, geologic unit, jointing
(size and spacing), faulting, voids, fracturing, grain size and
sinkhole formation.
(j) An evaluation of the geotechnical findings at the site gathered
during the Phase II Investigation, in relation to the proposed
development, and recommendations for the planning,
engineering design and construction techniques to be utilized
in accomplishing the project. All design recommendations shall
minimize, to the greatest extent practical, impacts upon water
quality and structural hazards associated with limestone
formations. The engineering solutions proposed to minimize
environmental and structural impacts for the useful life of the
project, as well as during construction, must be clearly
detailed.
(k) Any other information required by the approved Phase II
Investigation Plan.
(14) Review report.
(a) The Geotechnical Evaluation Report shall be reviewed by the
TGC, and a review report shall be submitted by the TGC to the
approving authority within 30 days of the submission by the
applicant of the Geotechnical Evaluation Report. The TGC's
report shall review the completeness of the Geotechnical
Evaluation Report and shall advise the approving authority
whether or not the applicant has provided the municipality
with:
[1] Site specific design and construction details and
specifications to ensure that the proposed development of
the tract will be properly implemented and will not
§ 175-30 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-30
155:594
adversely impact on the health, safety and welfare of the
community.
[2] Verification that the proposed method of development of
the tract will minimize any adverse effects on the quality of
surface or subsurface water and will not alter the
character of surface and/or subsurface water flow in a
manner detrimental to known on-site or off-site conditions.
[3] Testing and design performance standards which comply
with the standards set forth in § 175-52 and good
engineering practices.
[4] Specific details on inspection procedures to be followed
during the construction and after project completion.
(b) The recommendation shall be based on the data submitted, the
review of the data and other pertinent information by the TGC
and the purposes of this chapter.
(15) The approving authority shall, within 45 days of the receipt of the
report from the TGC, approve or disapprove the proposed
geotechnical aspects of the development plan and associated
construction techniques. In the event that the approving authority
denies the proposed development plan and associated construction
procedures, the approving authority shall state in the resolution its
reasons for disapproval.
D. Geologic hazards discovered during construction in the CAD. A specific
geologic hazard may not be identified and remediated while the
geologic investigation program is underway and may be discovered
during or after construction. In such cases the developer and/or the
owner shall:
(1) Report the occurrence of the hazard to the Township Clerk and
Engineer within 24 hours of discovery.
(2) Halt construction activities which would impact the geologic
hazard.
(3) Prepare a report on the geologic hazard which analyzes the impact
of the hazard and details a remediation plan for review and
approval by the TGC.
(4) After obtaining approval from the municipality, perform necessary
remediation of the hazard to prevent or minimize damage to
buildings, structures, utilities, driveways, parking areas, roadways
and other site improvements and to minimize pollution of the
groundwater.
(5) Repair any damage to improvements and restore ground cover and
landscaping.
§ 175-30 SEWERS § 175-30
155:595
(6) Reimburse the Township for the cost of inspection or other costs
incurred in connection with the geologic hazard.
E. Compliance and enforcement.
(1) Compliance with this chapter in the CAD is required prior to the
granting of preliminary major subdivision, conditional use or
preliminary site plan approval (except minor site plans). The
completion of geotechnical improvements is required before the
commencement of construction where appropriate, or concurrently
with construction when necessary, but in any event prior to the
issuance of any certificate of occupancy for the project. The
enforcement officials for any application requiring the approval of
the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment subject to this chapter
shall be the Township Engineer and the TGC. The Township
Engineer shall serve as the enforcement official for wastewater
systems requiring New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection permits or treatment works approvals.
(2) Failure to comply with any of the conditions in this chapter may
result in the issuance of a stop-work order, revocation of building
permits or denial of certificates of occupancy. Remedial and
corrective measures may be mandated if the appropriate
construction and site planning techniques, as outlined in the
applicant's approved Geotechnical Evaluation Report, are not
followed and result in actions which adversely impact karst
features.
F. Carbonate Area District data distribution. On-site geologic information
collected through the provisions of this chapter represents important
resource data. Copies of the final Geotechnical Evaluation Report and
all maps and accompanying data shall be filed with the Township Board
of Health, the Township Clerk, and the Planning Board Secretary. The
municipality shall develop a catalog system of all available municipallygenerated
geologic reports. This file shall be accessible to the public
during normal working hours.
G. In limestone areas the alteration and development of land may be
hazardous with respect to the foundation safety of structures, the
creation of unstable land as a result of changes in drainage and grading
and the contamination of ground and surface waters. The exact kinds of
sinkholes and/or subsidence is not always predictable; therefore, the
administration of these regulations shall create no liability on behalf of
the municipality, the Township Engineer, the Township Geotechnical
Consultant, municipal employees or municipal agencies as to damages
which may be associated with the formation of sinkholes or subsidence.
Compliance with these regulations represents no warranty, finding,
guarantee or assurance that a sinkhole and/or subsidence will not occur
on an approved property. The municipality, its agents, consultants and
employees assume no liability for any financial or other damages which
may result form sinkhole activity. It is also noted that sinkholes and
§ 175-30 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-30
155:596
ground subsidence may occur in areas outside the CAD and/or in areas
of carbonate geology presently not identified as such. The applicant
and/or property owner should always make independent investigations
of these matters prior to using the land for construction of a building or
structure or any activity which alters the soil and bedrock materials.
§ 175-30 SEWERS § 175-30
155:597

ARTICLE VI
Improvements
§ 175-31. General requirements. [Amended 10-20-1980 by Ord. No.
37-80; 11-15-1982 by Ord. No. 24-82]
A. Completion of improvements. [Amended 11-18-1991 by Ord. No.
36-91]
(1) Following preliminary approval, but prior to final subdivision
approval, the subdivider may elect to install all improvements as
required by the Planning Board, under the supervision and
inspection of the Township Engineer, or he may post a performance
guaranty to assure the installation of any or all required
improvements as hereinafter provided and install any required
improvements not covered by the performance guaranty.
(2) Following installation of improvements and/or posting of
performance guaranties as provided above, the subdivider shall be
entitled to file the final subdivision plat upon receipt of final
subdivision approval; however, no construction permits shall be
issued in the subdivision or section thereof for which final approval
was obtained until the complete installation of all required
improvements, including the filing with the Township Engineer of
all as-built plans and profiles of all utilities, including stormwater
management facilities, with a certification as to the actual
construction, except the following: [Amended 4-15-2002 by Ord.
No. 14-02105]
(a) The final bituminous surface course of streets;
(b) Sidewalks;
(c) (Reserved)106
(d) Monuments;
(e) Shade trees;
(f) Detention basin landscaping;
(3) All improvements covered by the performance guaranties shall be
completed within two years of final approval unless an extension of
time is granted by the Township Committee and shall be completed
to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer prior to the issuance of
the last 10% percent (rounded up to the next whole numeral) of
105. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that any subdivision which received
preliminary subdivision approval prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall be
exempt from the provisions of this ordinance.
106. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2)(c), dry wells and swales, was repealed 6-21-2004 by
Ord. No. 14-04.
§ 175-31 SEWERS § 175-31
155:599
certificates of occupancy for the subdivision. [Amended
4-15-2002 by Ord. No. 14-02107]
(4) If the subdivider elects to post performance guarantees pursuant to
this section, the final plat shall contain the following statement in
bold letters: [Amended 6-21-1999 by Ord. No. 14-99;
2-27-2003 by Ord. No. 3-03]
NOTICE
CONSTRUCTION OF ALL REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS IS TO
BE COMPLETED WITHIN TWO YEARS OF FINAL APPROVAL
UNLESS AN EXTENSION OF TIME HAS BEEN OBTAINED FROM
THE TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE. THE MUNICIPALITY HAS NO
OBLIGATION TO CONSTRUCT ANY IMPROVEMENTS NOT
COMMENCED, NOR TO COMPLETE ANY IMPROVEMENTS
COMMENCED BY DEVELOPER EXCEPT TO THE EXTENT OF
FUNDS RECEIVED FROM THE PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES
POSTED BY DEVELOPER WITH THE MUNICIPALITY. NO
BUILDING PERMITS SHALL BE ISSUED UNTIL COMPLETION
OF ALL REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS WITH THE EXCEPTION OF
THOSE SET FORTH IN § 175-31A(2).
B. To assure the repair and/or correction of certain installed
improvements during the period of construction prior to Township
acceptance, the Planning Board may require a performance guaranty in
an amount equal to 10% of the value of such installed improvements.
Pavement, curbing, drainage and items shown on the plans or required
by ordinance which have been installed during said construction period
may be subject to this requirement.
C. The performance guaranty to be furnished shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter and of the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. [Amended 2-19-1990 by Ord. No. 6-90108]
D. The following construction standards and improvements are necessary
to protect the health, safety, welfare and convenience of the residents
and public as well as needed to meet local, county, regional, state and
national goals and objectives. It is recognized, however, that in peculiar
situations, all of the improvements listed below may not be appropriate
or needed. These items may then be waived in accordance with § 175-8.
E. To assure the repair and/or correction of certain installed
improvements during the period of construction prior to Township
acceptance, the Planning Board may require a performance guaranty in
an amount equal to 10% of the value of such installed improvements.
107. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that any subdivision which received
preliminary subdivision approval prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall be
exempt from the provisions of this ordinance.
108. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection C and provided for the
renumbering of former Subsections D and E as Subsections C and D.
§ 175-31 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-31
155:600
§ 175-32. Construction standards.
Pavement, curbing, drainage and items shown on the plans or required
by ordinance which have been installed during said construction period
may be subject to this requirement.
F. The performance guaranty to be furnished shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter and of the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. [Amended 2-19-1990 by Ord. No. 6-90]
G. The following construction standards and improvements are necessary
to protect the health, safety, welfare and convenience of the residents
and public as well as needed to meet local, county, regional, state and
national goals and objectives. It is recognized, however, that in peculiar
situations, all of the improvements listed below may not be appropriate
or needed. These items may then be waived in accordance with § 175-8.
A. Township standards. All standards and specifications of the Township as
now or hereafter adopted shall govern the design, construction and
installation of all improvements. Failure of the subdivider, developer,
his contractor or agent to conform to said specifications shall be just
cause for the suspension of the work being performed. No subdivider
shall have the right to demand or claim damages from the Township, its
officers, agents or servants by reason of said suspension.
B. Other standards.
(1) In the event that the Township has not adopted standards for a
specific type of improvement, then generally accepted engineering
standards as set forth in engineering and construction manuals, as
may be approved and modified by the Township Engineer for a
specific situation, shall be used.
(2) Gas, electric, telephone and similar utilities shall be installed in
accordance with applicable company, state and federal
requirements.
C. Grades. All construction stakes and grades shall be set by a licensed
land surveyor in the employ of the subdivider, developer or contractor.
One copy of all cut sheets shall be filed with the Township Engineer
prior to the commencement of any construction.
D. Inspection. Prior to the start of the construction or installation of such
improvements, the subdivider shall advise the Township Engineer 48
hours prior to the commencement of such work. No underground
installation shall be covered until inspected and approved by the
appropriate official. If during installation of any of the required
improvements the subdivider fails to meet specification requirements
or to correct unacceptable work, the subdivider shall be notified, in
writing, by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the subdivider
has failed to comply with specifications or to correct unacceptable work
properly, and said notice shall set forth in detail what has not been
§ 175-31 SEWERS § 175-32
155:601
§ 175-33. Site conditions.
properly installed. If within 10 days after certified date of receipt of
such notice the subdivider has failed to perform in accordance with the
notice, the Township shall then cause the notice of failure to comply to
be served upon the subdivider, and a copy shall be sent to the governing
body and Planning Board for appropriate action.
A. Site conditions. During construction the site shall be maintained and
left each day in a safe and sanitary manner, and any condition which
could lead to personal injury or property damage shall be immediately
corrected by the subdivider.
B. Disposal of dead trees, litter, building materials. Developed areas shall
be cleared of all stumps, litter, rubbish, brush, weeds, dead and dying
trees, roots and debris, and excess of scrap building materials shall be
removed or destroyed immediately upon the request of and to the
satisfaction of the Construction Official prior to issuing an occupancy
permit.
C. Earth removal. No part of the top layer of soil shall be removed from the
site or used as spoil unless approved by the Township Committee. At
least six inches of such soil shall be provided within 25 feet of the
structure and appropriately landscaped. All non-hard-surfaced areas of
the lot or those portions without structures shall be stabilized by
seeding or planting to prevent soil erosion. Areas where vegetation has
been removed or the surface has been disturbed and which constitute a
potential soil erosion problem shall be appropriately stabilized to the
satisfaction of the Township Engineer and Construction Official.
D. Changes in elevation.
(1) No change shall be made in the elevation or contour of any lot or
site by the removal of earth to another lot or site other than as
shown on an approved preliminary plat.
(2) Minimal changes in elevations or contours necessitated by field
conditions may be made only after approval by the Township
Engineer. All said changes necessitated by field conditions shall be
shown on the final plat and indicated as a change from the
preliminary, or if final approval has been granted, said changes
shall be shown on the as-built plans.
E. Temporary improvements. During construction, the Township Engineer
may require the installation or construction of improvements to prevent
or correct temporary conditions on the site which could cause personal
injury, damage to property or constitute a health hazard. These
conditions may result from erosion and landslide, flooding, heavy
construction traffic, creation of steep grades and pollution.
Improvements may include grading, plantings, retaining walls, culverts,
§ 175-32 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-33
155:602
§ 175-34. Specific improvements.
pipes, guardrails, temporary roads and others appropriate to the
specific condition.
A. Surface water management improvements. Surface water management
improvements and measures conforming to the standards in §§ 175-27T
and 175-49 shall be provided.109 [Added 8-16-1982 by Ord. No.
19-82]
B. Sanitary sewage disposal.
(1) Provisions shall be made to convey sanitary waste from each lot
through laterals and interceptors of sufficient size, material and
capacity to collectors and then to trunk sewers to public treatment
facilities. Where a public sanitary sewer system is not reasonably
accessible, approved individual septic systems shall be installed for
each lot except as noted below.
(2) Where a public sanitary sewage disposal system is not now
reasonably accessible but will be within three years of date of
preliminary approval, as evidenced by a letter from the appropriate
sewer authority, the subdivider may be required by the Planning
Board to install within the subdivision a complete sewer pipe
system, including provisions for the connection thereto at each
structure. Until such time as the public sanitary sewage disposal
system is capable of becoming operable, individual septic systems
or other appropriate and approved waste treatment facilities shall
be required. A sanitary waste disposal system shall include all or
part of the following: pipes and necessary appurtenances such as
manholes, lampholes, pumping stations, drainage tiles, valves and
siphons.
(3) Where connection to a public sanitary sewage disposal system is
not proposed, the minimum lot requirements in a residential zone
shall be the bulk requirements of the R-1/R-2 Zone or the zone in
which they are actually located, whichever is greater. [Added
2-15-1988 by Ord. No. 3-88; amended 10-15-2001 by Ord. No.
32-01; 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 22-02]
(4) Where connection to a public sanitary sewage disposal system is
proposed, at the time of application, the applicant shall submit a
letter from the appropriate Municipal Utilities Authority stating:
[Added 8-19-1991 by Ord. No. 26-91; amended 11-18-1996 by
Ord. No. 30-96]
(a) The tract is within the Authority's service area.
109. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, Surface Water Management, was repealed 5-18-1981
by Ord. No. 14-81.
§ 175-33 SEWERS § 175-34
155:603
(b) The tract could be served by the Authority subject to
availability of capacity at time of approval, as per § 175-22E(3).
(5) Where connection to a public sanitary sewage disposal system is
proposed, as a condition precedent to approval by the Planning
Board, the appropriate Municipal Utilities Authority shall state, in
writing, that a public sanitary sewer disposal system will be
available per § 175-22E(3). [Added 8-19-1991 by Ord. No.
26-91; amended 11-18-1996 by Ord. No. 30-96]
C. Water.
(1) Provision shall be made to provide each lot with an adequate and
continuous supply of potable water.
(2) Where a public water system is reasonably accessible, all lots shall
be connected thereto, provided that adequate yield and pressure
are available without a negative effect on present users as defined
in § 175-22E(1). [Amended 11-18-1996 by Ord. No. 30-96]
(3) In the event that such an adequate public system is not reasonably
accessible, the subdivider shall submit plans to provide a suitable
system for supplying water at the subdivider's expense.
(4) Where an adequate public water system is not now reasonably
accessible but will be within three years of date of preliminary
approval, as evidenced by a letter from the Municipal Utilities
Authority or appropriate franchised water company, the subdivider
may be required by the Planning Board to install within the
subdivision a complete water distribution system including
provisions for connection to each structure. Until such time as the
system is capable of becoming operable, individual wells shall be
installed.
(5) A water system shall include all or part of the following: pipes and
necessary appurtenances of sufficient size, material and capacity,
pumps, valves, pumping stations, standpipes and fire hydrants.
(6) Fire hydrants shall be of a design and type approved by the
Township and shall be installed in accordance with Township
requirements.
(7) For subdivisions of five or more lots, a fire-protection system shall
be provided. Where public water is not proposed, the system shall
meet the criteria set forth in § 175-50. [Added 2-16-1987 by Ord.
No. 3-87; amended 6-17-1991 by Ord. No. 13-91]
(8) Where connection to public water is not proposed, the minimum lot
requirements in a residential zone shall be the bulk requirements
of the R-1/R-2 Zone or the zone in which they are actually located,
whichever is greater. [Added 2-15-1988 by Ord. No. 3-88;
§ 175-34 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-34
155:604
amended 10-15-2001 by Ord. No. 32-01; 6-17-2002 by Ord.
No. 22-02]
D. Private utilities. Gas lines, telephone lines, electrical service, cable
television and similar utilities shall consist of those improvements and
proper installation of the same required by the applicable municipal,
federal or state law or public utility regulation.
E. Vehicular and pedestrian improvements. Such improvements shall
include all or part of the following: street paving, curbs, gutters,
concrete sidewalks, bituminous concrete driveway aprons,
streetlighting, traffic signs, traffic control devices and guardrails and
other street improvements.
(1) Streets. Streets shall meet the design specifications established in
Article VII, Design Standards.
(2) Street signs. The design and location of all street signs shall be
approved by the Planning Board. The name of all new streets shall
be approved by the governing body or its designee.
(3) Sidewalks and driveways. In the R-1 Zone, sidewalks shall be
installed on both sides of through streets. On dead-end streets in
the R-1 Zone and on all streets in other zones, sidewalks may be
required where deemed necessary in the interest of public safety.
Sidewalks, where required, and driveways shall be constructed in
accordance with Chapter 172, Streets and Sidewalks, Article II,
Sidewalk Construction, and Article III, Driveway Construction.
[Amended 4-18-1983 by Ord. No. 9-83]
(4) Traffic signs and control devices. These improvements, such as
stop, yield and one-way signs, etc., shall be designed and installed
in accordance with applicable federal, state and county
regulations. Recommendation as to their installation shall be
reviewed by the Police Department.
(5) Guardrails. These shall be designed to prevent cars from leaving
the road. They shall be installed where danger exists to the
traveling public due to steep topography, narrow roadways,
location of drainage ditches or other similar conditions.
(6) Street lighting. The subdivider shall be responsible for the
installation of street lighting facilities as approved by the Township
Committee and in accordance with the standards of § 159-41.
[Added 8-19-2002 by Ord. No. 32-02]
F. Natural improvements. These improvements shall include all or some of
the following: shade trees, topsoil, earth removal, borrow and fill,
improvements to prevent erosion and landslides, improvements to
prevent damage to adjacent property, to protect vistas and existing
natural growth. All such improvements shall be installed within one
year of the issuance of any certificate of occupancy.
§ 175-34 SEWERS § 175-34
155:605
G. Shade trees. The standards for shade trees and for the installation
thereof shall be as follows:
(1) All trees must be nursery-grown according to the American
Association of Nurserymen guidelines. [Amended 10-15-2001 by
Ord. No. 31-01]
(2) Trees are to be balled and burlapped, well branched and with a
good root system.
(3) Trees are to have straight trunks.
(4) Trees must be true to name.
(5) Backfill should consist of 50% humus for each tree.
(6) All trees are to be generously, thoroughly watered at time of
planting.
(7) Trees will be properly pruned at time of planting.
(8) All excess debris and soil is to be removed from the planting site.
No soil is to be piled around base of tree.
(9) Trees are to be guaranteed for a period of two years from the date
that the Township Committee accepts the subdivision streets.
[Amended 10-15-2001 by Ord. No. 31-01]
(10) Trees shall be ed on site plans and shall be covered by a
performance bond. Notification of planting must be given to the
Shade Tree Committee one month prior to installation. [Amended
12-17-1984 by Ord. No. 31-84]
(11) Each tree will be staked approximately five feet from the ground
with two stakes two inches by two inches by six feet long. Trees will
be wired to stakes passing through a rubber hose where attached
to tree.
(12) All trees shall be no less than two-and-one-half-inches to threeinches
caliper per the American Association of Nurserymen
guidelines, measured six inches above ground. Amended 3-17-1980
Ord. No. 12-80; 3-21-1988 by Ord. No. 7-88; 10-15-2001 by Ord.
No. 31-01
(13) Shade trees shall not be planted within the road right-of-way. A
separate shade tree easement of a ten-foot width shall be provided
adjacent to the street right-of-way, except that at intersections, the
shade tree easement shall be adjacent to the sight easement.
[Amended 2-18-1980 by Ord. No. 5-80; 5-18-1981 by Ord. No.
14-81; 12-17-1984 by Ord. No. 31-84]
(14) Trees shall be planted 30 feet to 50 feet apart, as determined by the
Shade Tree Committee. [Amended 9-21-1981 by Ord. No.
28-81; 12-17-1984 by Ord. No. 31-84]
§ 175-34 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-34
155:606
§ 175-35. Performance guaranties and subdivision agreements.
(15) The Shade Tree Committee shall provide the owner or developer
with a list of approved trees for planting. Said list shall be selected
by the Shade Tree Committee from the Trees for New Jersey
Streets, published by the New Jersey Federation of Shade Tree
Commissions. No evergreens are to be planted where they will
shade the road and cause icing conditions. [Amended 3-17-1980
by Ord. No. 12-80; 9-21-1981 by Ord. No. 28-81; 12-17-1984
by Ord. No. 31-84; 10-15-2001 by Ord. No. 31-01]
(16) For installation of shade trees at street intersections, the applicant
shall comply with the Land Development Standards of the County
of Morris, New Jersey, as amended and supplemented.
(17)No shade trees will be required where the existing wood line is
next to or encroaches into the shade tree easement. [Added
10-15-1979 by Ord. No. 69-79; amended 12-17-1984 by Ord.
No. 31-84; 10-15-2001 by Ord. No. 31-01]
H. Monuments. Monuments shall be of such size and shape and properly
located as required by the Map Filing Law.110
I. Lot suitability improvements. Lot substandard suitability improvements
conforming to the requirements of § 175-46, including but not limited to
site improvements implementing grading and drainage plans
conforming to § 175-27R, as revised, such as grading, foundation, roof,
yard and/or french drains, etc., sight easements and construction and
design techniques.111 [Added 8-16-1982 by Ord. No. 19-82]
J. Geotechnical improvements. The geotechnical improvements required
by §§ 175-30 and 175-52 to address site specific karst/solution features
shall be installed prior to final approval or bonded. Inspection of these
improvements shall be under the supervision of the Township Engineer
in conjunction with the Township Geological Consultant and, if
necessary, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, a Township
Geotechnical Engineer as designated by the Township Engineer.
[Added 4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 4-1998]
A. Performance guaranty and subdivision.
(1) No final plat shall be approved by the Board until an agreement is
entered into between the subdivider and the Township
incorporating all of the terms and conditions of all approvals
granted by the Planning Board. No final plat shall be approved by
the Board until the subdivider shall have filed with the Township a
performance guaranty in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost
110. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
111. Editor's Note: Former Subsection j, Recreation Facilities, added 6-17-1991 by Ord. No.
16-91, as amended 7-15-1991 by Ord. No. 22-91, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 23-94 and 8-21-1995 by Ord. No. 27-95.
§ 175-34 SEWERS § 175-35
155:607
of installation of all required improvements which have not been
installed or completed prior to final approval as estimated by the
Township Engineer, completion of all such required improvements
has been certified, in writing, to the Board by the Township
Engineer, assuring the installation of such improvements on or
before an agreed date in accordance with the time set forth in
Subsection C and certification from the subdivider's bonding
company that it will issue the required maintenance bond at the
time of completion of the improvements. [Amended 12-18-1978
by Ord. No. 34-78; 11-18-1991 by Ord. No. 36-91]
(2) Snow removal. [Amended 12-18-1978 by Ord. No. 34-78;
4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 17-80; 9-17-1984 by Ord. No. 24-84]
(a) Each developer shall be responsible for snow removal in major
subdivisions until such time as roadway improvements are
accepted by the Township pursuant to § 175-37, Acceptance of
improvements. If the improvements to a street right-of-way are
accepted by the Township for purposes of release of a
performance guaranty any time from November 1 through
March 31, the Township shall not be deemed to have accepted
said right-of-way for the purposes of maintenance, snow
removal and other street-related services. However, if a
developer provides notice, in writing, to the Department of
Public Works prior to November 1 that application for
acceptance of improvements shall be made to the Township
and that actual acceptance by the Township may occur
sometime between November 1 and March 31, then general
principles of law shall determine whether the Township has
accepted the dedication.
(b) Each developer shall be required to post a separate cash
performance guaranty for snow removal in the amount of $100
per 100 linear feet of road or $1,500, whichever is greater. In
the event of failure of the developer to satisfactorily provide
snow removal within eight hours of the start of snowfall, the
Township shall have the option to take the necessary actions
and charge the cost of said snow removal against the cash
performance guaranty. The cost of snow removal is hereby
defined to include the personnel, equipment and/or material
for plowing of roads and/or spreading of salt/sand. Any
depletion of the cash bond caused by the reimbursing of the
Township for snow removal under the circumstances described
above shall be restored by the developer within 30 days. Upon
acceptance of the subdivision improvements by the Township,
the remaining cash performance guaranty balance shall be
returned to the developer. [Amended 8-21-1995 by Ord. No.
24-95]
(c) Any person who fails to satisfactorily provide snow removal in
accordance with the requirements of Subsection A(2)(a) and
§ 175-35 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-35
155:608
(b) above shall be subject, upon conviction, to the penalties
provided in § 1-3 of this Code. Each day a particular violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. The above-stated
penalties shall be in addition to the restoration of the snow
removal guaranty as required in Subsection A(2)(b) above.
[Added 5-19-1997 by Ord. No. 16-97; amended 4-16-2007
by Ord. No. 9-07]
(3) Soil erosion and sedimentation control. [Amended 7-20-1992 by
Ord. No. 12-92]
(a) Prior to the start of any major subdivision construction,
including but not limited to clearing or grading, a separate
cash performance guaranty for soil erosion and sedimentation
control shall be posted in the amount of $200 per lot. In the
event of noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter and/
or the approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan,
the Township will issue a written notice to the developer. After
72 hours have elapsed from the receipt of said notice, the
Township shall have the option to take corrective actions and
charge the cost of corrective actions against the cash
performance guaranty.
(b) In the event that the charges exceed the amount of the cash
performance guaranty, the deficit shall be paid by the
developer within 60 days. Upon acceptance of the subdivision
improvements by the Township, the remaining cash
performance guaranty balance shall be returned to the
developer.
B. Type of guaranty. At least 10% of the performance guaranty shall be in
the form of cash to be deposited with the Township. Such cash shall be
deposited to the credit of the Township of Washington and may be
usable at any point by the Township for the nonperformance of the
subdivider. The remaining portion of the performance guaranty shall be
issued by a bonding or surety company authorized to do business in the
State of New Jersey, as approved by the Township Attorney. [Amended
11-17-1980 by Ord. No. 62-80]
C. Time of guaranty. Performance guaranties shall run for a term not to
exceed 24 months. Performance guaranties with the consent of the
principal and surety, if there is a surety, may be extended by the
governing body by resolution for an additional period not to exceed 18
months. As a condition or as part of any such extension, the amount of
any performance guaranty shall be increased or reduced, as the case
may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of the installation
as determined as of the time of the passage of the resolution.
[Amended 2-19-1990 by Ord. No. 6-90]
D. Township completion. If the required improvements have not been
installed in accordance with the required standards and specifications
§ 175-35 SEWERS § 175-35
155:609
of the Township within the time limit or extension thereof as described
in Subsection C above and the requirements of the performance
guaranties, the obligor and surety shall be liable thereon to the
Township for all reasonable costs of the improvements not installed,
and upon receipt of the proceeds thereof, the Township shall install
such improvements and/or the Township may use such portions of said
performance guaranties as have been deposited in cash with the Clerk
to assure the completion of said improvements in accordance with the
terms of this chapter and any applicable agreement.
E. Items required prior to acceptance of performance bond by the
governing body. The following items shall be submitted to the governing
body before acceptance of any performance bond:
(1) Letter from Township Engineer. Letter from the Township Engineer
stating that the proposed bond covers all the items required by the
Planning Board.
(2) List of items. A list of the items to be covered and the total cost
thereof.
(3) Township Attorney's approval. Approval by the Township Attorney
of the performance guaranty as to form and amount including
amount in cash.
(4) Conformance with Township ordinances. A letter from the
Township Engineer stating that all plans and specifications meet all
applicable Township ordinances.
(5) Letter to Board. After approval and acceptance of the performance
guaranty by the governing body, a letter stating that fact shall be
sent to the Planning Board before the Planning Board shall sign the
final plats for filing with the county.112
F. Notification of completion or substantial completion. Upon substantial
completion of all required appurtenant utility improvements and the
connection of the same to the public system, the obligor may notify the
governing body, in writing, by certified mail, addressed in care of the
Municipal Clerk, of the completion or the substantial completion of
improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Municipal Engineer.
Thereupon the Municipal Engineer shall inspect all improvements of
which such notice has been given and shall file a detailed report, in
writing, with the Township Committee, indicating either approval,
partial approval or rejection of such improvements with a statement of
reasons for any rejection. The cost of the improvements as approved or
rejected shall be set forth. [Added 2-19-1990 by Ord. No. 6-90]
112. Editor's Note: Former Subsection e6, Items Required by the Governing Board Before
Releasing the Performance Bond or Any Part Thereof, which immediately followed this
subsection, was redesignated as Subsection L on 11-18-1991 by Ord. No. 36-91.
§ 175-35 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-35
155:610
G. Approval, partial approval or rejection of improvements by the
Township Committee. The Township Committee shall either approve,
partially approve or reject the improvements, on the basis of the report
of the Municipal Engineer, and shall notify the obligor, in writing, by
certified mail, of the contents of said report and the action of the
Township Committee with relation thereto, not later than 65 days after
receipt of the notice from the obligor of the completion of the
improvements. Where partial approval is granted, the obligor shall be
released from all liability pursuant to its performance guaranty, except
for that portion adequately sufficient to secure provision of the
improvements not yet approved, provided that 30% of the amount of the
performance guaranty posted may be retained to ensure completion of
all improvements. Failure of the Township Committee to send or
provide such notification to the obligor within 65 days shall be deemed
to constitute approval of the improvements and the obligor and surety,
if any, shall be released from all liability, pursuant to such performance
guaranty for such improvements. [Added 2-19-1990 by Ord. No.
6-90]
H. Completion of rejected improvements. If any portion of the required
improvements are rejected, the Township Committee may require the
obligor to complete such improvements and, upon completion, the same
procedure of notification, as set forth in this chapter, shall be followed.
[Added 2-19-1990 by Ord. No. 6-90]
I. Rights of obligor. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit
the right of the obligor to contest by legal proceedings any
determination of the Township Committee or the Municipal Engineer.
[Added 2-19-1990 by Ord. No. 6-90]
J. Inspection fees. The obligor shall reimburse the Township for all
reasonable inspection fees paid to the Municipal Engineer for the
foregoing inspection of improvements, provided that the municipality
may require of the developer a deposit for all or a portion of the
reasonably anticipated fees to be paid to the Municipal Engineer for
such inspection.
K. Provisions to be applied by stage or section. In the event that final
approval is by stages or sections of development pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-38a, the provisions of this chapter shall be applied by stage or
section. [Added 2-19-1990 by Ord. No. 6-90]
L. Items required by the governing body before releasing the performance
bond or any part thereof. The procedures established in this chapter
and in the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., shall
govern the release or reduction of performance bonds. Before releasing
any guaranties or portions thereof, the following items shall be
submitted to the governing body:
(1) Recommendation. A recommendation by the Township Engineer
that the bonds be reduced or released.
§ 175-35 SEWERS § 175-35
155:611
§ 175-36. Maintenance guaranties.
All improvements required by the Planning Board shall, before being
accepted by the Township, be covered by a maintenance bond running in
favor of the Township of Washington in the amount of 15% of the estimated
cost of the improvements as estimated by the Township Engineer. Said
maintenance bond shall run for a period of two years and provide for the
proper repair and/or replacement of any such improvements during said
period. The two-year period shall be from the date of the acceptance of
the improvements by the Township, and no performance guaranty shall be
released by the Township until such time as the maintenance bond herein
required has been posted with the Township.
§ 175-37. Acceptance of improvements. [Amended 12-18-1978 by
Ord. No. 34-78]
(2) As-built plans. An as-built plan and profiles of all utilities and roads
with a certification as to the actual construction, the same to be
approved by the Township Engineer and, where applicable, by the
Municipal Utilities Authority Engineer. One copy of each shall be
sent to the Clerk and a Mylar or similar copy to the Township
Engineer. When a septic tank installation is involved, an additional
copy shall be sent to the Washington Township Board of Health.
(3) Liens. An affidavit from the developer that there are no liens or
other legal encumbrances on any of the improvements or utilities
proposed to be deeded to the Township.
(4) Approval of installation. A written statement from the Township
Engineer that all utilities and improvements required by the
Planning Board have been installed and completed in accordance
with applicable Township ordinances and builders agreement with
the Township.
(5) Maintenance bond. A maintenance bond as provided in § 175-36
herein.
(6) Deeds. Deeds, free and clear of all encumbrances, for all streets,
public easements, drainage and conservation easements, other
lands dedicated to public use and any improvements to be
dedicated or deeded to the Township or other public agency.
(7) Letter from Clerk. After the release of the bond, or any part thereof,
a statement to that effect shall be sent to the Planning Board by the
Township Clerk.
A. The governing body shall not accept any road or other improvement
into the municipal road system or for municipal ownership until the
maintenance bond has been posted and all deficiencies are corrected or
repaired. Each developer shall be responsible for snow removal in
§ 175-35 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-37
155:612
§ 175-38. Fees.
Fees for engineering inspections during and after construction and during
the maintenance period shall be in accordance with § 175-11 herein as
computed by the Township Engineer. In the event that construction
proceeds at a very slow rate and the work is not pursued in a diligent
manner resulting in an increase in the number of engineering inspections,
or in the event of faulty installations, inferior materials or workmanship
causing an increase in the number of engineering inspections, any
additional fees charged to the Township by the Township Engineer and any
additional inspection costs shall be paid by the subdivider.
§ 175-39. Off-tract improvements. [Amended 10-20-1980 by Ord.
No. 41-80]
major subdivisions until the roads are accepted by the Township in
accordance with § 175-35A(2).
B. The Township Committee need not accept any roads or other
improvements if the roads or other improvements will be used by the
developer to complete other portions of the subdivision.
A. For developments where preliminary approval is granted prior to the
effective date of this amendment. Any subdivision requiring off-tract
improvements, as defined herein, shall comply with the provisions of
this chapter. Performance and maintenance guaranties shall be
provided in accordance with §§ 175-35 and 175-36. The following
criteria shall be utilized in determining the proportionate share of such
improvement to the owner or subdivider:
(1) Street widening, alignment, corrections, channelization of
intersections, construction of barriers, new or improved traffic
signalization, signs, curbs, sidewalks, trees, utility improvements
not covered elsewhere, the construction of new streets and other
similar street or traffic improvements: The owner's or subdivider's
proportionate cost shall be in the ratio of the estimated peak-hour
traffic generated by the proposed property or properties to the sum
of the present deficiency in peak-hour traffic capacity of the
present facility and the estimated peak-hour traffic generated by
the proposed development. The ratio thus calculated shall be
increased by 10% for contingencies.
(2) Water distribution facilities, including the installation of new water
mains, the extension of existing water mains, the relocation of such
facilities and the installation of other appurtenances associated
therewith: The owner's or subdivider's proportionate cost shall be
in the ratio of the estimated daily use of water from the property or
properties in gallons to the sum of the deficiency in gallons per day
for the existing system or subsystem and the estimated daily use of
water for the proposed development. The ratio thus calculated shall
be increased by 10% for contingencies.
§ 175-37 SEWERS § 175-39
155:613
(3) Sanitary sewage distribution facilities, including the installation,
relocation or replacement of collector and interceptor sewers and
the installation, relocation or replacement of other appurtenances
associated therewith: The owner's or subdivider's proportionate
cost shall be in the ratio of the estimated daily flow in gallons to the
sum of the present deficient capacity for the existing system or
subsystem and the estimated daily flow from the proposed project
or development. In the case where the peak flow from the proposed
development may occur during the peak flow period for the existing
system, the ratio shall be the estimated peak flow rate from the
proposed development in gallons per minute to the sum of the
present peak flow deficiency in the existing system or subsystem
and the estimated peak flow rate from the proposed development.
The greater of the two ratios thus calculated shall be increased by
10% for contingencies and shall be the ratio used to determine the
cost to the owner or subdivider.
(4) Stormwater and drainage improvements, including the installation,
relocation or replacement of storm sewers, culverts, bridges and
catch basins and the installation, relocation or replacement of
other appurtenances associated therewith: The owner's or
subdivider's proportionate cost shall be in the ratio of the
estimated peak surface runoff, based on a fifteen-year storm
frequency, as proposed to be delivered into the existing system
measured in cubic feet per second to the sum of the deficient
existing peak flow in cubic feet per second for the existing system
and the estimated peak flow as proposed to be delivered. The ratio
thus calculated shall be increased by 10% for contingencies.
B. For development applications where preliminary approval is granted
after the effective date of this section.
(1) As a condition of preliminary approval, the developer may be
required by the approving agency to pay its pro rata share of the
cost of providing only reasonable and necessary street
improvement, recreational facilities, water, sewage, drainage and
other utility facilities, and easements therefor, located outside the
property limits of the development but necessitated or required by
the proposed development. Any such improvement shall be based
upon the circulation and comprehensive utility service elements of
the Master Plan. The developer shall either construct the off-tract
improvement or contribute its pro rata share of the cost at the
option of the approving authority, subject to the approval of the
governing body. If the developer constructs the improvement, it
shall be compensated by the Township of Washington for all but the
developer's pro rata share of the cost of the improvement.
(2) Standards for determining the developer's pro rata share of the
cost of an off-tract improvement.
§ 175-39 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-39
155:614
(a) If only the tract to be developed is benefited by the off-tract
improvement, the entire cost of the improvement will be paid
by the developer.
(b) If both the tract to be developed and other lots are benefited,
the developer shall pay any difference between the total cost of
the off-tract improvement and the total amount by which all
lots serviced thereby, including the developed tract, have been
specially benefited, unless the governing body, on
recommendation or referral by the approving authority,
determines that the improvement shall be constructed as a
local improvement, in which case the developer shall pay, in
addition, the value of the special benefit to be conferred upon
the developed property, and each other benefited property
owner shall pay the value of the benefit conferred upon its
respective lot.
(c) If any off-tract improvement is not to be constructed, the
developer's pro rata share shall be zero.
(3) Determination of the amount by which each lot served is benefited.
(a) Upon request of the approving authority, the Tax Assessor of
the Township of Washington shall determine which lots are
benefited by the proposed off-tract improvement and the
amount by which each such lot is specially benefited.
(b) The amount by which each tract is specially benefited shall be
determined in a manner consistent with N.J.S.A. 40:56-27 and
the manuals, rules and regulations prescribed by the State of
New Jersey for assessment and valuation of property and other
recognized authority deemed necessary by the Tax Assessor.
(c) If the Tax Assessor is unable to make the determination
required, the approving authority shall select a qualified
valuation company approved by the Tax Assessor to make the
determination in the manner prescribed.
(d) Any cost of making the determination shall be paid solely by
the developer from the developer's deposit.
(e) The determination of the Tax Assessor or valuation company
shall be confirmed, modified or rejected by the approving
authority after a hearing on notice to the developer. The
hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the approving
authority's rules of procedure.
(4) Deposit.
(a) Upon determination by the approving authority that an offtract
improvement is necessitated or required, the developer
shall submit an additional deposit in the sum of 120% of the
§ 175-39 SEWERS § 175-39
155:615
§ 175-40. Utilities or improvements owned by other agencies.
In the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities
automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the improvements
are covered by a performance or maintenance guaranty to another
governmental agency, no performance or maintenance guaranty, as the
estimated cost of obtaining, making and reviewing the
determination in Subsection B(3) above. All deposits shall be
handled in the same manner as set forth in § 175-11B(2).
(b) Failure of the developer to submit the deposit within 15 days of
request by the approving authority shall render the application
incomplete.
(c) Only the formula for calculating the developer's pro rata share
of the estimated cost of the off-tract improvement shall be
determined in conjunction with preliminary subdivision
approval. The estimated cost may be modified prior to
installation or in conjunction with final subdivision approval.
The actual amount shall be determined after completion, and a
refund will be made or an additional payment required,
depending on the actual cost of the improvement.
(d) If the improvement is to be constructed by the developer, the
approving authority shall require the developer either to pay
120% of the estimated cost of the improvement or to deliver a
performance guaranty in that amount, either prior to
installation or as a condition of final approval, whichever is
earlier. If the municipality is to construct the improvement, the
approving authority shall require the developer either to pay
120% of the developer's pro rata share of the estimated cost of
the improvement or to deliver a performance guaranty in that
amount as a condition of final approval. The funds shall be used
solely for the construction of the off-tract improvement.
C. Definitions. Unless the context otherwise indicates, for the purpose of
this chapter, certain words and phrases used are defined for the
purpose hereof as follows:
DRAINAGE — Includes without limitation, drainage necessary for
street or other improvements, including construction or improvement
of ditches, streams, rivers and other channels generally.
STREET IMPROVEMENTS — Includes, without limitation, all grading,
pavement, curbing, sidewalks, guardrails, shade trees, surveyor's
monuments, traffic control devices, right-of-way acquisitions and
professional and administrative costs relating thereto and all other
expenses and appurtenances associated therewith. Unless the
approving authority specifies to the contrary, street improvements shall
be to full Master Plan standards.
§ 175-39 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-40
155:616
case may be, shall be required by the Township for such utilities or
improvements.
§ 175-40 SEWERS § 175-40
155:617

ARTICLE VII
Design Standards
§ 175-41. Specific design requirements.
The subdivider shall observe the following requirements and principles of
land subdivision in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof. All
design standards shall comply with state requirements for improvements
for the handicapped.
A. Development pattern. The subdivision plat shall conform to design
standards that will encourage the most appropriate development
pattern within the Township.
B. Reservation of public areas.
(1) If the Master Plan or the Official Map provides for the reservation
of designated streets, public drainageways, flood control basins or
public areas within the proposed development, before approving a
subdivision the Planning Board may further require that such
streets, ways, basins or areas be shown on the plat in locations and
sizes suitable to their intended uses. The Planning Board may
reserve the location and extent of such streets, ways, basins or
areas shown on the plat for a period of one year after the approval
of the final plat or within such further time as may be agreed to by
the developer. Unless during such period or extension thereof the
Township shall have entered into a contract to purchase or institute
condemnation proceedings according to law for the fee or a lesser
interest in the land comprising such streets, ways, basins or areas,
the developer shall not be bound by such reservations shown on the
plat and may proceed to use such land for private use in
accordance with applicable development regulations.
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the streets and
roads, flood control basins or public drainageways necessitated by
the subdivision or land development and required for final
approval.
(3) The developer shall be entitled to just compensation for actual loss
found to be caused by such temporary reservation and deprivation
of use. In such instance, unless a lesser amount has previously been
mutually agreed upon, just compensation shall be deemed to be the
fair market value of an option to purchase the land reserved for the
period of reservation, provided that determination of such fair
market value shall include, but not be limited to, consideration of
the real property taxes apportioned to the land reserved and
prorated for the period of reservation. The developer shall be
compensated for the reasonable increased cost of legal,
engineering or other professional services incurred in connection
with obtaining subdivision approval or site plan approval, as the
case may be, caused by the reservation.
§ 175-41 SEWERS § 175-42
155:619
§ 175-42. Streets.
§ 175-43. Improvements to existing streets and rights-of-way.
[Amended 7-16-1979 by Ord. No. 58-79]
A. General. The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or
Official Map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of
existing streets and, where necessary in order to promote the orderly
flow of traffic and for the safety, welfare and convenience of the public,
shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extensions to adjoining
properties.
B. Right-of-way and pavement widths. The right-of-way and pavement
widths shall be measured from abutting lot line to abutting lot line and
shall not be less than the following:
(1) Primary or arterial roads. Right-of-way width, 80 feet; pavement
width, 50 feet.
(2) Collector streets. Right-of-way width, 60 feet; pavement width, 40
feet.
(3) Minor streets. Right-of-way width, 50 feet; pavement width, 30
feet.
(4) Culs-de-sac or dead-end turnarounds. Culs-de-sac or dead-end
turnarounds shall have a minimum radius of 40 feet on the curb.
(5) Internal roads. The right-of-way and pavement widths for internal
roads in multifamily, commercial and industrial developments and
zones shall be determined by the Planning Board on an individual
basis and shall in all cases be of sufficient width and design to
safely accommodate the maximum traffic, parking, loading and
access for emergency equipment, but in no case shall the pavement
be less than the 26 feet in width for two-way traffic.
(6) Rural historic scenic corridors. Notwithstanding the requirements
outlined in Subsections 175-42B(1), (2) and (3), the right-of-way
and pavement widths for rural historic scenic corridors, as
designated in § 175-52.2, shall be subject to modification by the
Planning Board on a case-by-case basis in order to accomplish the
objectives of the Master Plan and § 175-52.2. However, the Board
shall give due consideration to issues of public safety and may
require local improvements on rural historic scenic corridors upon
the advice of the Police Department, emergency services or
Township Engineer. [Added 8-19-2002 by Ord. No. 31-02]
A. Subdivisions that include existing streets which do not conform to
pavement and/or right-of-way widths as shown on the Master Plan or
Official Map shall dedicate and improve to Township specifications the
additional width from the center line of said road abutting the property
being subdivided. If the subdivision adjoins one side of an existing road
§ 175-42 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-43
155:620
§ 175-44. Street design standards.
which does not meet standards, only 1/2 of the required extra width
shall be dedicated and improved to Township specifications.
B. When the Planning Board, upon proof by the developer, recommends to
the governing body that in the interests of traffic safety, health,
convenience and good planning, postponement of the installation or
construction of improvements to a roadway is desirable, the governing
body may authorize such postponement, provided that the developer
shall deposit with the Township the cost of the improvement in lieu of
actually constructing or installing the same, or waive in whole or in part
the requirements for improvement.
C. On minor subdivisions, the Planning Board or Board or Adjustment,
upon proof by the developer and without referral to or approval by the
governing body, may grant approval conditioned only on such street
dedication and improvements which bear a reasonable relationship to
the needs created by and benefits conferred upon the subdivision.
D. Successive subdivisions. Subject to Subsection C above, when a lot is
successively subdivided so that three or more additional building lots
have been derived from it within a period of 36 months, the owner(s) of
the last lot or lots derived shall be required to install improvements in
front of all three or more lots per § 175-43A or B. The time period shall
be measured from the date of approval by written resolution of the
earlier subdivision to the date of approval by written resolution of the
later subdivision creating the third additional building lot, whether or
not any of these were memorializing resolutions. Notice of this
requirement shall be provided in minor subdivision deeds. [Added
10-21-1991 by Ord. No. 32-91]
A. Grades. [Amended 6-15-1981 by Ord. No. 24-81]
(1) Grades of arterial and collector streets and grades of other streets
which serve as either the principal access street(s) to a residential
development of more than 50 homes, or commercial or industrial
development, or the principal street(s) for circulation within such
development, shall not exceed 6%. Grades of other streets shall not
exceed 10%. No street shall have a minimum grade of less than 1%.
[Amended 11-17-1986 by Ord. No. 41-86; 12-15-1986 by Ord.
No. 45-86]
(2) For all side street intersections, the grade of the side street shall
not exceed 2%, either negative or positive, for a distance of 100
feet, measured from the center line of the intersected street.
[Amended 9-15-1986 by Ord. No. 31-86]
B. Intersections.
(1) Street intersections at arterial or collector streets shall be laid out
at right angles. Street intersections for other streets shall be laid
§ 175-43 SEWERS § 175-44
155:621
out as nearly at right angles as possible and in no case shall be less
than 70º. The block corners at intersections with arterial, collector
or collector loop streets shall be rounded at the right-of-way line
with a forty-foot radius curve and at the curbline with a fifty-foot
radius curve. The block corners at intersections for other streets
shall be rounded at the right-of-way line with a twenty-five-foot
curb radius and at the curbline with a thirty-five-foot radius curve.
[Amended 11-17-1980 by Ord. No. 52-80]
(2) All intersections shall have sight easements and sight distances to
provide for the following minimum sight distances, measured in
each direction, when observed from a point 10 feet before the
intersecting pavement and three feet above the pavement. Sight
easements shall be marked with monuments at the locations where
the sight easement intersects the right-of-way. [Amended
6-15-1981 by Ord. No. 24-81; 8-18-1986 by Ord. No. 28-86;
9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 27-88]
Allowable Speed
(miles per hour)
Required Sight Distance
(feet)
25 300
30 350
35 425
40 475
45 525
50 600
C. Where the proposed street does not connect opposite an existing street,
the offset between the existing and proposed intersections' center lines
shall be no less than the following: [Amended 5-16-1988 by Ord. No.
15-88]
(1) Intersections on arterial or collector roads: 250 feet.
(2) Other intersections: 150 feet.
D. Reverse curves. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be between all
reverse curves on any street. [Amended 9-21-1987 by Ord. No.
22-87]
E. Horizontal curves. The minimum horizontal curve radius shall be 600
feet on arterial and collector streets and 300 feet on all other streets.
[Amended 9-21-1987 by Ord. No. 22-87]
F. Grade Changes. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical
curves of sufficient radius to provide a smooth transition and proper
sight distance designed to the following standard as a minimum:
[Amended 6-15-1981 by Ord. No. 24-81]
§ 175-44 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-44
155:622
Type of Street or Road
Design Speed
(miles per hour)
Arterial 50
Collector 50
Minor 35
Permanent dead-end streets 25, if approved by the Township
Engineer
G. Dead-end streets.
(1) Dead-end streets shall not be longer than the following unless
authorized to be longer by the Planning Board: [Amended
6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 22-02]
Zone Feet
R-1 900
R-1/R-2 1,200
R-5 1,700
(2) They shall have a turnaround installed with a minimum curb radius
of 40 feet and shall be tangent wherever possible to the right side
of the street. The dead-end street should extend to the adjoining
property line where possible to permit its extension to serve
adjacent properties, with adequate provision made for the future
extension of the street to meet Township standards. Wherever a
turnaround is proposed on any street, the front yard setback line
shall be measured so as to maintain the front yard setback from the
turnaround right-of-way. [Amended 6-15-1981 by Ord. No.
24-81]
(3) The length of the dead-end street is defined as follows: [Added
12-15-1986 by Ord. No. 45-86]
(a) Starting at the extension of the proposed curbline on the
through street and ending at the furthermost curb location in
the turnaround area.
(b) Where a dead-end street includes one or more branch streets
or dead-end looped streets, the length shall be the sum of all
the streets lengths.
H. Names. Streets and subdivisions shall not have a name which will
duplicate or so nearly duplicate as to be confused with the names of
existing subdivisions and streets. The continuation of an existing street
shall have the same name. All subdivision and street names shall be
approved by the Planning Board. Subdivision names shall remain
exactly the same as the approved name for purposes of advertising or
for the sale of homes or lots within the subdivision. The approved
§ 175-44 SEWERS § 175-44
155:623
§ 175-45. Blocks.
§ 175-46. Lots.
subdivision name shall be reflected on any real estate or advertising
sign that is erected.
I. Time of paving. Installation of the base course and top course shall be in
compliance with the time restrictions as set forth in Chapter 172,
Streets and Sidewalks. [Added 2-20-1995 by Ord. No. 3-95]
A. General. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall
be such as to accommodate the size of the lot required in the area by
Chapter 215, Zoning, and to provide adequately for sewage disposal,
convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic.
B. Pedestrian crosswalks. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, public rights-ofway
through the blocks may be required in locations deemed necessary
by the Planning Board. Such rights-of-way shall be at least 10 feet wide
and may be improved by paving if so deemed by the Planning Board.
Block sizes for group housing, business or industrial use shall be
sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
C. Easements. Rights-of-way and easements within blocks in commercial,
business or industrial areas shall be not less than 30 feet in width.
A. General. Lot dimensions, front, side and rear yards and total area in
square feet shall not be less than the requirements of Chapter 217,
Zoning.
B. Side lines. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to
streets and radial to curved streets.
C. Frontage. Each lot must front upon a street, and the frontage shall not
be less than required by Chapter 217, Zoning, as measured along the
building setback line. The minimum frontage as measured along the
street right-of-way shall be at least 75 feet.
D. Setbacks. Where land has been dedicated for a widening of existing
streets, lots shall begin at such new street lines as may have been
established, and all setbacks shall be measured from such line.
E. Substandard suitability. Where there is a question of the suitability of a
lot or lots for their intended use due to factors such as rock formations,
soil conditions, steep slopes, streams, watercourses, flood conditions,
high-water table and/or other environmentally sensitive factors, the
Planning Board may require the applicant to submit information
satisfactory to the Planning Board on any or all of the above factors.
Upon receipt and review of the above information, the Planning Board
shall have the right to grant approval conditional on one or all of the
following: [Amended 2-18-1980 by Ord. No. 2-80]
§ 175-44 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-46
155:624
§ 175-47. Public use and service areas; utility placement.
(1) Compliance with specific actions to render the lot(s) suitable for
the intended use.
(2) Compliance with specific drainage and/or conservation easements
restricting portions of the lot(s) from the intended use.
(3) Compliance with building construction and/or design techniques
which would render the proposed structure compatible with the
specific unsuitability factor, including but not limited to slab
construction or foundation piling.
(4) Implementation of plans in compliance with § 175-27R. [Added
8-16-1982 by Ord. No. 19-82]
(5) For Cokesbury, Califon Turbotville, alluvial and muck soils,
compliance with the Shimel Report, a copy of which is on file at the
Planning Board office. [Added 5-10-1989 by Ord. No. 14-89]
F. Driveways. (Refer to Chapter 172, Streets and Sidewalks, Article III,
Driveway Construction.)
G. Lots on arterial or collector streets. Lots fronting on arterial or collector
roads shall, at the discretion of the Planning Board, be serviced by a
marginal access road or reverse frontage or be required to provide
driveways with turnarounds.
H. Minimum improvable lot area. [Added 12-18-1995 by Ord. No.
40-95]
(1) Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish criteria by
which residential building lots can be established that will provide
a suitable and adequate area in which to construct a dwelling and,
if required, a septic system. This section is intended to ensure the
development of lots that will allow the construction of dwellings
while minimizing the disturbance of environmentally sensitive
features.
(2) All lots within the R-1 Zone and the R-1/R-2 Zone that are created
in a subdivision shall have a minimum improvable lot area, within
the setbacks, of 7,500 square feet, in which the dwelling shall be
constructed. All lots within the R-5 Zone that are created in a
subdivision shall have a minimum improvable lot area, within the
setbacks, of 25,000 square feet, in which the dwelling shall be
constructed. [Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 22-02;
12-21-2009 by Ord. No. 30-09; 2-15-2010 by Ord. No. 02-10]
A. Utility easements. In any major subdivision or where unusual
circumstances warrant, as determined by the Planning Board,
easements may be required for utility installations. Such easements
shall be at least 30 feet wide and located after consultation with the
§ 175-46 SEWERS § 175-47
155:625
utility companies and Township agencies concerned. [Amended
6-15-1981 by Ord. No. 23-81]
B. Drainage and conservation easement. [Amended 2-17-1997 by Ord.
No. 3-97]
(1) Stream corridor and open water buffers. [Amended 5-21-2001 by
Ord. No. 13-01; 7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 23-03; 12-19-2005 by
Ord. No. 43-05]
(a) Purpose. The purposes of this subsection are the following:
[1] Maintain the quality of streams and open waters and
improve the quality of currently impaired streams and
open waters in the township.
[2] Protect significant ecological components of stream
corridors and open waters such as riparian areas,
floodplains, wetlands, woodlands, steep slopes and plant
and associated wildlife communities within the stream
corridors and open waters of the township; and minimize
flood-related damage to properties in the township.
[3] Complement the existing state, regional, county and
municipal stream corridor and open water protection and
management regulations and initiatives.
(b) Applicability. The development of all land containing a stream
corridor and/or state open waters shall be subject to the
regulations set forth in this § 175-47B(1). These provisions are
intended to regulate the type of activities, siting of structures
and engineering of all proposed development on parcels
located within a stream corridor and open water buffer as
defined in Chapter 111, Land Use Procedures. These
provisions apply to land disturbances resulting from or related
to any activity or use requiring a zoning variance, subdivision
and/or site plan approval.
(c) Exceptions.
[1] The full stream corridor and open water buffer area
requirement may be waived by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment in connection with variance applications for
improvements to existing developed lots which do not
exceed 2,500 square feet of additional impervious
coverage for those portions of such lots that include or
border a C1 or other stream or state open water having a
demonstrated drainage area of less than 50 acres or where
there is existing clearing adjacent to the C1 or other
stream or state open water, provided that not more than 50
linear feet of mowed lawn is permitted along the water's
edge. The remainder of any existing developed lot that
§ 175-47 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-47
155:626
includes or borders a C1 or other stream or state open
waters must have a minimum of 25 feet of naturalized area
(nonmowed) as measured from the top of the bank of the
C1 or other stream or state open waters. Specifications for
naturalizing such reduced buffer areas as native meadow
or restored forest are available from the Township
Planning Department. A conservation easement for this
area shall be dedicated to the Township, in form
satisfactory to the Township Attorney, pursuant to
§ 217-36.
[2] Maintenance of the berm of a dam is exempted from the
requirements of Subsection B(1)(c)[1] above.
[3] If a fifty-foot long (parallel to the C1 or other stream or
state open water) section of lawn is maintained adjacent to
a C1 or other stream or state open water, residents are
encouraged to substitute fine fescues (i.e., red fescue,
chewings fescue, hard fescue) within the twenty-five-foot
zone, as measured from the edge of the bank of the water,
in which fertilizers and pesticides are prohibited pursuant
to Chapter 85, in place of turf grasses such as Kentucky
bluegrass and perennial ryegrass. Fine fescues are low
growing and can be left nonmowed or need to be mowed
only two to three times per year.
(d) Permitted activities. All land which is in a stream corridor and
open water buffer shall remain in a natural condition or, if in a
disturbed condition, including agricultural activities, at the
time of adoption of this subsection, may be restored to a
natural condition. There shall be no clearing or cutting of trees
and brush except for removal of dead vegetation and pruning
for reasons of public safety or for the replacement of invasive
species with indigenous species; no altering of watercourses;
no dumping of trash, soil, dirt, fill, vegetative or other debris;
or regrading or construction, except for the following
activities.
[1] Open space uses that are primarily passive in character
shall be permitted to extend into the stream corridor and
open water buffer, provided near stream vegetation is
preserved, including:
[a] Wildlife sanctuaries, nature preserves, forest
preserves, fishing areas, with bank stabilization
measures implemented, game farms, fish hatcheries
and fishing reserves operated for the protection and
propagation of wildlife, but excluding enclosed
structures.
§ 175-47 SEWERS § 175-47
155:627
[b] Passive areas of public and private parklands,
including unpaved hiking, bicycle and bridle trails
outside of the stream channel, provided that said trails
have been stabilized with pervious materials.
[2] Stream bank stabilization or riparian reforestation, which
conform to the guidelines of the restoration plan described
in § 175-47B(1)(h), or wetlands mitigation projects that
have been approved by the Department of Environmental
Protection are permitted to extend into the stream
corridor and open water buffer.
[3] Stream corridor and open water buffer crossings by
recreational trails, roads, railroads, sewer and/or water
lines and public utility transmission lines are permitted,
provided that any disturbance is offset by buffer
improvements in compliance with the restoration plan, as
required by § 175-47B(1)(h), and any applicable state
permits are acquired.
[4] Agricultural land uses, including but not limited to
cropland, pasture, fencing, nursery operations, silviculture
and greenhouses, in existence as of the effective date of
this subsection, are permitted. With the exception of
fencing to exclude livestock from the stream corridor or
open water, or placement of livestock watering troughs to
keep livestock out of the stream channels or open waters,
no new agricultural structures shall be permitted in the
stream corridor buffer after the effective date of this
subsection unless specifically permitted under the
provisions of any state law which pre-empts the provisions
of this ordinance. Necessary livestock crossings are
permitted, with design approval.
(e) The following activities associated with development
applications after the effective date of this subsection are
permitted within the stream corridor and open water buffer
only if no other reasonable or prudent alternative is available:
[1] Private or public water supply wells that have a sanitary
seal, floodproofed water treatment facilities or pumping
facilities.
[2] Dredging or grading work incidental to permitted
structures or uses, including stream cleaning and stream
rehabilitation, lake dredging and other work undertaken
to improve hydraulics or to protect public health permitted
and approved by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJDEP).
[3] NJDEP-approved culverts, bridges and roads, provided
that they cross the stream corridor as directly as practical.
§ 175-47 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-47
155:628
[4] NJDEP-approved sanitary or storm sewers and outfalls.
[5] Health Department-approved septic systems.
[6] Utility transmission lines installed during periods of low
stream flow in accordance with soil erosion and sediment
control practices and approved by the Morris County Soil
Conservation District and permitted through the NJDEP.
(f) Prohibited activities. Any activity not specifically authorized
within Subsections B(1)(d) and (e) of this Section 175-47 shall
be prohibited within the stream corridor and open water
buffer. In no circumstances shall the following be permitted as
exceptions to such provisions:
[1] Any solid or hazardous waste facilities, including but not
limited to sanitary landfills, transfer stations or
wastewater lagoons.
[2] Junkyards, commercial and industrial storage facilities and
open storage of vehicles or materials.
(g) Requirements for activities in stream corridor and open water
buffers.
[1] All new major and minor subdivisions and site plans shall
be designed to provide sufficient areas outside of the
stream corridor and open water buffer to accommodate
principal structures, any customary accessory uses
appurtenant thereto, as well as all planned lawn areas.
[2] The applicant for any activity permitted in a stream
corridor and open water buffer shall rehabilitate any
degraded areas within the stream corridor and open water
buffer in a manner acceptable to the Planning Board/
Zoning Board unless the applicant demonstrates that it is
not economically feasible to do so. The applicant shall also:
[a] Rehabilitate and cure the effects of disturbance
caused during construction through the use of best
management practices (BMP's) recommended by the
NJDEP.
[b] Maintain the integrity of the surrounding plant
community.
[c] Maintain the existing ability of the stream corridor
and open water buffer to protect the water quality of
the stream. The applicant shall provide whatever
additional measures are necessary to assure that the
stream corridor and open water buffer will be
rehabilitated or preserved and to prevent additional
encroachments in the stream corridor and open water
§ 175-47 SEWERS § 175-47
155:629
buffer likely to occur as a result of the approval
granted. Conservation easements dedicated to the
Township of Washington, in form satisfactory to the
Township Attorney, shall be provided assuring that
there will be no further intrusion on the stream
corridor and open water buffer than that permitted by
the activity approved.
(h) Submission requirements and restoration plans.
[1] At the time of application to the Planning or Zoning Board
for development, the landowner, applicant or developer
shall submit a map of the project site delineating the
following conditions (at a scale of one inch equals 100
feet):
[a] Topographic information at a two-foot contour.
[b] Any slopes equal to or greater than 15% within the
site.
[c] Streams, wetlands and the one-hundred-year
floodplain;.
[d] Wetland boundary line(s).
[e] Stream corridor and open water buffer boundary
line(s).
[f] The location of all existing and proposed activities,
including improvements and land disturbance to be
located within any of the above boundaries.
[g] The applicant shall also provide, at a scale not smaller
than one inch equals 30 feet, a stream corridor and
open water buffer restoration plan that specifies best
management practices and construction methods to
be used to restore all land disturbed [see Subsection
B(1)(g)] within the stream corridor and open water
buffer. The restoration plan is subject to the approval
of the Township Environmental Consultant. All
plantings included in the plan shall consist of all native
trees, shrubs, grasses and wild flowers. The Township
can provide suggested specifications.
[2] A map and restoration plan pursuant to this subsection is
not required where the stream corridor and open water
buffer is not being disturbed and conservation easements/
deed restrictions are dedicated to the Township to ensure
that there will be no future clearing or disturbance of the
stream corridor and open water buffer.
§ 175-47 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-47
155:630
(2) Where it is desirable to preserve other areas within a subdivision
because of soil conditions, rock outcroppings, tree masses, wildlife
habitat, vistas or other significant horticultural, environmental or
natural features, there shall be provided a drainage and/or
conservation easement of sufficient area and width to protect and
preserve the aforementioned features. Such easements shall be
deeded to the Township prior to final subdivision approval and
carry the following limitations:
(a) No trees or shrubs shall be removed or destroyed on lands in
the easement, except in accordance with approved forest
management practices, and only upon approval of the
Township Committee or its designee. [Amended 5-21-2001
by Ord. No. 13-01]
(b) No topsoil, sand, gravel or minerals shall be excavated or
removed, except as may be required to build a pond, and then
only if the Township approves the design and structure of the
pond, it being the intent to preserve the natural function of the
floodplain.
(c) No buildings or structures of any description shall be erected.
(d) No fill of any kind shall be permitted, except as may be
required to build a road, and then only after the Township
approves the design of such road as part of the subdivision.
C. Underground utilities.
(1) In all subdivisions, all utility distribution lines or mains and all
services shall be installed underground. In all such subdivisions,
the applicant shall arrange with the serving utility for the
underground installation of the utilities distribution supply lines in
accordance with the provisions of the applicable standard terms
and conditions incorporated as a part of its tariff, as the same are
then on file with the State of New Jersey Board of Public Utility
Commissioners. However, lots which, in such subdivisions, abut
existing streets where overhead electric or telephone distribution
supply lines have heretofore been installed on any portion of the
street involved may be supplied with electric and telephone service
from those overhead lines, but the service connections from the
utilities' overhead lines shall be installed underground. [Amended
6-15-1981 by Ord. No. 23-81]
(2) In any particular situation where the applicant can clearly
demonstrate that because of unusual topographic conditions or
other unusual conditions having to do with the land, the installation
of such utilities underground is impracticable or otherwise not
feasible due to such conditions, then the Planning Board, in its
discretion, may waive the requirement for underground
installation.
§ 175-47 SEWERS § 175-47
155:631
§ 175-48. Conservation, erosion and sediment control.
Measures used to control erosion and reduce sedimentation shall, as a
minimum, meet the standards, specifications and recommendations of the
Morris County Soil Conservation District and the Township of Washington.
The following measures shall be included, where applicable, in the soil
erosion and sedimentation control plan.
(3) All underground utility work which will be under the pavement of
the street shall be laid sufficiently in advance to allow for complete
settlement of the trenches, and in no event shall construction work
be permitted over such excavation which, in the opinion of the
Township Engineer, has not properly settled.
D. Streetlights. Streetlights shall be installed at street intersections or
otherwise dangerous areas upon the recommendation of the Traffic
Officer and final review of the Chief of Police. [Amended 11-19-1979
by Ord. No. 72-79]
A. Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be done
in such a way as to minimize erosion.
B. Development shall preserve salient natural features, keeping cut-fill
operations to a minimum, and ensure conformity with topography so as
to create the least erosion potential and adequately handle the volume
and velocity of surface water runoff.
C. Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and
supplemented.
D. The disturbed area and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a
practical minimum.
E. Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable.
F. Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be used to protect exposed
critical areas during development.
G. The permanent (final) vegetation and physical erosion control measures
shall be installed as soon as practical in the development.
H. Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after
development. Where necessary, the rate of surface water runoff will be
mechanically retarded.
I. Until the disturbed area is stabilized, sediment in the runoff water shall
be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or
other acceptable methods.
J. Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation, regrading
or other development, it shall be the responsibility of the developer
causing such sedimentation to remove it from all adjoining surfaces,
§ 175-47 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-48
155:632
drainage systems and watercourses and to repair any damage at his
expense as quickly as possible.
K. Maintenance of all drainage facilities and watercourses within any
major subdivision is the responsibility of the developer until they are
accepted by the Township of Washington or other approving agency.
L. It is the responsibility of any person doing any act on or across a
communal stream, watercourse or swale or upon the floodway or rightof-
way thereof to maintain as nearly as possible in its present state the
stream, watercourse, swale, floodway or right-of-way during the
duration of such activity and to return it to its original or equal
condition after such activity is completed.
M. Maintenance of drainage facilities or watercourses originating and
completely on private property is the responsibility of the owner to the
point of open discharge at the property line or at a communal
watercourse within the property.
N. No person shall block, impede the flow of, alter or construct any
structure or deposit any material or thing or commit any act which will
affect normal or flood flow in any communal stream or watercourse
without having obtained prior approval from the Township of
Washington and the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, Division of Water Resources.
O. Rights-of-way or easements having a minimum width of 30 feet shall be
provided for all drainage facilities and watercourses which are
proposed for acceptance by the Township of Washington or other
official agency. [Amended 6-15-1981 by Ord. No. 23-81]
P. Each person who makes any surface changes shall be required to:
(1) Collect on-site surface runoff and dispose of it into the common
natural watercourse of the drainage area.
(2) Handle existing off-site runoff through his development by
designing the stormwater system to adequately handle storm
runoff from a fully developed area upstream.
Q. The soil erosion and sediment control plan shall include the following:
[Added 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 15-88]
(1) A detailed sequence of construction complying with the criteria
listed in § 175-39A through P.
(2) Where detention/retention basins and/or major cut/fill operations
are located on or near streams, springs or areas of high-water
table.
(a) No construction shall commence during the period from
October 15 to April 15.
§ 175-48 SEWERS § 175-48
155:633
§ 175-49. Surface water management standards. [Amended
4-19-1982 by Ord. No. 9-82; 2-18-1985 by Ord. No. 2-85; 5-19-1986
by Ord. No. 18-86; 10-15-1990 by Ord. No. 33-90; 5-18-1998 by Ord.
No. 13-98; 2-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2-05]
(b) All construction shall be completed and stabilized by October
15.
A. General standards. In the preparation of a surface water management
plan, the following shall be adhered to:
(1) All residential and nonresidential projects shall be designed in
accordance with the design standards of N.J.A.C 5:21, Residential
Site Improvement Standards (RSIS).
(2) Provisions shall be made to collect and recharge surface water
within the confines of the development whenever possible.
(3) Maximum use shall be made of presently existing surface water
runoff control devices, mechanisms or areas such as existing
berms, terraces, grass waterways, favorable hydrologic soils,
swamps, swales, watercourses, woodlands and floodplains in
accordance with their functional capabilities, as well as any
proposed retention structures. Use of existing surface water runoff
control devices, mechanisms or areas on one or more adjacent
properties may be considered by the Board upon receipt of
appropriate written permission from the owner(s) of the property
involved. Any decision by the Township to include adjacent
properties in the surface water runoff plan shall be based on the
following criteria:
(a) Environmental and/or surface water management conditions
peculiar to this site, specifically the presence of large natural
detention areas immediately downstream of the site.
(b) Installation of surface water runoff control devices in
accordance with the Surface Water Management Ordinance
would have a greater environmental impact.
(c) Approvals including use of adjacent properties will not have an
adverse effect on the neighboring properties, public streets,
public safety or the environment.
(d) Approvals including use of adjacent properties will not
foreseeably result in need for public or private improvements
to property other than the applicant's.
(4) Evaluation shall be made of the subwatershed(s) of which the site is
a part, the receiving stream channel capacities and point of
concentration structure.
§ 175-48 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-49
155:634
(5) Surface water runoff shall generally not be transferred from one
watershed to another.
(6) The plan shall coordinate with the soil erosion sediment control
plan and with all other applicable ordinances and statutes.
(7) To the greatest possible extent, the plan shall avoid the
concentration of flow and shall provide for the dissipation of
velocities at all concentrated discharge points.
(8) Re-establishing vegetative cover shall be in accordance with
Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
in New Jersey, adopted by the Morris County Soil Conservation
District, latest edition, and with all other applicable ordinances and
statutes.
(9) Timing for the plan shall establish permanent surface water
management measures prior to construction or other land
disturbance, to include seeding and establishing sod in grass
waterways.
B. Design standards. The plan shall utilize the following design standards:
(1) The design of stormwater management collection systems and
facilities, including detention facilities, for all projects (residential
and nonresidential) shall be in accordance with residential site
improvement standards.
(2) All outfalls are to be designed in a manner to retard velocities at
the outfall and to provide stream channel protection. Where an
outfall does not discharge directly into a well-defined watercourse,
and where the volume or rate of runoff is increased as determined
by the Township Engineer, the applicant shall obtain an easement
for a right of open discharge from the property owner between the
outfall and the receiving well-defined watercourse. The form of
easement for a right of open discharge shall be approved by the
Township Attorney. [Amended 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 8-05]
(3) When a natural drainage pattern is necessarily intercepted, as by a
street, provisions shall be made to accommodate surface water
runoff from the areas upstream from the point of interception.
(4) All structures and land treatment practices shall conform to
Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
in New Jersey, latest edition, adopted by the Morris County Soil
Conservation District, and all other applicable ordinances and
statutes.
(5) All water-carrying structures and/or retention areas shall be
completed and stabilized prior to diversion of water to them.
(6) Prior to developing the surface water management plan, there shall
be an inventory of the site showing all existing natural and man-
§ 175-49 SEWERS § 175-49
155:635
made drainage features (berms, terraces, grass waterways,
favorable hydrologic soils, poorly drained soils, swamps, swales,
watercourses, woodlands, floodplains). These shall be incorporated
in the plan to the greatest possible extent in accordance with their
functional capability.
(7) Drainageways and watercourses which normally carry or receive
surface water runoff shall not be overloaded with increased runoff,
sediment or other pollution resulting from disturbance of soil and
vegetation or incident to development, construction or other
activity.
(8) Due consideration shall be given to the relationship of the subject
property to the natural or established drainage pattern of the
subwatershed(s) of which it is a part as shown on the map
Watershed Overlay of the Washington Township Natural Inventory
Resource Inventory, Map No. 9.
(9) Surface water runoff controls shall be designed to assure that the
land in question uses no more than its proportionate watershed
share of the natural stream and culvert capacity.
(10) Additional surface water runoff control and recharge devices may
be proposed, such as rooftop storage, dry wells, cisterns and roof
drain infiltration trench, provided that they are accompanied by
detailed engineering plans and performance capabilities.
C. Porous media. In the case of detention facilities utilizing porous media
for ground absorption, such as dry wells, porous pavement or the like,
the volume of the porous media shall be large enough to contain the
total volume of rainfall excess within the voids. Ground absorption
systems shall be used only where the infiltration rate of the receiving
soil is acceptable as determined by percolation tests and soil borings or
as determined by the Township Engineer. Provisions shall be made to
contain overflow of such systems on site or to surface drain the
overflow in such a way as not to adversely affect any other property.
D. Surface impoundment. If detention facilities utilizing surface
impoundment, such as detention basins or rooftop storage, are used,
sufficient volume to fully contain the total volume of rainfall excess shall
be provided. The outlets of such facilities shall be designed to limit the
maximum discharge rate of stormwater runoff to what occurs at the site
under existing conditions and shall discharge in such a way as not to
adversely affect any other property. If rooftop storage is proposed, the
weight of the impounded water on the roof shall be accounted for in the
structural design of the building, and the roof shall be designed to
provide maximum protection against leakage. If earth berms or dikes
are used to create the impounding area, they shall be adequately
stabilized and the slopes protected with vegetative cover, paving or
riprap to protect against failure or breaching.
§ 175-49 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-49
155:636
E. Combination of techniques. If a combination of different stormwater
detention techniques is used, combined volume of the systems shall be
large enough to fully contain the total volume of rainfall excess.
F. Maintenance. The maintenance of all stormwater systems shall be in
accordance with an approved stormwater management system
maintenance plan. The plan shall be prepared to be consistent with the
Township Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SPPP).
G. Exceptions for site plans. Surface water management provisions cannot
be waived, except that, where there are peculiar conditions to a site
plan or to the area in the vicinity thereof, exceptions may be granted, at
the option of the Board, based on the following criteria:
(1) Waivers shall include mitigation measures at sites as outlined in the
Township Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SPPP).
(2) Compliance with the literal enforcement of part or all of the
standards is impractical, due to the size of the lot, shape of the lot
or lack of availability of receiving streams/storm drains.
(3) The amount of the increased impervious area (roofs, pavements,
etc.) relating to the application and prior applications where
waivers were granted by the Board does not exceed 7,500 feet.
(4) The granting of the exceptions will not have an adverse effect on
the neighboring properties, public streets, public safety or the
environment.
(5) The granting of the exceptions will not foreseeably result in need
for public or private improvements to property other than the
applicant's.
H. Landscaping. All detention/retention basins shall include landscaping
utilizing the following design criteria:
(1) Landscaping shall be compatible with the surrounding area.
(2) Where the adjacent area is wooded:
(a) Deciduous trees, evergreen trees or shrubs hardy to our plant
zone shall be installed within the basin, excluding the dam
embankment, and the surrounding disturbed area. Trees/
shrubs within the basin shall be of a type compatible with
flooding/wet conditions.
(b) The only grassed area shall be the detention basin dam
embankment, which shall be free of trees/shrubs and shall
require periodic mowing.
(3) Where the adjacent area is lawn:
§ 175-49 SEWERS § 175-49
155:637
§ 175-50. Fire-protection system. [Added 2-16-1987 by Ord. No.
3-87; amended 4-16-1990 by Ord. No. 11-90]
For all subdivisions of five or more lots, where public water is not proposed,
the subdivider shall, at his expense, install a fire-protection system. For
subdivisions of five or more lots and less than 10 lots, a waiver may
be granted if a public water system or fire-protection system is located
within 5,000 feet of all proposed dwellings as measured along roads and
driveways. The fire-protection system shall be in accord with the following
criteria:
(a) The detention basin shall be a grassed area with suitable trees/
shrubs located around the perimeter and within the basin,
excluding the dam embankment.
(b) The grassed areas shall require periodic mowing.
(4) The landscaping plan approval for each site shall be based on the
conditions at and around the site and based on visual aesthetics,
durability and ease of homeowner maintenance.
A. Every home in the subdivision must be within 1,000 feet, as measured
along the streets and driveways, of an adequate source of water for fire
protection. For large subdivisions, more than one source of water for
fire protection may be necessary. [Amended 4-17-2000 by Ord. No.
11-00]
B. The adequate source of water for fire protection shall consist of the
following alternatives:
(1) Underground storage tank(s).
(2) Fire ponds or retention basing.
(3) Lakes or streams or an equivalent alternate acceptable to the
Board.
C. Underground storage tanks. [Amended 9-18-1995 by Ord. No.
31-95]
(1) For underground storage tanks, an adequate source of water shall
be defined as a minimum of 30,000 gallons. The top of the tank
shall be four or more feet underground. The tank shall be of
fiberglass or other noncorrosive construction and shall be installed
in accordance with the manufacturer's specification. In areas of
high-water table, the tank shall be installed with antiflotation
footings and straps. The tank shall include an access manhole, an
inspection port to measure the water level, venting for 1,500
gallons per minute of discharge suction piping connected to the
bottom of the tank, a suction hydrant with 4 1/2 N.S.T. threads
located at an elevation no higher than 12 feet above the bottom of
§ 175-49 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-50
155:638
§ 175-51. Private agricultural overlay zone road standards. [Added
7-18-1994 by Ord. No. 15-94]
the tank and a suitable access road to the hydrant. [Amended
4-17-2000 by Ord. No. 11-00]
(2) Underground storage tanks shall be provided as follows:
(a) Subdivisions of five but not more than 10 lots: a minimum of
one tank.
(b) Subdivisions of 11 but not more than 20 lots: a minimum of two
tanks.
(c) Subdivisions of 21 but not more than 30 lots: a minimum of
three tanks.
(d) Any increment of one to 10 lots, over 30 lots: a minimum of one
additional tank.
NOTE: Each tank must have a minimum capacity of 30,000
gallons. [Amended 4-17-2000 by Ord. No. 11-00]
D. Fire ponds.
(1) For fire ponds and/or retention basins, an adequate source of water
shall be defined as a minimum of 30,000 gallons, provided that the
fire pond or the lower section of retention basins used for fire
storage is: [Amended 4-17-2000 by Ord. No. 11-00]
(a) At least five feet deep.
(b) The thirty-thousand-gallon volume excludes the bottom one
foot of depth and the top two feet of depth.
(c) The pond has an impervious bottom.
(d) The pond has an adequate flow of water during drought
conditions.
(2) The pond/basin shall be equipped with a standard suction point
with strainer to a suction hydrant and a suitable access road to the
hydrant.
E. Lakes or streams may be used, subject to the subdivider's
demonstrating that the lake or stream meets the criteria set forth above
for fire ponds.113
A. Dead-end street not to exceed 2,000 feet.
B. A loop or cul-de-sac to accommodate a fire engine.
113. Editor's Note: Former Subsection 16-8.11, Standards for Recreation Facilities, added
6-17-1991 by Ord. No. 16-91, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
8-21-1995 by Ord. No. 27-95.
§ 175-50 SEWERS § 175-51
155:639
§ 175-52. Geotechnical improvements. [Added 4-20-1998 by Ord.
No. 4-98]
Where geotechnical improvements are required by § 175-30, the design and
construction of the improvements shall be accomplished so as to minimize,
to the greatest extent practical, the development of future sinkholes or
other karst hazards and the pollution of surface and ground water
resources. Table 1 (Design Elements, Risks, Testing Requirements,
Performance Standards, Preferred Design Features and Remedial Plan
Elements for Development on Karst Terrain)114 represents the best
technical judgment currently available and may be used as a guide.
However, none of the items in Table 1 are intended to preclude the
application of the best professional judgment, innovation and experience.
§ 175-52.1. Open space and open lands guidelines. [Added
3-19-2001 by Ord. No. 5-01]
The following guidelines should be considered in determining the
configuration and location of open space parcels resulting from
development under open space cluster provisions and open lands resulting
from lot averaging subdivisions:
C. Minimum width of 20 feet.
D. Maximum grade of 10% permitted.
E. Paving of the private road and the installation of drainage facilities shall
only be required if the Township Engineer determines that they will be
needed to prevent drainage problems on the adjacent Township roads
or the private road.
F. The ownership and maintenance of the private road will be the
responsibility of the lot owners.
G. Private roads shall comply with driveway requirements per Chapter
172, Streets and Sidewalks, Article III, Driveway Construction, except
for the more stringent requirements cited above.
A. The preserved open space or open lands area shall be configured in
such a manner as to facilitate agricultural use. Factors such as, but not
limited to, the proposed proximity of the open space or open lands to
adjacent tracts containing farming operations, the ability to create
large contiguous tracts of open space and/or farmland and the
desirability of maximizing separation between farming operations and
residential units should be considered.
B. In order to maintain the rural character and scenic viewsheds of the
Township, as perceived from the public rights-of-way, open space and
open lands parcels should be located in such manner as to preserve
114. Editor's Note: Table 1 is located on file in the Township Clerk's office.
§ 175-51 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-52.1
155:640
§ 175-52.2. Rural historic scenic corridors. [Added 8-19-2002 by
Ord. No. 31-02]
scenic vistas and preserve the rural character of farmsteads, barns and
homesteads after development.
C. Where subdivision tracts include existing farmland operations, open
space parcels and designated open lands should be configured to
preserve such uses, to the greatest extent possible, in order to facilitate
the continuation of farming.
D. Open space parcels and designated open lands should be located in
such a manner (i.e., physical separation) as to reduce the potential for
conflicts between farm operations and residential uses.
E. Proposed roads should be located within the development portion of the
property. It is the intent of this section to keep the open space or open
lands portion continuous and free of roadway intrusions; however,
adequate access must be provided to the open space or open lands
area.
F. Open lands created as a result of these regulations may be used for
recreation, agriculture or resource conservation. No buildings or
structures shall be constructed or maintained on the deed-restricted
open lands except such structures that are accessory to the
agricultural, natural resource conservation or open space use.
G. Existing or proposed equestrian trails, and other trails, including
Patriot's Path, which may be shown on the Master Plan of Washington
Township or Morris County, and which are located on lands within any
proposed cluster or lot averaging subdivision, shall be identified on the
preliminary subdivision plat and preserved, established or relocated, as
may be appropriate. The Planning Board may require easements for
this purpose.
A. Where normally required road improvements to public roadways would
change the character of a rural historic scenic corridor, alternate
improvements or treatments should be required instead of upgrading
the roadway. In order to retain the visual character of the rural portions
of the Township, road improvements should not be initiated to open
rural lands for development. Limiting the access points along rural
historic scenic corridors will serve to promote the flow of traffic while
also maintaining the scenic qualities of the roadside view. [Amended
10-21-2002 by Ord. No. 39-02]
B. These roadways have varying right-of-way and cartway widths and
sometimes have buildings and structures within close proximity to the
right-of-way. These roadways have changed little from their historic
origins, generally follow the existing terrain, and have radii and grades
that do not meet current standards. The intent of this designation is to
maintain the rural character of these roadways so as to preserve this
§ 175-52.1 SEWERS § 175-52.2
155:641
important component of the Township's rural past. A minimum width
of 20 feet, or as recommended by the New Jersey residential site
improvement standards, should be the roadway design criteria.
Additionally, two paved shoulders of two feet width are needed for line
painting, snow removal and protection of pavement edge.
C. The treatment of roadside features is an important element in
maintaining the integrity of the scenic corridor. A rural historic road
buffer easement, 50 feet in width, shall be provided adjacent to the
street right-of-way, in addition to the shade tree easement and/or sight
easement which may be required. The minimum fifty-foot buffer
easement shall be replanted with similar vegetation wherever natural
vegetation is removed. Common driveways shall be utilized to limit new
driveway cuts, and limited access for new streets shall be permitted in
order to maintain the character of the scenic corridor. To the maximum
extent possible, historic features along the roads, such as stone rows,
hedgerows, stone retaining walls and fences, should not be disturbed.
Sidewalks should be separated from the roadway, meandering and
constructed of alternative materials in order to maintain the character
of the scenic corridor.
D. The following roads are designated as rural historic scenic corridors:
Name of Street
Apgar Road (east of Green Hills Road)
Beacon Hill Road
Black River Road
Califon Road
Camp Washington Road
Church Lane
Coleman Road
Drakestown Road (north of Route 46)
East and West Springtown Road
East Valley Brook Road
Fairview Avenue (north of Naughright Road)
Fishers Mine Road
Flocktown Road
Fox Hill Road
Frog Hollow Road
Hacklebarney Road
Heath Lane
Hollow Brook Road
Kings Highway
§ 175-52.2 WASHINGTON CODE § 175-52.2
155:642
Name of Street
Laketown Road
The Maples (East/West/North)
Maple Lane
Middle Valley Road
Mission Road (Reservoir Road to Marjorie Drive)
Mount Lebanon Road
North Four Bridges Road
North Mt. Lebanon Road
Old Turnpike Road
Parker Road
Pickle Road
Pleasant Grove Road
Reservoir Road
Sand Hill Road
Spring Lane
Stephensburg Road
Turtleback Road
Van Pelt Road
West Valley Brook Road (south of Beacon Hill Road)
Wherli Road
Zellers Road
§ 175-52.2 SEWERS § 175-52.2
155:643

ARTICLE VIII
Violations
§ 175-53. Failure to obtain approval.
If before final subdivision approval has been granted any person transfers
or sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except pursuant to an agreement
expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval, as owner or agent, any
land which forms a part of a subdivision for which Township approval is
required by ordinance, such person shall be subject to a penalty not to
exceed $1,000, and each lot disposition so made shall be deemed a separate
violation.
§ 175-54. Civil action.
A. In addition to the foregoing, the Township may institute and maintain a
civil action:
(1) For injunctive relief.
(2) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such
a contract of sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued
in accordance with Article 6, Section 44, of the Municipal Land Use
Law.115
B. In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be
entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land from which the
subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the developer
or his assigns or successors, to secure the return of any deposits made
or purchase price paid, and also a reasonable search fee, survey
expense and title closing expense, if any. Any such action must be
brought within two years after the date of the recording of the
instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of said land or within six
years, if unrecorded.
115. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
§ 175-53 SEWERS § 175-54
155:645
Chapter 179
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 175.
Zoning — See Ch. 217.
Public bathing — See Ch. 235.
§ 179-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PRIVATE POOLS — Applies to pools located in or above the ground, both
permanent and portable, having a water depth exceeding 12 inches, and
owned by individuals, groups of individuals, clubs or any type of
organizations.
SWIMMING POOL — Includes fill and draw flow-through and recirculation
pools, outdoor and indoor, which are artificially constructed to provide
recreational facilities for swimming, bathing or wading and all buildings,
equipment and appurtenances thereto. It shall not include outdoor ponds,
rivers or lakes, nor baths used for cleansing of the body or practice of the
healing arts.
§ 179-2. Discharge of water.
No discharge of water shall be permitted from any pool except to a brook,
dry-well seepage pit, storm sewer or lawn sprinkling system. Under no
circumstances shall water from any pool be permitted to flow, overflow, seep
or drain onto adjacent property.
§ 179-3. Fencing. [Amended 9-17-1979 by Ord. No. 67-79]
Fencing requirements for all in-ground pools shall be in accordance with the
BOCA Basic Building Code/1978.
§ 179-4. Lighting.
Lighting used above the surface of the water to illuminate any private
swimming pools shall be so arranged and shielded that the light is reflected
away from adjoining premises.
§ 179-5. Enforcement.
A. The Building Inspector of the township shall enforce the provisions of
this chapter. In addition thereto, any other person may also make a
complaint for any violation of this chapter before the Municipal Court.
§ 175-54 WASHINGTON CODE § 179-5
179:646
§ 179-6. Existing pools. [Amended 9-17-1979 by Ord. No. 67-79]
All existing private swimming pools which do not fall within the
requirements of § 179-3 shall be fenced, as herein required under § 179-7,
within 120 days of enactment of this chapter.
§ 179-7. Access ladders or steps and fencing. [Amended 9-17-1979
by Ord. No. 67-79]
§ 179-8. Board of Review. [Amended 9-17-1979 by Ord. No. 67-79]
A Board of Review is hereby established consisting of the members of the
Township Committee. The Board of Review shall hear and decide requests
for exemptions from the requirements of this chapter.
Chapter 182
TAXATION
B. Prior to the issuance of any complaint there shall be effected personal
service of an abatement notice setting forth the nature of the violation
and requiring correction within three days. If the owner of the pool is
unable to correct the violation within this period of time, he shall
immediately discontinue the use of the pool and cause the water to be
completely drained from the pool in order to avoid prosecution as
herein provided.
A. Any access ladder or steps with any above-the-surface-type swimming
pools, whether permanent or portable, shall be removed from the pool
when not in use. "Removal" shall be defined as not capable of being
used to enter the pool.
B. Above-the-surface pools which do not have smooth, unbroken vertical
sidewalls or equally unclimbable, vertically reinforced sides four feet or
more in height above the surface of the ground shall be completely
enclosed by a permanent fence of durable material at least four feet in
height, which fence shall be constructed so as not to have openings,
holes or gaps larger than two inches measured horizontally, except that
chain link fencing may have openings not greater than two inches
measured on any side. The fence shall be located a minimum of three
feet from the waterline of any portion of the pool. If a pool has attached
thereto a raised deck, the fence shall be located no closer than three
feet from the raised deck. All gates and doors used in conjunction with
the fence shall meet the same specifications as the fence itself and shall
be equipped with locking devices which are self-closing. Gates shall be
locked at all times that a pool is not in use. All self-latching devices shall
be placed at the top of the gate and make inaccessible to small
children.116
116. Editor's Note: Former Section 19-8, Exemptions, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed 9-17-1979 by Ord. No. 67-79.
§ 179-5 TAXATION § 179-8
182:647

ARTICLE I
Home Improvements Tax Exemption
[Adopted 4-21-1986 by Ord. No. 13-86 (Ch. 25 of the Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 182-1. Designation as qualified municipality.
The Township of Washington hereby acknowledges having been duly
designated as a qualified municipality pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 104, as
amended.117
§ 182-2. Area of eligibility.
The following described area of the Township of Washington is hereby
designated as the area in which residential buildings may be eligible for tax
exemption pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 104, as amended: Block 28, Lots 26 -
33; Block 33, Lots 45 - 49; Block 34, Lots 50 - 54; Block 35, Lots 14 - 19.
§ 182-3. Amount of improvements exempted.
All housing units which are in buildings at least 20 years old and which
are otherwise eligible for tax exemption pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 104,
as amended, the regulations duly promulgated pursuant hereto and this
article, shall have exempt from taxation the first $10,000 of otherwise
taxable improvements for a period of five years following completion of such
improvements.
§ 182-4. Compliance with statute and regulations.
No exemption of improvements from taxation shall be allowed except
pursuant to statute and duly promulgated regulations of the Department of
Community Affairs and the Division of Taxation.
§ 182-5. Duties of Tax Assessor.
The Tax Assessor of the Township of Washington shall implement P.L. 1975,
c. 104, as amended, in the Township of Washington and shall accept and
receive applications for exemption of improvements from taxation and shall
record such applications and retain them as a permanent part of the
municipal tax records.
§ 182-6. Notice to taxpayers.
The Tax Collector shall, within a year of the adoption of this article, supply
to each residential taxpayer in the approved area a notice concerning the
tax exemption program, which notice shall be in a form approved by the
Department of Community Affairs.
117. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.72 et seq.
§ 182-1 TAXATION § 182-6
182:649
Chapter 185
TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 203. Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 207.
§ 182-6 WASHINGTON CODE § 182-6
182:650
ARTICLE I
Taxicabs
§ 185-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRIVER — Any person who drives a regulated vehicle.
OPERATOR — Any person, corporation, partnership or association who
operates any regulated vehicle.
OWNER — Any person, corporation, partnership or association in whose
name any regulated vehicle is registered with the New Jersey Motor
Vehicles Commission.
REGULATED VEHICLE — Any automobile or motor car, commonly called a
"taxicab," engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire which is
held out, announced or advertised to operate or run or which is operated or
run over any of the streets or public highways of this state and particularly
accepts and discharges such persons as may offer themselves for
transportation from points or places to points or places within or without
the state.
§ 185-2. License required.
No person shall drive, keep or use for hire or cause to be driven, kept
or used for hire, any regulated vehicle within the Township of Washington
unless the vehicle and the driver thereof are licensed according to the
provisions of this article.
§ 185-3. Requirements for license.
A. License fees. Every applicant for a license for a regulated vehicle shall
pay to the Township, a license fee as follows:
(1) For each regulated vehicle: $50.
(2) For each driver license issued to a driver of a regulated vehicle:
$20.
(3) For any replacement of a lost license or for a revised license: $25.
B. Term of license. All licenses shall be valid from the day of issuance and
shall expire on December 31 thereafter. For any license issued on or
after September 1, the fee shall be one-half of the fee set forth in
§ 185-2A.
A. Regulations.
(1) Every applicant for a license as owner shall be at least 21 years of
age.
§ 185-1 TAXATION § 185-3
182:651
(2) Every applicant for license as a driver must be 21 years of age and
a holder of a valid automobile driver's license issued by the State of
New Jersey.
(3) Not more than five licenses for regulated vehicles shall be
outstanding in the Township at one time.
(4) The license may be transferred from vehicle to vehicle owned by
the licensee on application made and approved by the Township
Committee.
(5) All owners or operators, upon applying for one or more regulated
vehicle licenses, shall be required to maintain a business office.
B. Application. Every applicant for a license under this ordinance shall file
with the Township Clerk a sworn written application, in duplicate, on a
form to be furnished by the Clerk, containing the following information:
(1) Full name, including middle initial.
(2) Permanent home address.
(3) If an owner, a description of all vehicles, including the VIN and New
Jersey Motor Vehicles Commission registration number.
(4) If a driver, the New Jersey driver's license number and date of
expiration and copy of the license.
(5) A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, the
nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed
therefore.
(6) If an owner, the business office address and telephone number.
(7) Three recent photographs of passport size.
(8) If a driver, the name of the taxi company with whom he or she shall
be employed.
(9) Proof that the applicant is at least 21 years of age.
(10) Proof that the applicant is either a citizen of the United States or a
legal resident alien.
(11) If the applicant is a corporation, proof that the corporation is either
incorporated in the State of New Jersey or authorized to do
business in New Jersey.
(12) If an owner, proof of insurance as required herein.
(13) Certification that all child support obligations are current pursuant
to the standard set forth in N.J.S.A. 2A:17-56.41.
(14) A schedule, if an owner, of the fares proposed to be charged.
§ 185-3 WASHINGTON CODE § 185-3
182:652
C. Investigation of applicant.
(1) Each applicant for a regulated vehicle driver license shall, upon
making application therefore and annually with each license
renewal, submit to the performance of a criminal history
background check, including the submission of fingerprints, at the
applicant's sole cost and expense by making an appointment with
the state contract vendor. In addition, each applicant shall submit
to the Township Police Department his or her driver abstract from
the New Jersey Motor Vehicles Commission.
(2) The applicant shall not have been convicted of any of the crimes set
forth in N.J.S.A. 48:16-3.b.(1) and (2). If the applicant is a
partnership, then no partner may have such a record. If the
applicant is a corporation, then neither the corporation nor any
officer or director may have such a record.
(3) Prior license revocations. The applicant must have no record of
prior revocation by any jurisdiction of a license related to the
taxicab business. If the applicant is a partnership, then no partner
may have such a record. If the applicant is a corporation, then
neither the corporation nor any officer or director may have such a
record.
(4) The applicant must be tested for the presence of controlled
dangerous substances, as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2, within 30
days of the filing of his or her application at a facility to be
designated by the Township. The results shall be provided to the
Chief of Police and shall show the applicant to be free of controlled
dangerous substances. The same test shall be required for license
renewal. The applicant shall assume the cost of all testing.
Operators shall also be subject to testing for controlled dangerous
substances in the event of an accident by the operator or the
observance of an operator driving the regulated vehicle in a
careless, reckless or suspicious manner.
(5) A copy of the application and all of the reports and records,
including the results of the criminal history record background
check, which results shall be kept confidential, shall be provided to
the Chief of Police who shall review same and render a
recommendation to the Township Committee as to whether the
license should be granted based on the criteria set forth in this
ordinance and in N.J.S.A. 48:16-3.b.
D. Issuance of license. The Township Clerk shall present the completed
application to the Township Committee, who shall, at the next regularly
scheduled meeting after receipt of the recommendation of the Chief of
Police, determine, based on the recommendation of the Chief of Police,
and application of the factors set forth in Subsection C, whether the
license shall issue. If the Township Committee so directs, the Township
Clerk shall issue the license to the applicant. Where an owner's license
§ 185-3 TAXATION § 185-3
182:653
has previously been issued, the approval of the Township Committee
shall not be required as a condition for the issuance of additional
vehicle licenses. Prior to placing each additional vehicle into service,
the owner must amend its license application setting forth the
character of the vehicle proposed to be licensed and such other facts as
the Township may require. Applications for a license as a driver of the
regulated vehicle may be approved by the Township Clerk.
E. Information for licenses.
(1) Each license issued under this article for the operation of a
regulated vehicle shall state the name of the person to whom the
license is granted, the number of the license and the date of
expiration and the motor vehicle registration number and vehicle
identification number for each regulated vehicle. Each license shall
be signed by the Township Clerk and shall have the Township Seal
affixed thereto.
(2) Each license issued to the driver of a regulated vehicle shall state
the full name of the person to whom the license is granted, the
operator's business name, the number of the license and the date of
expiration as well as a clear picture of the driver.
(3) Transfer of owner's license. The owner's license may be transferred
from one vehicle to another belonging to the same owner, only after
an application in writing has been submitted and approval has been
granted by the Township Clerk and payment has been made to the
Township Clerk of a transfer fee of $15. All applications for transfer
shall be made on forms to be furnished by the Township and shall
be accompanied by the transfer fee.
F. Display of license.
(1) Every owner to whom a license is granted under this section shall
cause the number of the license to be displayed in figures three
inches high and located in the center of the rear quarter panels on
the driver and passenger sides and the rear center line of the trunk
of the vehicle. Each regulated vehicle so licensed shall display on
each rear door the name of the Township of Washington in letters
three inches in height.
(2) Inside of the licensed vehicle where the sign shall be plainly visible
to the passengers, the owner shall keep a card with his name and
the number of his license, together with the rate of fare and also
the certificate that he has complied with insurance requirements of
the State of New Jersey relating to vehicles for hire.
(3) Every driver of a licensed vehicle shall display the number of his
license conspicuously on his cap, hat or outer garment.
§ 185-3 WASHINGTON CODE § 185-3
182:654
§ 185-4. Inspections and maintenance.
The Township employee designated by the Township Committee may
inspect all licensed vehicles and report thereon to the Township Committee.
The Township Committee may suspend the license of any licensed vehicle
deemed to be insecure or unsanitary until such time as the vehicle shall
be made safe and sanitary to the satisfaction of the Committee, it being
provided that the owner thereof may demand and obtain a hearing at any
meeting of the Committee, and also the reinspection of the vehicle by the
Township employee designated by the Township Committee at any time
after 24 hours from the time of suspension.
§ 185-5. Revocation and hearing.
§ 185-6. Duties of driver.
Every driver of the licensed vehicle shall have the right to demand payment
of the legal fare in advance and may refuse employment unless it be
prepaid, but no driver shall otherwise refuse or neglect to convey any
orderly person or persons upon request as designated by this article, to any
place in the Township, nor extort or demand any sum for so doing, other
than the fare displayed in the vehicle pursuant to § 185-3F(2), provided
that licensed vehicles answering calls or at the time actually engaged in
commuting service shall not be deemed to violate this section on refusing
other passengers.
§ 185-7. Insurance; power of attorney.
G. Clerk's register. The Township Clerk shall keep a register of licenses
granted showing the number and date of issuance and expiration of
each license and the name of each person licensed.
A. Any license granted under this article may be suspended or revoked by
the Township Committee, after notice and a hearing, whenever it shall
appear that the person to whom the license was granted has failed to
furnish or keep in force the insurance policy and power of attorney
required in accordance with § 185-7, or to comply with any term or
provision of this article or any law of the State of New Jersey regarding
the ownership and operation of regulated vehicles or to maintain any
regulated vehicle in a safe or sanitary condition. After such revocation
or suspension, the license shall be inoperative and of no effect.
B. Any such contemplated hearing shall be held within 15 days following
an order of suspension upon notice, which notice shall set forth the
reasons for the proposed revocation or suspension.
A. Insurance. The owner of the licensed vehicle must file with the
Township Clerk an insurance policy issued by an admitted insurance
company duly licensed to transact business in New Jersey, providing for
annual motor vehicle liability insurance coverage of not less than
§ 185-3 TAXATION § 185-7
182:655
§ 185-8. Prohibitions.
§ 185-9. Hours of operation.
Every owner shall maintain a dispatch service in the Township Monday
through Friday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., and on
Saturday from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. However, this shall not be construed
as restricting the owner from operating additional hours each day.
$500,000 per incident, which insurance must remain in effect for the
period of the license and any renewal thereof.
B. Power of attorney. The owner shall execute and deliver to the Township
Clerk a power of attorney, wherein the owner shall appoint the Chief
Financial Officer of the Township his true and lawful attorney for the
purpose of acknowledging service of process out of a court of
competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of the
indemnity granted under the insurance policy filed.
C. Certificate of compliance.
(1) The Township Clerk, upon the filing of the required insurance
policy, shall issue a certificate in duplicate showing that the owner
of the regulated vehicle has complied with the terms and provisions
of this article.
(2) The certificate shall recite the name of the insurance company, the
number and date of expiration of the policy, a description of the
regulated vehicles insured thereunder and the registration
numbers of the vehicles.
(3) The duplicate certificate shall be filed with the Motor Vehicles
Commission before any such vehicle is licensed pursuant to this
article.
(4) The original certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous place
within the licensed vehicle.
A. No driver of any vehicle licensed under this article shall stand the same
while waiting for employment at any place of public assemblage or
entertainment except in such places as have been or shall be
designated by the Township Committee.
B. No owner or driver of any licensed vehicle shall, while waiting for
employment or otherwise, use indecent or profane language, nor be
guilty of boisterous talking or shouting, or any disorderly conduct.
C. Nothing herein contained shall prevent a person or persons of legal age
and duly licensed by the State of New Jersey to drive motor vehicles,
from driving a licensed vehicle in an emergency, for a period of not
more than five consecutive hours, but shall not thereafter drive a
vehicle duly licensed under this article.
§ 185-7 WASHINGTON CODE § 185-10
182:656
§ 185-10. Violations and penalties.
Except as required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-1, and in addition to the penalty set
forth in § 185-5, any owner, operator and/or driver who shall operate or
drive a regulated vehicle in any street in the Township of Washington
without complying with the provisions of this chapter and with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 et seq. shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty
of a misdemeanor and be subject to one or more of the following: a fine
not exceeding $2,000, a term of imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
§ 185-10 TAXATION § 185-10
182:657

ARTICLE II
Limousines
§ 185-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LIMOUSINE — Any automobile or motor car used in the business of
carrying passengers for hire to provide prearranged passenger
transportation at a premium fare on a dedicated, nonscheduled, charter
basis that is not conducted on a regular route and with a seating capacity
of no more than 14 passengers, not including the driver, provided that
such a vehicle is certified by the manufacturer of the original vehicle and
the second-stage manufacturer, if applicable, to conform to all applicable
Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards promulgated by the United States
Department of Transportation pursuant to 49 CFR Part 571 (49 CFR 571.1
et seq.) and 49 CFR Part 567 (49 CFR 567.1 et seq.). In addition, a "Vehicle
Emission Control Information" label, which contains the name and
trademark of the manufacturer and an unconditional statement of
compliance with the emission requirements of the Environmental Protection
Agency, shall be present on the vehicle. Nothing in this article contained
shall be construed to include taxicabs, hotel buses, buses employed solely
in transporting school children or teachers, vehicles owned and operated
directly or indirectly by businesses engaged in the practice of mortuary
science when those vehicles are used exclusively for providing
transportation related to the provision of funeral services, autobuses which
are subject to the jurisdiction of the Department of Transportation, or
interstate autobuses required by federal or state law or regulations of the
Department of Transportation to carry insurance against loss from liability
imposed by law on account of bodily injury or death.
LIMOUSINE SERVICE — The business of carrying passengers for hire by
limousines.
PERSON — Any individual, copartnership, association, corporation or jointstock
company, their lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any court
whatsoever.
PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS — The location of the main place of
business of the limousine service in the Township of Washington where
limousine service is conducted, where limousines are dispatched, or where
limousine drivers report for duty.
STREET — Any street, avenue, park, parkway, highway, or other public
place.
§ 185-12. Insurance; amount.
Except for limousines registered in other states pursuant to N.J.S.A.
48:16-22.4, no limousine shall be operated wholly or partly along any street
in the Township of Washington until the owner of the limousine shall have
filed with the clerk of the municipality in which the owner has his, her or its
§ 185-11 TAXATION § 185-12
182:659
principal place of business an insurance policy of a company duly licensed
to transact business under the insurance laws of New Jersey in the sum
of $1,500,000 against loss by reason of the liability imposed by law upon
every limousine owner for damages on account of bodily injury or death
suffered by any person as a result of any accident occurring by reason
of the ownership, maintenance or use of the limousine upon any public
street. Such operation shall be permitted only so long as the insurance
policy shall remain in force to the full and collectible amount of $1,500,000.
The insurance policy shall provide for the payment of any final judgment
recovered by any person on account of the ownership, maintenance and use
of such limousine or any fault in respect thereto, and shall be for the benefit
of every person suffering loss, damage, injury aforesaid.
§ 185-13. Certificate of compliance; contents; fees, filing and
posting.
Upon the filing of the required insurance policy by an owner having its
principal place of business in the Township of Washington of a limousine
service, the Township Clerk, upon the payment of the maximum fee allowed
under N.J.S.A. 48:16-17, as may be amended from time to time, and
currently $50 for the first vehicle and $10 for each subsequent vehicle,
shall issue in duplicate a license to operate showing that the owner of the
limousine has complied with the terms and provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-13
et seq. The license shall recite the name of the insurance company, the
number and date of expiration of the policy, a description of every limousine
insured thereunder, and the registration number of the same. The duplicate
license shall be filed with the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission before
any such car is registered as a limousine. The original license or a copy
thereof shall be retained within the limousine and shall be available for
inspection by any law enforcement officer in the state. In addition to the
recital of insurance information required on the license pursuant to this
section, the owner of a limousine shall attach to the original license or copy
thereof retained within the limousine a notarized letter from an insurance
company containing the same insurance information required in the recital
and the Vehicle Identification Number (VIN) or a notarized certificate of
insurance for the particular limousine showing the VIN as well as the limits
of insurance coverage, and available insurance card, which shall constitute
proof of insurance coverage, and which shall also be available for inspection
by any law enforcement officer in the State.
§ 185-14. Certain license or permit required for limousines
providing intramunicipal point-to-point service.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the Township
of Washington requires a limousine service to obtain a corporate license,
permit, certificate or other form of authority if the limousine service is
providing service on an intramunicipal point-to-point basis within the
Township of Washington. The fee for the issuance of this license is $50
(which is in addition to any other fee), which applies to all limousines
§ 185-12 WASHINGTON CODE § 185-14
182:660
operated by a limousine service providing such intramunicipal point-topoint
service within the Township of Washington.
§ 185-15. Limousine licensing.
No limousine shall be operated on the streets in the Township of Washington
unless it has a license issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:16-17 and the
limousine is equipped in accordance with the minimum standards
established by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission and the
Department of Transportation with:
§ 185-16. Compliance with state statute.
Any owner, operator or driver shall comply with N.J.S.A. 48:16-13 et seq.,
including but not limited to N.J.S.A. 48:16-22.3a, and any regulation enacted
thereto. Proof of compliance for each owner, operator or driver shall be
provided to the Township with each application for a limousine license,
including renewal applications, by providing copies of the chauffeur driver
endorsement for each owner, operator and driver.
§ 185-17. Regulation of licenses.
§ 185-18. Examination and inspection of limousine by operator.
Prior to the operation of a limousine in the Township of Washington for the
purpose of picking up passengers, the driver of the limousine shall conduct
a general examination of the condition of the vehicle in accordance with
N.J.S.A 48:16-22.2.a.
§ 185-19. Revocation and hearing.
A. A two-way communication system, which, at a minimum shall provide
for communication to a person outside the vehicle for a distance of not
less than 100 miles and which requirement may be satisfied by a mobile
telephone;
B. A removable first aid kit and operable fire extinguisher, which shall be
placed in an accessible place within the vehicle;
C. Sideboards attached to the permanent body construction of the vehicle
if the height of the vehicle floor is 10 inches or more above ground level.
A. No more than five licenses for limousines shall be outstanding in the
Township at one time.
B. No limousine licensed under this chapter shall be operated as a taxi.
Limousines licensed under this chapter shall be limited in use to
carrying passengers for hire upon contract only, or for such events as
funerals, weddings and other special occasions, or for trips outside of
the geographic boundaries of the Township of Washington.
§ 185-14 TAXATION § 185-19
182:661
§ 185-20. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the penalty set forth in § 185-19, any person who shall operate
a limousine service in any street in the Township of Washington without
complying with the provisions of this chapter and with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 48:16-13 et seq. shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the
fines and penalties set forth in N.J.S.A 39:5G-1(a) and -2.
A. Any license granted under this article may be suspended or revoked by
the Township Committee, after notice and a hearing, whenever it shall
appear that the person to whom the license was granted has failed to
furnish or keep in force the insurance policy required in accordance
with § 185-13, or to comply with any term or provision of this article or
any law of the State of New Jersey regarding the ownership and
operation of limousines or to maintain any limousine in a safe or
sanitary condition. After such revocation or suspension, the license
shall be inoperative and of no effect.
B. Any such contemplated hearing shall be held within 15 days following
an order of suspension upon notice, which notice shall set forth the
reasons for the proposed revocation or suspension.
§ 185-19 WASHINGTON CODE § 185-20
182:662
Chapter 189
TOBACCO SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drug-free school zones — See Ch. 79.
Unlighted cigarette constituting litter — See
Ch. 114, § 114-1.
Sale of cigarettes to minors — See Ch. 140.
§ 189-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FREESTANDING OR ATTACHED TOBACCO/CIGARETTE DISPLAY — Any
display promotion of tobacco/cigarette products in any area of a store or
food establishment not specifically behind a sales counter and within the
grasp of the public so as to be self-service.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, cooperative, association,
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee or any
other legal entity.
TOBACCO — Any product made from the tobacco plant for the purpose
of smoking, chewing, inhaling and other personal use, including cigars,
chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff and cigarettes in any form.
TOBACCO RETAILER — Any person or entity that operates a store, stand,
booth, concession or place which sells tobacco; also a person or entity that
owns, operates or maintains a vending machine and/or vending machine
location.
VENDING MACHINE — Any automated, self-service device which, upon
insertion of money, tokens or any form of payment, dispenses cigarettes or
other tobacco products in any form.
§ 189-2. Prohibition on sale to minors.
It shall be unlawful to sell tobacco/cigarettes to a person under 18 years of
age.
§ 189-3. Identification required.
It shall be unlawful for a tobacco/cigarette retailer to sell or permit to be
sold tobacco/cigarettes to any individual without requesting and examining
a photo identification from the purchaser to conclude their age as 18 years
or greater unless the seller has some conclusive basis for determining the
buyer is over the age of 26 years.
§ 185-20 TOBACCO SALES § 189-4
189:663
§ 189-4. Sale from vending machines and displays prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to offer for sale or to sell tobacco/cigarettes through
a tobacco/cigarette vending machine or from a freestanding or attached
display of tobacco/cigarettes in the Township of Washington.
§ 189-5. Removal of vending machines.
All tobacco/cigarette machines and freestanding or attached displays of
tobacco/cigarette within the grasp of the public and not specifically behind
a sales counter made unlawful by the terms of this chapter shall be removed
within 30 days from the effective date of this chapter.
§ 189-6. Enforcement.
§ 189-7. Violations and penalties.
A. Whenever the Health Officer/Sanitarian or other authorized
representative of the Board of Health reasonably believes there exists a
violation of this chapter, he/she may issue a summons and complaint not
later than 90 days after discovery of the alleged violation. The
complaint shall be written and shall state with reasonable particularity
the nature of the violation, including reference to the article and section
of this chapter alleged to have been violated. The complaint shall be
delivered by the police or sent certified mail to the alleged violator.
B. The Health Officer/Sanitarian or other authorized representative of the
Board of Health or any other person charged with enforcement of this
chapter, after giving proper identification, may inspect any matter,
thing, place, record, incident or event as necessary.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, willfully oppose, verbally
abuse or otherwise obstruct the Health Office/Sanitarian or other
authorized representative of the Board of Health, who may request the
assistance of the Washington Township Police Department or other
police agency or peace officer when necessary to execute his or her
official duty in the manner prescribed by law.
D. Citizens may bring complaints against violators of this chapter through
the Board of Health or Police Department.
A. Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any person
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a fine of $250 for the first offense, $500 for a second
offense and $1,000 for a third and each consecutive offense. Complaints
shall be made in Municipal Court of the Township of Washington or
before such other judicial officer having authority under the laws of the
State of New Jersey.
B. The defendant may, after reading and understanding the penalties,
plead guilty to the charges and, after signing an affidavit, may pay the
§ 189-4 WASHINGTON CODE § 189-7
189:664
Chapter 192
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 207.
§ 192-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms when used in this chapter shall have the
following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
AUTOMOBILE — A private passenger automobile, station wagon, van, sport
utility vehicle or pickup truck.
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — The removal and transportation of an
automobile from a highway, street or other public or private road or a
parking area or from a storage facility, and other services normally incident
thereto, but does not include recovery of an automobile that has left the
roadway and does not include any additional labor required to clean up the
scene.
DAYTIME HOURS — From 7:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m., prevailing time,
excluding all day Sunday.[Amended 2-18-2002 by Ord. No. 5-02]
INSIDE BUILDING — A vehicle storage facility that is completely indoors,
having one or more openings in the walls for storage and removal of
vehicles and is secured by a locking device on each opening.
MILEAGE — A charge for mileage traveled by the tow truck, from the
towing company's place of business to the location of the start of the tow
and the return trip, by the shortest route possible.[Added 2-18-2002 by
Ord. No. 5-02]
MOTORCYCLE — A motorcycle, motorbike or bicycle with motor attached
and any other motor-operated vehicle similar to a bicycle or tricycle,
including all-terrain vehicles.
NIGHTTIME HOURS — From 6:00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m., prevailing time, and
all day Sunday.
[Amended 2-18-2002 by Ord. No. 5-02]
OUTSIDE SECURED — An automobile storage facility that is not indoors
and is secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier that is at least
six feet high. The facility is to be lighted at night.[Amended 2-18-2002 by
Ord. No. 5-02]
appropriate fine to the Clerk of the Municipal Court, in lieu of a Court
appearance.
C. Each sale of tobacco/cigarettes to a minor shall constitute a separate
violation.
§ 189-7 TOBACCO SALES § 192-1
189:665
OUTSIDE UNSECURED — An automobile storage facility that is not indoors
and is not secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier, and all other
storage facilities not defined above as inside building or outside secured.
RECOVERY OF VEHICLE — The recovery of an automobile from a position
beyond the right-of-way berm or from being impaled upon any other object
within the right-of-way or berm. It shall also include the recovery of a
vehicle which is overturned or on its side.
ROAD SERVICE — Assisting a motor vehicle without towing or hookup.
Service such as providing fuel (plus cost of fuel), a jump start, change of flat
tire (with available spare), simple opening of vehicle lockout, etc.[Added
2-18-2002 by Ord. No. 5-02]
TRUCK — Any motor vehicle other than an automobile or motorcycle as
defined above and which requires medium or heavy-duty towing. Medium
duty is 10,001 pounds to 26,000 pounds GVW. Heavy duty is 26,001 pounds
GVW and up.[Amended 2-18-2002 by Ord. No. 5-02]
TOW VEHICLE — A vehicle equipped with a boom or booms, winches,
slings, tilt beds, wheel lifts or under-reach equipment specifically designed
by its manufacturer for the removal and transport of private passenger
automobiles.
WINCHING — Moving a vehicle by use of the cable or winch from a position
that is not accessible for direct hookup by conventional means of loading
onto a tow vehicle. It shall not include pulling a motor vehicle onto a tilt bed
or car carrier or lifting a vehicle with a conventional tow sling.
YARD TOW — The removal of the vehicle from the towing operator's storage
yard for the benefit of another towing operator who is taking the vehicle
from the storage site and whose tow vehicle is physically unable to gain
access to the vehicle while it is inside the storage yard.
§ 192-2. Towing regulations.
A. Removal of motor vehicles. Whenever a police officer orders the
removal of automobiles from private or public property, the officer shall
utilize the rotation lists established in § 192-2C of this chapter.
[Amended 3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 05-16]
B. An officer may allow the driver of a vehicle involved in a motor vehicle
accident or a disabled motor vehicle to arrange for their own selection
of a wrecker to tow said vehicle, provided that such a request does not
impair traffic and will not require the officer to remain at the scene
after his normal responsibility is concluded. [Added 2-18-2002 by
Ord. No. 5-02]
C. Towing operators. Every three years the Township Committee shall
establish by resolution a list of automobile-towing operators and a list
of truck-towing operators to be utilized by the Police Department on a
rotating basis. An operator may, if qualified, be on both lists. These lists
will divide Washington Township into two geographical areas, north
§ 192-1 WASHINGTON CODE § 192-2
189:666
(District 1) and south (District 2). Such lists shall be utilized by
members of the Police Department on a nonexclusionary and
nondiscriminatory basis. Only those towing operators who meet the
minimum standards of operator performance set forth in this chapter
shall be included on such lists. There shall be no limit on the number of
operators on either list. Operators may be added to the list at any time.
[Amended 2-18-2002 by Ord. No. 5-02]
(1) Application. Applicants shall obtain a criminal history background
check through www.niportal.com/nisp/criminalrecords (additional
information is available from the Police Department) and follow the
instructions for obtaining a criminal history background check,
which includes making an appointment to be fingerprinted by the
state contract vendor. Applicants who fail to obtain a criminal
history background check or otherwise refuse to consent to or
cooperate in securing a criminal history check shall not be
considered for inclusion on the list. If the applicant is a corporation
then this requirement shall apply to the officers of the corporation.
This investigation shall also apply to any and all personnel who
operate towing equipment for the owner of the towing service, if
that person is engaged to provide service as requested by
Washington Township. As a result of such investigation, the Chief of
Police shall note, in writing, his recommendation, and his reasons
therefore to the Township Clerk. The Township Clerk shall present
the completed application, along with the recommendation from
the Chief of Police as to whether the application shall be approved,
at the next regularly scheduled public meeting. If the Township
Committee so directs, the Township Clerk shall advise the applicant
that the application has been approved. [Amended 2-18-2002 by
Ord. No. 5-02; 5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 08-09; 3-21-2016 by
Ord. No. 05-16]
(2) Equipment. All towing operators shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) For classification as an automobile towing service, the operator
must possess one flatbed-style tow vehicle and one hoist-type
tow vehicle with a sling and wheel lift.
(b) For classification as a truck towing service, the operator must
have one heavy duty tow vehicle capable of towing a fully
loaded tractor-trailer weighing 80,000 pounds.
(c) All tow vehicles must carry the following equipment:
[1] Shovel.
[2] Fire extinguisher.
[3] Jumper cables.
[4] Tire changing equipment and portable air tank.
§ 192-2 TOBACCO SALES § 192-2
189:667
§ 192-3. Fees established. [Amended 2-18-2002 by Ord. No. 5-02]
[5] Jack and hammer.
[6] Pry bar or similar tool.
[7] Speedy Dry or similar liquid absorbent and disposal
container.
[8] Push broom.
[9] Two-way radio communication system or cellular
telephone. [Amended 2-18-2002 by Ord. No. 5-02]
(d) All towing vehicles must have amber emergency warning lights
mounted on the vehicle so as to warn approaching traffic of
their presence. The size and location of these lights must
conform to New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicle standards.
The operator must have an amber light permit.
(e) All towing vehicles must carry a copy of the rate schedule
established by Washington Township. Said schedule must also
be displayed in a conspicuous manner at the operator's place of
business.
(3) (Reserved)118
(4) Availability and response time. Each operator must be available 24
hours a day, seven days a week, and must respond as follows: for
tows of all vehicles except heavy-duty trucks: within 20 minutes
during daylight hours and 30 minutes during nighttime hours of the
original telephone call request by the Police Department; and for
tows of heavy-duty trucks: within 30 minutes during daylight hours
and 40 minutes during nighttime hours of the original telephone
call request by the Police Department. [Amended 3-21-2016 by
Ord. No. 05-16]
(5) Each operator must comply with the provisions of L. 1999, c. 396
(N.J.S.A. 39:3-84.6 et seq.) and any regulations adopted pursuant
thereto. [Added 2-18-2002 by Ord. No. 5-02]
A. Automobiles and motorcycles. The fee schedule for towing services and
storage shall be established by the Township Committee by resolution.
B. Trucks. The fee schedule for towing services and storage shall be
established by the Township Committee by resolution.
C. Inclement weather conditions. The towing operator may, during
inclement weather conditions, such as but not limited to snow storm,
ice storm, black ice conditions, flooding or during a state of emergency,
118. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(3), Facilities, as amended, was repealed 3-21-2016 by
Ord. No. 05-16.
§ 192-2 WASHINGTON CODE § 192-3
189:668
§ 192-4. Regulations for towing service operators.
charge an extra twenty percent of the final invoice (if towed under
normal conditions) for towing services provided as set forth in the fee
schedule.
A. Release of impounded vehicles. [Amended 2-18-2002 by Ord. No.
5-02; 3-18-2002 by Ord. No. 10-02]
(1) Release of impounded vehicles. No impounded vehicle is to be
released without proper authorization from the Police Department.
Vehicle release arrangements shall be available every day between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., provided that when the vehicle
was impounded as a result of an arrest for driving while
intoxicated, the vehicle may be reclaimed at any time by the owner
or lessee who was not the operator of the vehicle at the time it was
impounded or after at least 12 hours has elapsed since the arrest,
in the case of reclamation by the operator of the vehicle who was
arrested for driving while intoxicated, by paying the appropriate
fees as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the
Township Committee.
(2) The owner of the vehicle (or his designee) shall provide a paid
receipt from the towing operator and then respond to the
Washington Township Police Department to arrange for the release
of his/her vehicle from the police impound yard or towing
operator's facility, as the case may be. Additionally, the Washington
Township Police may accept cash payment on behalf of the towing
service and forward the money to the towing service. An invoice for
the towing service provided (when a vehicle is towed to the police
impound yard) will be left with the vehicle, as well as the keys for
said vehicle. The police department will retain custody of both the
invoice and keys for all vehicles towed to the police impound yard.
All transactions of this type will be recorded in a log book and the
principal of the towing establishment will be required to sign the
log book to acknowledge receipt of said payment.
(3) Appointment for release of the vehicle shall be made through the
shift supervisor, who shall be responsible to ensure that all laws
and procedures concerning the release of vehicles are followed.
The Township shall supply junk titles or good titles for abandoned
vehicles in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:10-1 et
seq. for vehicles unclaimed over 30 days. The Township shall
compensate the towing service for the towing bill for such vehicles
unclaimed for over 30 days for vehicles stored in the police
impound yard. A junk title shall be applied for, and the towing
invoice paid, after the Township recovers the value of the vehicle.
For any vehicles that are towed and stored by the towing operator,
the Township shall apply for a junk title, and compensate the
towing operator for towing fees and storage, up to the limit of the
value of said vehicle.
§ 192-3 TOBACCO SALES § 192-4
189:669
B. Insurance; indemnity.
(1) Each operator on the approved lists shall furnish the Township
Clerk with a certificate of insurance from an insurance company
satisfactory to the Township. Each certificate of insurance shall
identify the coverage provided and shall provide that such
insurance shall not be changed or canceled without giving 10 days
prior written notice to the Township by certified mail, return
receipt requested. Specific reference to the rotating lists of towing
operators shall be made on all policies of insurance.
(2) Each operator must have bodily injury liability, property damage
liability, employer's liability and motor vehicle liability coverage
with combined policy limits of $1,000,000. Each approved operator
must also have statutorily required workers' compensation
coverage.
(3) Each operator shall indemnify and save the Township harmless
from all damages and claims for damages which may be made by
any person for bodily injury or property damages resulting from the
operator's performance.
(4) Each operator shall have an on-hook vehicle rider on their towing
insurance policy. This rider will provide insurance should the towed
vehicle become uncoupled from the tow truck during towing
operations. [Added 2-18-2002 by Ord. No. 5-02]
C. Enforcement. The Police Department is designated to enforce the
provisions of this chapter in accordance with due process of law. In
carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the Police Chief is hereby
authorized to adopt additional reasonable regulations which are not
inconsistent with this chapter.
D. Abandoned or unclaimed vehicles. [Amended 2-18-2002 by Ord. No.
5-02]
(1) Any vehicle which is not claimed by the owner within 30 days of
impoundment shall be reported by the operator storing the vehicle
to the Police Department, pursuant to N.J.S.A 39:10A-1 through
39:10A-7.
(2) After expiration of the thirty-day period, the Police Department
shall make application for title to the Division of Motor Vehicles as
per standing general orders. Vehicles which remain unclaimed
after all requirements of the general orders are met shall be
auctioned off to recover towing costs, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1
through 39:10A-7.
(3) Any operator found to be disposing of vehicles in violation of this
procedure will be charged with misapplication of entrusted
property (N.J.S.A. 2C:21-15) and will be prohibited from providing
service to Washington Township.
§ 192-4 WASHINGTON CODE § 192-4
189:670
§ 192-5. Violations and penalties.
E. Rights of owners.
(1) The owner of any vehicle towed shall have the right to remove
property belonging to him or her from the stored vehicle unless a
"police hold" is marked on the towing form.
(2) The vehicle owner or his or her representative shall have the right
to take photographs of stored vehicles.
F. Public inspection. This chapter, all regulations adopted by the Police
Chief and the fee schedules of individual tow operators, shall be
available to the public during normal business hours.
G. Operator dealings with public.
(1) The operator shall always act in a professional manner and at all
times be courteous and respectful toward members of the public,
as well as representatives of the Township of Washington. If
members of the public, especially those whose cars may have been
towed or impounded, resort to strong language, threats and
unbecoming behavior toward the operator, the operator is expected
to exercise restraint and not to respond in kind and thereby reflect
unfavorably on the Township of Washington and/or the Police
Department.
(2) Repeated reports of discourteous behavior by the operator, which
can be substantiated and documented, may be considered by the
Township as sufficient cause for removal of the operator from the
rotational list of automobile towing operators and truck towing
operators as established consistent with § 192-2C. [Amended
3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 05-16]
H. Removal of towed vehicles; location for storage. [Added 2-18-2002 by
Ord. No. 5-02]
(1) A vehicle that is removed by a towing company under this chapter,
in which the Police Department has a duty to impound said vehicle
for investigative or security reasons, shall be towed to the Police
Department impound yard and stored there until all investigations
are completed and/or proper paperwork to support the release of
the motor vehicle back to the owner or his designee are presented
for Police Department approval.
(2) A vehicle that is removed by a towing company that the Police
Department has no interest in (i.e., disabled motor vehicle or one
that is involved in an accident without further Police Department
investigation required) may be towed back to the towing operator's
facility or to a location of the vehicle owner's choice, provided the
towing operator is in a position to comply with such a request.
§ 192-4 TOBACCO SALES § 192-5
189:671
A. Complaint and hearing. The governing body shall have the right to
suspend or revoke any towing privileges issued pursuant to this section
for good cause upon written complaint of the Police Chief. In the event
that a towing operator fails or refuses to retain the proper equipment,
personnel or facilities necessary to perform the services required for
towing operators, or that the services performed are not satisfactory or
violate any provision of this section, rule or regulation duly adopted, the
Police Chief shall file a written complaint with the governing body that
there is probable cause for revocation or suspension. Written notice of
such complaint and the basis of the complaint shall be given to the
towing operator and said operator shall be entitled to a hearing before
the governing body prior to final determination of the complaint by the
governing body.
B. Penalties.
(1) Any operator who violates any section of this chapter, in addition to
any other penalties provided by law, shall be subject to suspension
of towing privileges for one month for a first offense, three months
for a second offense and six months for a third offense. If the
operator commits a fourth offense, its right to provide towing
services to the Township shall be permanently revoked, and the
towing operator shall be removed from the list of approved
operators.
(2) Any operator who violates the operator rate schedule shall receive
a fine of $250 and suspension of towing privileges for one month. A
second violation will result in a fine of $400 and suspension of
towing privileges for six months. A third violation will result in a
fine of $500 and permanent revocation of towing privileges.
(3) In all cases, if an operator overcharges a vehicle owner, the excess
moneys paid shall be returned by the operator to the owner within
10 business days.
(4) A towing operator may be removed from the list adopted pursuant
to § 192-2C by resolution of the Township Committee if its
performance is determined to be unreliable or inadequate. If there
is a breach of any of the provisions of this chapter or applicable
regulations, an operator may be removed from the list by the Chief
of Police pending action by the Township Committee. [Amended
3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 05-16]
§ 192-5 WASHINGTON CODE § 192-5
189:672
Chapter 196
TREES AND SHRUBS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 53.
Injuries to trees by moving of buildings — See
Ch. 60.
Injury to trees in parks — See Ch. 137.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 148.
§ 196-1. Permit required for certain acts.
No person shall do or cause to be done any of the following acts affecting
the trees, plants, shrubbery or other ornamental flora planted or growing
naturally within the highways or public places under the jurisdiction of the
township, except with a written permit first obtained from the Shade Tree
Committee:
§ 196-2. Wires and cables near trees.
Every person having control over any wire for the transmission of an
electric current along a public highway shall at all times guard the trees
through which, or near which, such wire passes against any injury from
the wire or cable or from the electric current carried by it. The device or
means used shall in every case be subject to approval by the Shade Tree
Committee.
A. Cut, trim, break, disturb the roots of or spray with chemicals any living
tree or shrub or injure, misuse or remove any structure or device placed
to support or protect any tree or shrub.
B. Plant or remove any living tree or shrub or climb with spikes any living
tree or shrub.
C. Fasten any rope, wire, electric attachments, sign or other device to a
tree or shrub or to any guard about such tree or shrub.
D. Close or obstruct any open space provided about the base of a tree or
shrub to permit the access of air, water or fertilizer to the roots of such
tree or shrub.
E. Pile any building material or make any mortar or cement within six feet
of a tree or shrub.
F. Change the grade of the soil within the limits of the lateral spread or
the branches of any such tree.
§ 192-5 TREES AND SHRUBS § 196-3
196:673
§ 196-3. Guy wires and braces.
No person shall place any guy wire, brace or other device on any such tree
in such a manner as to injure it.
§ 196-4. Injury by animals.
No person shall hitch or fasten an animal to any tree or shrub upon a public
highway or to any guard or support provided for the same nor permit an
animal to bite or otherwise injure any tree or shrub.
§ 196-5. Chemical damage.119
No person shall permit any brine, gas or injurious chemical or liquid to
come in contact with the stump or roots of any tree or shrub upon a public
highway.
§ 196-6. Interference with Shade Tree Committee.
No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with any lawful work undertaken
by the Shade Tree Committee or its authorized agent.
§ 196-7. Enforcement.
If any person continues to violate any of the provisions of this chapter after
being duly notified of such violation or neglects or refuses to comply with
any lawful order of the Township Engineer or other lawful authority, the
failure to comply with a second or each of any subsequent notifications or
orders shall be construed as an additional violation of this chapter, and each
such additional offense shall subject the offending party, upon conviction, to
the same penalty as provided for the first offense.
Chapter 200
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 203.
Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 207.
Zoning — See Ch. 217.
§ 200-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
119. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 101, Hazardous Materials.
§ 196-3 WASHINGTON CODE § 200-1
196:674
PROPERTY — Any real property within the township which is not a street or
highway.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way maintained, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
VEHICLE — A machine propelled by other than human power, designed to
travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and to
transport persons or property or pull machinery, including, but not by way
of limitation, an automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and
wagon.
§ 200-2. Abandonment of vehicles prohibited.
No person shall abandon a vehicle within the township, and no person shall
leave a vehicle at any place within the township for such time and under
such circumstances as to cause the vehicle to reasonably appear to be
abandoned.
§ 200-3. Leaving of wrecked, nonoperating vehicles on street
prohibited.
No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or
junked vehicle on a street or highway within the township.
§ 200-4. Disposition of wrecked or discarded vehicles.
No person in charge or control of property within the township, whether
as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow partially
dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicles to remain
on the property longer than 48 hours; and no person shall leave such
vehicles on any property within the township for a longer time than 48
hours. This subsection shall not apply to a vehicle in an enclosed building, a
vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place
and manner, when necessary to the operation of the business enterprise,
or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a
lawful place and manner by the township.
§ 200-5. Impounding. [Amended 7-19-2010 by Ord. No. 14-10]
The Chief of Police or any member of the Police Department designated by
him is authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any place
within the Township which appears to be present in violation of this chapter.
Such a vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in
accordance with applicable statutes. The Chief of Police or any member of
the Police Department acting for him shall notify the registered and legal
owner, in writing, by personal service or by certified mail, at the last known
address of the owner, of the removal of the vehicle, the reason for the
removal and the location of the vehicle. The vehicle shall be retained and
impounded until the owner or his authorized agent pays the cost of such
§ 200-1 TREES AND SHRUBS § 200-5
196:675
taking, removal, and storage as may be established from time to time by
resolution of the governing body.
Chapter 203
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise by vehicles — See Ch. 125.
Vehicles in parks — See Ch. 137, § 137-1.
Damage to roadways by vehicles — See Ch.
140, § 140-25.
Traffic control at construction sites — See Ch.
172, Art. IX.
Sight distances — See Ch. 172, Art. VIII.
Taxicabs and limousines — See Ch. 185.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 200.
Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 207.
§ 200-5 WASHINGTON CODE § 200-5
196:676
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 203-1. Words and phrases defined.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
therein.
§ 203-2. Official time standard.
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern standard time or Eastern daylight saving time, as may be in use in
the Township.
§ 203-3. Penalty.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, any
person convicted of a violation of this chapter or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 203-1 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-3
196:677

ARTICLE II
Parking
§ 203-4. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any persons of the duty to observe other more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 203-5. Parking prohibited during state of emergency.
§ 203-6. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in § 203-37, attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 203-7. Night parking.
No person shall park a vehicle on any street or road in the Township
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., from November 1
through April 15. This shall include all roadways in major subdivisions
which have been dedicated but have not been accepted by the Township,
but have dwellings on the same.
§ 203-8. Temporary parking prohibition for snow plowing and
removal. [Added 10-17-1988 by Ord. No. 31-88; amended
11-15-1999 by Ord. No. 29-99]
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or section of streets where emergency no-parking signs are
posted when weather conditions, accidents, fires, public celebrations,
etc, dictate or require the avoidance of hazards or other conditions
which interfere with the free flow of traffic. Notification that emergency
no-parking signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the
operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the
posting of the signs.
B. 120The effectiveness of this section is contingent upon signs being
erected as required by law.
A. Removal.
(1) Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it
covers the streets or highways, an emergency shall exist and no
vehicle shall be parked on any portion of a public road, street or
highway.
120. Editor's Note: Former § 203-5B, regarding the removal of vehicles, was repealed
11-15-1999 by Ord. No. 29-99. This ordinance also redesignated former § 203-5C as
§ 203-5B. See now § 203-8.
§ 203-4 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-8
196:679
§ 203-9. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in § 203-38
of any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in said
§ 203-38, attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 203-10. Stopping or standing prohibited at all times on certain
streets. [Amended 10-19-1998 by Ord. No. 33-98]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle as specified in § 203-39 on any
day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in said § 203-39,
attached to and made a part of this chapter, except that buses are permitted
to stop for the purpose of picking up or discharging passengers on those
parts of the streets identified in § 203-40.1.
§ 203-11. Stopping or standing prohibited during certain hours on
certain street.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified in
§ 203-40 of any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in
said § 203-40, attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 203-12. Parking time limited on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
§ 203-41 at any time between the hours listed in said § 203-41 of any day
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in § 203-41, attached to
and made a part of this chapter.
§ 203-13. Mid-block crosswalks.
(2) The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow
has ceased until the streets and roads have been plowed
sufficiently and to the extent that parking will not Interfere with the
normal flow of traffic.
B. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation shall be deemed
a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic,
and any police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The
owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the
vehicle.
A. Establishment.
(1) Flocktown Road. A mid-block crosswalk along Flocktown Road is
hereby established at 225 feet north of the northerly curbline of
Partridge Lane.
(2) Camp Washington Road. A mid-block crosswalk along Camp
Washington Road is hereby established at a point 2,310 feet north
§ 203-8 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-13
196:680
§ 203-14. Handicapped parking.121 [Added 4-15-2019 by Ord. No.
05-19]
of the northerly curbline of Schooley's Mountain Road (County
Route 517) to a point 10 feet north thereof.
(3) Fairview Avenue. A mid-block crosswalk along Fairview Avenue is
hereby established beginning at a point 884 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Scenic Falls Road and extending 12 feet
northerly therefrom. [Added 6-15-1998 by Ord. No. 24-98]
(4) East Springtown Road. A mid-block crosswalk along East
Springtown Road is hereby established beginning at a point 276
feet north of the northerly curbline of Camp Washington Road (Pole
#NJ2514WT) and extending 12 feet northerly therefrom. [Added
6-15-1998 by Ord. No. 24-98]
(5) Naughright Road. A mid-block crosswalk along Naughright Road is
hereby established beginning at a point 434 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Fieldstone Drive and extending 26 feet easterly
therefrom. [Added 6-15-1998 by Ord. No. 24-98]
(6) Rock Road. A mid-block crosswalk along Rock Road is hereby
established beginning at a point 450 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Briarwood Road and extending 12 feet northerly
therefrom. [Added 6-15-1998 by Ord. No. 24-98]
(7) Middle Valley Road. A mid-block crosswalk along Middle Valley
Road is hereby established beginning at a point 780 feet north of
the centerline of West Mill Road and extending 20 feet northerly
therefrom. [Added 12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 32-00]
(8) North Four Bridges Road. A mid-block crosswalk along North Four
Bridges Road is hereby established beginning at a point 820 feet
north of the centerline of Bartley Road and extending 15 feet
northerly therefrom. [Added 12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 32-00]
B. The crosswalk markings shall be installed in accordance with the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
A. Restrictions. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197 et seq., any person not
displaying a special vehicle identification (placard or license plate)
issued by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission is prohibited from
parking in any space on public or private property that has been
designated for use solely by persons with specially identified vehicles.
B. Penalties. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197(3)(c), any person who violates
this section shall be subject to a penalty of $250 for the first offense,
121. Editor's Note: Former § 203-14, Parking for the handicapped, as amended 12-19-1988 by
Ord. No. 37-88, was repealed 12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 41-98.
§ 203-13 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-14
196:681
and for subsequent offenses, a fine of at least $250 and up to 90 days of
community service.
§ 203-14 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-14
196:682
ARTICLE III
Traffic Regulations
§ 203-15. Trucks over four tons excluded from certain streets.
Trucks over four tons' gross weight are hereby excluded from the streets or
parts of streets described in § 203-42 except for the pickup and delivery of
materials on such streets, said § 203-42 being attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 203-16. Trucks over fourteen tons excluded from certain streets.
Trucks over 14 tons' gross weight are hereby excluded from the streets or
parts of streets described in § 203-43, except for the pickup and delivery of
materials on such streets; said § 203-43 being attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 203-17. Trucks over twenty tons excluded from certain streets.
Trucks over 20 tons' gross weight are hereby excluded from the streets or
parts of streets described in § 203-44, except for the pickup and delivery of
materials on such streets, said § 203-44 being attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 203-18. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in § 203-45, attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated.
§ 203-19. Through streets.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described in § 203-46, attached to and made a part of this chapter,
are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on
the near right side of each street intersecting the through street, except
where yield signs are provided for in the designations.
§ 203-20. Stop intersections.
Pursuant to the provision of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described in
§ 203-47, attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated
as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 203-21. Yield intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in § 203-48, attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby
designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed as provided
therein.
§ 203-15 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-22
196:683
§ 203-22. Loading zones.
The locations described in § 203-49, attached to and made a part of this
chapter, are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 203-23. Taxi stands.
The locations described in § 203-50, attached to and made a part of this
chapter, are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 203-24. Bus stops.
The locations described in § 203-51, attached to and made a part of this
chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 203-25. Left turn prohibition.
No person shall make a left turn at any of the locations described in
§ 203-52, attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 203-26. U-turn prohibition.
No persons shall make a U-turn at any of the locations described in
§ 203-53, attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 203-27. No turns.
No person shall make a turn at any of the locations described in § 203-54,
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 203-28. Lane use.
§ 203-29. Speed limits.
Speed limits for certain streets and parts of streets shall be as described
in § 203-56, attached to and made a part of this chapter. Regulatory and
warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect the above
designated speed limits.
A. Lane use reservations. The lane locations described in § 203-55,
attached to and made a part of this chapter, are designated as lane use
reservations, and traffic shall move only as indicated.
§ 203-22 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-29
196:684
ARTICLE IV
Control for Movement and Parking of Traffic on Public and Private
Property
[Added 12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 41-98122]
§ 203-30. Municipal and Board of Education property.
In accordance with the provision of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the designated Board
of Education property shall have the movement of traffic controlled by the
type of regulation indicated. No person shall operate or park a vehicle in
violation of the regulations indicated.
A. Signs and pavement markings, installation and maintenance.
(1) The owners of the premises referred to in this § 203-30 shall
provide and install signs and pavement markings as required. All
signs and pavement markings shall be in accordance with the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27 and as required by
N.J.S.A. 39:4-198. The cost of procurement and installation of the
signs and pavement markings shall be the responsibility of the
owner of said property. The owner shall subsequently, after the
initial procurement and installation, maintain such signs and
pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense to the
municipality.
(2) The owners and/or operators of all vehicles entering upon all lands
or properties as described in this § 203-30 shall park their vehicles
as described; all vehicle(s) must be parked in the designated area,
between the painted lines provided. Notice shall be given to the
public by the placing of sign(s) at the vehicular entrance(s) to these
lands and/or parking lots, as described in this § 203-30.
B. Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil
fills, any grassy area or pedestrian walkway or present in any way a
safety or traffic hazard upon the lands, properties and parking lots
described in this § 203-30 may be removed by towing the vehicle at the
owner's or operator's expense.
C. West Morris Regional High School. No person shall park a vehicle at
any time in the school building parking lot or the administrative
building parking lot except in designated areas therein and between the
white lines provided. Parking therein shall be by permit only during
school hours, and vehicles shall be correspondingly identified.
(1) Parking prohibited at all times. No person shall park a vehicle at
any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets described:
122. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Art. IV, Long Hill
Plaza Regulations, added 12-20-1993 by Ord. No. 32-93, as amended 12-20-1993 by Ord.
No. 34-93.
§ 203-30 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-30
196:685
Name of Street Side Location
Main entrance North Beginning 420 feet from the
southerly curbline of Old
Bartley Road to the parking
lot access road
(2) Parking prohibited during certain hours. No person shall park a
vehicle between the hours specified on any day upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described:
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
Main entrance North 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.
From the southerly
curbline of Old
Bartley Road to a
point 420 feet easterly
therefrom
(3) Stopping or standing prohibited at all times. No person shall stop
or stand a vehicle as specified on any day upon any of the streets or
areas described:
Name of Street Location
Main entrance The entire length on the school
side
Old Bartley Road The entire length on the school
side
Parking lot access road On the easterly side, beginning
at the southerly curbline of Old
Bartley Road to a point 265 feet
southerly therefrom
Parking lot On the westerly side, beginning
at the southerly curbline of Old
Bartley Road to a point 226 feet
southerly therefrom
Rear access road On the northerly side, from the
southerly curbline of the
southerly lot to a point 750 feet
therefrom
Rear access road On the northerly side, beginning
930 feet from the southerly
curbline of the southerly
parking lot to South Four
Bridges Road, a distance of 323
feet
§ 203-30 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-30
196:686
Name of Street Location
Rear access road On the southerly side, from the
easterly curbline of South Four
Bridges Road for a distance of
1,665 feet
Southerly parking lot From the southwest corner of
the parking lot, then in a
northwesterly direction for a
distance of 87 feet (area by
gymnasium wing)
(4) Parking time limited. No person shall park a vehicle for longer than
the time limit at any time between the hours listed of any day upon
any of the streets or areas described:
Name of
Street Side Time Limit Location
Front parking
lot
Northeast 1 hour From the
northeasterly corner
southeasterly for 50
feet (5 stalls)
(5) Parking for the handicapped. The following locations shall be
designated and reserved as handicapped parking spaces for
persons who have been issued a motor vehicle identification sticker
or license plate. No other person shall park a vehicle in any area
assigned as a handicapped parking space, as described below.
Vehicles shall be parked between the posted lines.
(a) Five spaces to be designated handicapped, to be located at the
southerly end of the front parking lot. [Amended 8-15-2005
by Ord. No. 31-05]
(6) One-way streets. The following described streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Main entrance Southbound Entire length
(7) Stop intersections. The following described intersection(s) are
hereby designated as Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be
installed as provided therein:
(a) Parking lot access road and main entrance road. Stop sign(s)
shall be installed on the main entrance road.
(8) Loading zones. The locations described are hereby designated as
loading zones:
§ 203-30 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-30
196:687
(a) On the east side of the West Morris Regional High School
gymnasium wing, starting at the southerly side of the shop
wing and extending in a southerly direction for 85 feet of a
width of 47 feet.
(9) Speed limits. Speed limits for all access roads and parking lots shall
be 15 miles per hour. Regulatory and warning signs shall be
erected and maintained to effect the above-designated speed limits.
D. Flocktown Road School.
(1) Parking for the handicapped. The following locations shall be
designated and reserved as handicapped parking spaces for
persons who have been issued a motor vehicle identification sticker
or license plate. No other person shall park a vehicle in any area
assigned as a handicapped parking space, as described below.
Vehicles shall be parked between the posted lines.
(a) The first parking stall to the left in a group of four closest to the
main entranceway to the school building, at the northwesterly
area of the parking lot in front of the school, as indicated on the
attached plan, and attached to and made part of this
chapter.123
E. Walter J. Kossman Elementary School.
(1) Parking for the handicapped. The following locations shall be
designated and reserved as handicapped parking spaces for
persons who have been issued a motor vehicle identification sticker
or license plate. No other person shall park a vehicle in any area
assigned as a handicapped parking space, as described below.
Vehicles shall be parked between the posted lines.
(a) The first parking stall in a group of seven closest to the main
entranceway to the school building, at the northwesterly area
of the parking lot, as indicated on Site Plan No. 1, Walter J.
Kossman Elementary School, dated May 22, 1984, a copy of
which is on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
F. Old Farmers Road Elementary School.
(1) Parking for the handicapped. The following locations shall be
designated and reserved as handicapped parking spaces for
persons who have been issued a motor vehicle identification sticker
or license plate. No other person shall park a vehicle in any area
assigned as a handicapped parking space, as described below.
Vehicles shall be parked between the posted lines.
(a) The first parking stall in a group of 10, located at the
northwesterly end of the parking lot, said parking lot located at
123. Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 203-30 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-30
196:688
§ 203-31. Municipal parks.
the southerly side of the school building space furthest from
Old Farmers Road, as indicated on Site Plan No. 1, Old Farmers
Road Elementary School, dated May 22, 1984, a copy of which
is on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
G. Long Valley Middle School.
(1) Parking for the handicapped. The following locations shall be
designated and reserved as handicapped parking spaces for
persons who have been issued a motor vehicle identification sticker
or license plate. No other person shall park a vehicle in any area
assigned as a handicapped parking space, as described below.
Vehicles shall be parked between the posted lines.
(a) The first four parking stalls to the left of a group of 16, being
the second row of a block of parking stalls from West Mill Road
(County Highway Route No. 513) at the northeasterly end of
the parking area closest to the school building cafeteria
section.
H. Washington Township Police Department Complex. No person shall
park a vehicle at any time in the Police Department Complex parking
lot, except in designated areas therein and between the white lines
provided. Parking therein shall be for Police Department business only,
unless permission is granted by the Chief of Police or his designee for
other purposes.
(1) Parking for the handicapped. The following locations shall be
designated and reserved as handicapped parking spaces for
persons who have been issued a motor vehicle identification sticker
or license plate. No other person shall park a vehicle in any area
assigned as a handicapped parking space, as described below.
Vehicles shall park between the posted lines.
(a) Two handicapped parking stalls shall be provided, located to
the right (south) of the main entrance to the Police Department
building lobby.
A. Signs and pavement markings, installation and maintenance.
(1) The owners of the premises referred to in this § 203-31 shall
provide and install signs and pavement markings as required. All
signs and pavement markings shall be in accordance with the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27 and as required by
N.J.S.A. 39:4-198. The cost of procurement and installation of the
signs and pavement markings shall be the responsibility of the
owner of said property. The owner shall subsequently, after the
initial procurement and installation, maintain such signs and
§ 203-30 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-31
196:689
pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense to the
municipality.
(2) The owners and/or operators of all vehicles entering upon all lands
or properties as described in this § 203-31 shall park their vehicles
as described; all vehicle(s) must be parked in the designated area,
between the painted lines provided. Notice shall be given to the
public by the placing of a sign(s) at the vehicular entrance(s) to
these lands and/or parking lots, as described in this subsection
§ 203-31.
B. Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil
fills, any grassy area or pedestrian walkway or present in any way a
safety or traffic hazard upon the lands, properties and parking lots
described in this § 203-31 may be removed by towing the vehicle at the
owner's or operator's expense.
C. Rock Spring Park Complex.
(1) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:5A-4, Subtitle 1 of Title 39 shall be made
applicable to the following streets or areas. The following access
roads and parking lots have been named to best describe their
location:
(a) Rocky Top Square: access street off of Schooley's Mountain
Road (County Route 517) connecting to vehicle parking area
(Rocky Top parking lot).
(b) Rocky Top parking lot: area for the parking of vehicles between
Rocky Top Square and its terminus.
(c) Bolmer Drive: access street off of E. Springtown Road to its
terminus at the baseball field parking lot.
(d) Rock Spring Place: access street between Bolmer Drive to
Rock Spring main parking lot.
(e) Rock Spring main parking lot: area for the parking of vehicles
between Rock Spring Place and its terminus.
(f) Senior citizen garage drive: access drive between Rock Spring
main parking lot and the rear of the senior citizens building at
its terminus.
(g) Secondary parking lot west lane: access off of senior citizen
garage drive and secondary parking lot.
(h) Secondary parking lot north lane: access off of Rock Spring
Place and secondary parking lot.
(i) Secondary parking lot: between secondary parking lot west
and north lanes.
§ 203-31 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-31
196:690
(j) Tennis court: access street off of Bolmer Drive and tennis court
parking lot.
(k) Tennis court parking lot: area for the parking of vehicles
between the tennis court and its terminus.
(l) Baseball field parking lot: area for the parking of vehicles,
between Bolmer Drive and its terminus.
(m) Library court: library access street, between Bolmer Lane and
first parking lot.
(n) First parking lot: area for parking of vehicles, between library
court and circular connecting road.
(o) Circular connecting road: connecting road between first and
second parking lots.
(p) Second parking lot: area for parking of vehicles between
circular connecting road and its terminus.
(2) Parking. All vehicles must park in designated areas, between
painted lines in the following named parking lot(s):
(a) Rock Spring main parking lot.
(b) Rocky Top parking lot.
(c) First parking lot.
(d) Second parking lot.
(3) Stopping or standing prohibited at all times. No person shall stop
or stand a vehicle upon the streets or parts of streets or areas, not
to exclude parking lots or parts of designated areas within the said
lot. [Amended 2-18-2002 by Ord. No. 2-02]
Name of Street/
Parking Lot Side Hour Location
Bolmer Drive East All Southerly curbline of
East Springtown Road for
a distance of 1,030 feet
Bolmer Drive East All Terminus of lane at the
baseball field parking lot
for a distance of 630 feet
Bolmer Drive West All Southerly curbline of
East Springtown Road for
a distance of 550 feet
§ 203-31 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-31
196:691
Name of Street/
Parking Lot Side Hour Location
Bolmer Drive West All Starting at a distance of
1,350 feet from the
southerly curbline of East
Springtown Road to a
distance of 1,425 feet
therefrom, encompassing
the gate area
First parking lot West All 34 feet north of the
southerly curbline for a
distance of 31 feet
Library court Both All Entire length
Rocky Top Square Both All Entire length
Second parking lot West All 39 feet south of the
northerly curbline for a
distance of 29 feet
(4) Parking prohibited at all times. No person shall park a vehicle at
any time upon any of the streets or areas, not to exclude parking
lots or parts of a designated area within their said lot.
Name of Street/
Parking Lot Side Hour Location
Circular connecting
road
Both All Entire length
Rock Spring main
parking lot
North All From the westerly
curbline to a point of 15
feet
Rock Spring main
parking lot
South All From the easterly
curbline for a distance of
15 feet
Rock Spring main
parking lot
South All 36 feet from the westerly
curbline for a distance of
25 feet
Rock Spring main
parking lot
South All 148 feet from the
westerly curbline for a
distance of 45 feet
Rock Spring Place Both All Entire length
Secondary parking
lot, north lane
Both All Entire length
Secondary parking
lot, west lane
Both All Entire length
§ 203-31 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-31
196:692
Name of Street/
Parking Lot Side Hour Location
Senior citizens'
garage drive
Both All Entire length
Tennis Court Both All Entire length
(5) Handicap parking. All stalls shall be a minimum width of 12 feet,
signed with R7-8 and R7-8P (reserved parking sign and penalty
plate) in the designated parking area for persons who have been
issued the handicap parking permits by the Division of Motor
Vehicles.
Name of Parking
Lot Side Location
Basefall field parking
lot
North 20 feet east of the curbline of
Bolmer Drive for a dis-tance of
36 feet
First parking lot West Two stalls from the southerly
curbline, then in a northerly
direction for a distance of 24
feet
Rock Spring main
parking lot
South From the westerly curbline for
a distance of 36 feet
Rock Spring main
parking lot
South 61 feet from the westerly
curbline for a distance of 12
feet
Rocky Top parking lot North From the easterly curbline for
a distance of 12 feet
Rocky Top parking lot South From the easterly curbline for
a distance of 12 feet
(6) Tow-away zone. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obscure or
impede the normal flow of traffic, blocking an entrance or exiting
way, loading zones, oil fills, pedestrian walkway, fire lane or in any
way presenting a traffic or safety hazard may be removed by a
towing vehicle at the owner's expense.
(7) Yield intersections. designation The intersections described below
are hereby designated as Yield Intersections. Yield signs shall be
installed as provided therein:
Bolmer Drive and library court: yield sign shall be installed on
Library Court.
Bolmer Drive and Rock Spring Place: yield sign shall be installed
on Rock Spring Place.
§ 203-31 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-31
196:693
§ 203-32. Traffic controls on private property open to the public.
Bolmer Drive and tennis court: yield sign shall be installed on
tennis court.
Rock Spring Place and secondary parking lot, north lane: yield
sign shall be installed on secondary parking lot, north lane.
(8) One-way streets. The following described streets or areas are
designated as one-way streets.
Name of Street Direction of Travel Limits
Circular connecting
road
Counter-clockwise Entire Length
(9) Speed limits. The speed limit for all directions of travel in the
following streets and parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour.
Name of Street/Parking Lot Limits
Baseball field parking lot Entire length
Bolmer Drive Entire length
Circular connecting road Entire length
First parking lot Entire length
Library court Entire length
Rock Spring main parking lot Entire length
Rock Spring Place Entire length
Rocky Top parking lot Entire length
Rocky Top Square Entire length
Secondary parking lot Entire length
Secondary parking lot, north
lane
Entire length
Secondary parking lot, west
lane
Entire length
Second parking lot Entire length
Senior citizen garage drive Entire length
Tennis court Entire length
Tennis court parking lot Entire length
A. Signs and pavement markings, installation and maintenance.
(1) The owners of the premises referred to in this § 203-32 shall
provide and install signs and pavement markings as required. All
signs and pavement markings shall be in accordance with the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27 and as required by
§ 203-31 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-32
196:694
N.J.S.A. 39:4-198. The cost of procurement and installation of the
signs and pavement markings shall be the responsibility of the
owner of said property. The owner shall subsequently, after the
initial procurement and installation, maintain such signs and
pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense to the
municipality.
(2) The owners and/or operators of all vehicles entering upon all lands
or properties as described in this § 203-32 shall park their vehicles
as described; all vehicle(s) must be parked in the designated area;
between the painted lines provided. Notice shall be given to the
public by the placing of a sign(s) at the vehicular entrance(s) to
these lands and/or parking lots, as described in this § 203-32.
B. Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil
fills, any grassy area or pedestrian walkway or present in any way a
safety or traffic hazard upon the lands, properties and parking lots
described in this § 203-32 may be removed by towing the vehicle at the
owner's or operator's expense.
C. Long Hill Plaza regulations.
(1) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, Subtitle 1 of Title 39 shall be made
applicable to the streets or areas designated in this § 203-32C.
(2) Parking. All vehicles must park only in designated areas and
between the lines provided.
(3) Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 13 feet wide as shown on
the attached site plan. The site plan is attached to Ord. No. 32-93
and on file in the office of the Township Clerk and signed with R7-8
(reserved parking sign and penalty plate) in the designated parking
areas for persons who have been issued the handicapped parking
permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
(4) Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede
a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones,
oil fills, any grassy area or pedestrian walkway or present in any
way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the
vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
(5) Speed limits. The speed limits for all traffic in the parking lots and
all lanes of travel shall be 15 miles per hour. Regulatory and
warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect the abovedesignated
speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
(6) Stopping or standing prohibited. No person shall stop or stand a
vehicle any time upon any of the streets or parts of following
described streets:
§ 203-32 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-32
196:695
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Front Drive South All Entire length
Main Drive South All Entire length to
intersection of Lane C
Main Drive West All Along building to
frontage
Rear Drive North All Along rear of
extended loading dock
area
Rear Drive South All From southeast
corner of Lot B to a
point 460 feet
westerly therefrom
(7) One-way streets. The following described streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
Name of
Street Direction Limits Location
Eastern egress North Entire length Exit only onto Route
U.S. 46
Front Drive Counterclockwise
east
Entire length From the west
intersection with main
drive to the east
intersection with main
drive
Lane A North Entire length From main drive to
front drive
Lane B South Entire length From front drive to
main drive
Main drive South Entire length From west intersection
with Route U.S.
46 to east intersection
of Route U.S. 46 exit
Western
access
South Entire length Entrance only from
Route U.S. 46
(8) Pedestrian crosswalk. From the end of the concrete sidewalk at the
southeast corner of the A&P building southward directly to the rear
of the property crossing the rear drive.
D. Long Valley Plaza regulations.
(1) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, Subtitle 1 of Title 39 shall be made
applicable to the streets or areas designated in this subsection
§ 203-32D.
§ 203-32 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-32
196:696
§ 203-33. Private parking yards and parking places open to the
public.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the movement of
traffic on the following private property that is open to the public and to
which the public is invited shall be controlled by the types of regulations
indicated. No person shall operate or park a vehicle in violation of the
following regulations:
(2) Parking. All vehicles must park only in designated areas and
between the lines provided.
(3) Handicapped parking. The following locations shall be designated
and reserved as handicapped parking spaces for persons who have
been issued a motor vehicle identification sticker or license plate.
No other person shall park a vehicle in any area assigned as a
handicapped parking space, as described below. Vehicles shall park
between the posted lines.
(a) A minimum twelve-foot parking stall, said stall being the first
stall from the easterly curbline (west) in front of the building
(bank).
(b) Two eight-foot stalls with a five-foot aisleway between, said
stalls being located to the left (east) of the first brick
pedestrian island from the westerly curbline in front of the
building.
(c) A minimum twelve-foot parking stall, said stall to be located at
the rear of the building along the southernmost curbline,
immediately to the left (east) of the concrete refuse container
pad.
(4) Speed limits. Speed limits for all access roads and parking lots shall
be 15 miles per hour. Regulatory and warning signs shall be
erected and maintained to effect the above designated speed limits.
A. Peachtree Village. [Added 7-16-2001 by Ord. No. 18-01]
(1) The Peachtree Limited Partnership has filed a written consent with
the Township of Washington that the provisions of Subtitle One of
Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable
to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at the
Peachtree Village located in the Township of Washington, County of
Morris, and the following regulations shall hereby be enforceable:
(a) General parking.
[1] All vehicles must park in designated areas and between
the lines provided.
§ 203-32 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-33
196:697
[2] No person shall park or stand a vehicle upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described below, except in areas
covered by other parking restrictions.
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Decatur Court Both All Entire length
Magnolia Court Both All Entire length
Moon Light Court Both All Entire length
Peachtree Road Both All Entire length
Scarlett Drive Both All Entire length
Tara Drive Both All Entire length
[3] Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as
shown on the attached site plan124 and signed with the
R7-8 and R7-8P (Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty Plate),
in the designated parking areas for persons who have been
issued the handicapped parking permit by the Division of
Motor Vehicles.
(b) Through streets; stop intersections.
[1] Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the through street except where yield signs
are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Peachtree Road Entire length
Tara Drive Entire length
[2] Stop intersections. The following described intersections
are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs
shall be installed as provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on:
Decater Court and Scarlett Drive Decater Court
Hearthstone Road and Peachtree
Road
Peachtree Road
Peachtree Road and East Avenue Peachtree Road
Tara Drive and East Avenue Tara Drive
124. Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the office of the Township Clerk and may be
examined there during regular office hours.
§ 203-33 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-33
196:698
(c) One-way streets. The following described streets or parts of
streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated.
Name of Street Direction Limits
Peachtree Road West From the prolongation of
the westerly curb line of
Lot F to East Avenue
(d) Speed limits.
[1] The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking
lot(s) shall be 15 miles per hour.
[2] The speed limit for both directions of travel on the
following roadways are:
Name of
Roadway Speed Limit Limits
Decatur Court 20 Entire length
Hearthstone Road 30 Entire length
Magnolia Court 20 Entire length
Moonlight Court 20 Entire length
Peachtree Road 25 Entire length
Scarlett Drive 20 Entire length
Tara Drive 20 Entire length
[3] Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and
maintained to effect the above designated speed limits
authorized by the Department of Transportation.
(e) Tow-away zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct
or impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit
ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area or pedestrian
walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's
expense.
(2) Penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New
Jersey Statute, every person convicted of a violation of this
subsection or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of
not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15
days or both.
(3) All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and
paid for by the Peachtree Limited Partnership. All signing shall
conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
§ 203-33 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-34
196:699
§ 203-34. Semi-public areas.
A. Palmer Park Recreational Complex. [Added 12-18-2006 by Ord. No.
24-06]
(1) Washington Township has filed a written consent with the New
Jersey Department of Transportation to have the provisions of
Subtitle One of Title 39 of the revised statutes of New Jersey be
made applicable to the semi-public roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at Palmer Park Recreational Complex, as depicted on
the attached site plan dated September 20, 2006, located in the
Township of Washington, County of Morris, and that the following
regulations shall be enforceable:
(a) General parking.
[1] All vehicles must park in designated areas and between
the lines provided.
[2] No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described below, except in areas
covered by other parking restrictions.
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
All roads and
aisles
Both All As indicated on site
plan125
[3] Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as
shown on the attached site plan and signed with the R7-8
and R7-8P (Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty Plate), in
the designated parking areas for persons who have been
issued the handicapped parking permit by the Motor
Vehicle Commission.
(b) Speed limits.
[1] The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking
lot(s) shall be 15 miles per hour.
[2] The speed limit for both directions of travel on the
following roadways is:
Name of
Roadway
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
Palmer Place 15 Entire length
125. Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the office of the Township Clerk and may be
examined there during regular office hours.
§ 203-34 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-34
196:700
§ 203-35. Mid-block crosswalks. [Added 6-16-2008 by Ord. No.
09-08]
The following locations shall be established as mid-block crosswalks:
Name of Street Location
Chancellor Way A. Beginning at a point 420 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Bartley Road (CR 625) and
extending to a point 10 feet southerly therefrom
B. Beginning at a point 4,110 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Bartley Road (CR 625) and
extending to a point 10 feet southerly therefrom
Fairview Avenue [Added
9-19-2011 by Ord. No.
14-11]
A. Beginning at a point 697 feet east of the
northerly curbline of Schooley's Mountain Road
(CR 517)
B. Beginning at a point 642 feet from the
southerly curbline of Raspberry Lane
§ 203-36. (Reserved).
[3] Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and
maintained to effect the above-designated speed limits
authorized by the Department of Transportation.
(c) Tow-away zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct
or impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit
ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area or pedestrian
walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's
expense.
(2) Signs. All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be
installed and paid for by the Township. All signing shall conform to
the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
(3) Penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New
Jersey Statute, every person convicted of a violation of this
subsection or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of
not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15
days, or both.
§ 203-34 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-36
196:701

ARTICLE V
Schedules
§ 203-37. Schedule I: No Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 203-6, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Black River Road Both From Hunterdon County -
Morris County line westerly
for 967 feet
County Route 625 (Bartley Road)
[Added 8-15-2005 by Ord. No.
33-05]
Both Starting at the center line of
North Four Bridges Road
easterly to the Washington
Township/Mount Olive
Township corporate line
County Route 625 (Bartley Road)
[Added 8-15-2005 by Ord. No.
33-05]
Both Starting at the center line of
North Four Bridges Road
westerly for a distance of
1,500 feet
Spring Lane [Added 5-18-1998
by Ord. No. 14-98]
Both From center line of
Naughright Road in a
westerly direction for a
distance of 1,325 feet
West Maple Avenue [Added
12-18-2000 by Ord. No.
35-00]
North Starting at the westerly
curbline of Schooley's
Mountain Road westward for
a distance of 300 feet
West Morris Regional High School [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No.
37-88; repealed 12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 41-98]
§ 203-38. Schedule II: Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Main entrance [Added 12-19-1988 by Ord. No. 37-88; repealed
12-21-1988 by Ord. No. 41-98]
South Four Bridges Road
[Added 8-15-2005 by
Ord. No. 31-05]
East 7:00
a.m. to
3:30
p.m.
From a point 100 feet
south of the center line of
County Route 625 to a
point 485 feet therefrom
South Four Bridges Road
[Added 5-17-1999 by
Ord. No. 12-99]
West 7:00
a.m. to
5:00
p.m.
From a point 100 feet
south of the center line of
County Route 625 to a
point 850 feet therefrom
§ 203-37 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-38
196:703
Name of Street Side Hours Location
South Four Bridges Road [Added 7-15-1996 by Ord. No. 19-96;
repealed 12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 41-98]
§ 203-39. Schedule III: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 203-10, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle at any time upon any of the following described streets:
Name of Street Location
Apgar Road On the northerly side, from the westerly
curbline of Old Farmers Road to the
easterly curbline of Green Hills Road, a
total distance of 1,555 feet
Apgar Road On the southerly side, from the easterly
curbline of Green Hills Road to the
easterly curbline of Old Farmers Road, a
total distance of 1,585 feet
Califon Road [Added
4-20-1998 by Ord. No.
11-98]
On the westerly side, from the center line
of Ascot Drive and extending in a
northerly direction for a distance of 1,110
feet
County Route 513 (East Mill
Road)
South side, from Fairmount Road (County
Route 517) to Old Farmers Road
County Route 513 (East Mill
Road) [Added 12-18-1989 by
Ord. No. 30-89]
South side, between Old Farmers Road
and North Washington Valley Road (a
distance of 728 feet from the near-side
curbline of Old Farmers Road to the nearside
curbline of North Washington Valley
Road)
County Route 513 (West Mill
Road) [Added 12-18-1989 by
Ord. No. 30-89]
Both sides, starting 2,340 feet west of the
center line of Middle Valley Road,
proceeding in an easterly direction for a
distance of 2,870 feet
County Route 513 (West Mill
Road)
South side, beginning at the curbline of
County Route 517 and extending west for
a distance of 6,075 feet
County Route 517 (Fairmount
Road)
On the easterly side, from the southerly
curbline of Mill Road to a point 650 feet
south therefrom
County Route 517 (Fairmount
Road)
On the westerly side, from the southerly
curbline of Mill Road to a point 900 feet
south therefrom
County Route 517 (Schooley's
Mountain Road)
On the easterly side, beginning at the
northerly curbline of Fairview Avenue to a
point 110 feet north therefrom
§ 203-38 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-39
196:704
Name of Street Location
County Route 517 (Schooley's
Mountain Road)
On the easterly side, beginning at a point
248 feet from the northerly curbline of
Fairview Avenue for a distance of 156 feet
in a northerly direction
County Route 517 (Schooley's
Mountain Road)
On the easterly side (for northbound
traffic), beginning at the intersection of
Springtown Road thence in a southerly
direction for 1,000 feet
County Route 517 (Schooley's
Mountain Road)
On the easterly side, beginning at a point
1,800 feet south of the Warren County
line and extending in a northerly
direction for a distance of 1,800 feet to
said county line
County Route 517 (Schooley's
Mountain Road)
On the westerly side, beginning at a point
164 feet from the northerly curbline of
Fairview Avenue for a distance of 89 feet
in a northerly direction
County Route 517 (Schooley's
Mountain Road)
On the westerly side (for southbound
traffic), beginning at the intersection of
Springtown Road thence in a southerly
direction for 1,000 feet
County Route 517 (Schooley's
Mountain Road)
On the westerly side, beginning at the
Warren County - Hackettstown
Corporation line and extending in a
southerly direction for a distance of 1,800
feet
County Route 625 (Bartley Road) [Repealed 7-15-1996 by Ord. No.
19-96]
County Route 625 (Bartley Road) [Added 7-15-1996 by Ord. No. 19-96;
repealed 12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 41-98]
County Route 625 (Bartley
Road) [Added 12-21-1998 by
Ord. No. 42-98]
Both sides, starting at the center line of
North Four Bridges Road easterly for a
distance of 3,000 feet
East Avenue On the northbound side, from the
southerly curbline of U.S. Route 46 to a
point 325 feet southerly therefrom
East Avenue On the southbound side, from the
northerly curbline of U.S. Route 46 to a
point 85 feet northerly therefrom
East Avenue On the southbound side, from the
southerly curbline of U.S Route 46 to a
point 325 feet southerly therefrom
§ 203-39 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-39
196:705
Name of Street Location
East Springtown Road
[Amended 11-20-1989 by
Ord. No. 26-89]
Both sides, beginning at the intersection
of Schooley's Mountain Road (County
Route 517) to a point 2,190 feet easterly
therefrom
East Valley Brook Road On the southerly side, at a point 2,274
feet from the easterly side of Old Farmers
Road to a point 1,022 feet east thereof
Flocktown Road 450 feet west of the curbline of Rock
Road and extending to the curbline of
Partridge Lane, a distance of 870 feet
Naughright Road On the easterly side of, starting at the
southerly curbline of Fieldstone Drive in a
southerly direction for a distance of 1,000
feet
Naughright Road On the westerly side of, starting at the
northerly curbline of Fieldstone Drive in a
southerly direction for a distance of 1,030
feet
North Four Bridges Road
[Added 8-15-2005 by Ord.
No. 31-05]
Both sides, from the center line of County
Route 625 (Bartley Road) northerly to a
point 1,200 feet therefrom
Old Farmers Road On the easterly side (for north-bound
traffic), from County Route 513 [East Mill
Road) to Carl Lane, a distance of 740 feet
Old Farmers Road [Added
8-21-2017 by Ord. No.
11-17]
On the easterly side (for north-bound
traffic), from Forest View Drive to a point
500 feet south therefrom
South Four Bridges Road
[Added 7-15-1996 by Ord.
No. 19-96]
Both sides, from center line of County
Route 625 (Bartley Road) to a point 100
feet therefrom
South Four Bridges Road
[Added 7-15-1996 by Ord.
No. 19-96; amended
8-15-2005 by Ord. No.
31-05]
East side, starting at a point 485 feet
south of center line of County Route 625
southward to the Washington Township/
Chester Township corporate line
South Four Bridges Road
[Added 7-15-1996 by Ord.
No. 19-96; amended
8-15-2005 by Ord. No.
31-05]
West side, starting at a point 850 feet
south of the center line of County Route
625 southward to the Washington
Township/Chester Township corporate
line
South Four Bridges Road [Added 12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 41-98,
repealed 5-17-1999 by Ord. No. 12-99]
§ 203-39 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-39
196:706
Name of Street Location
West Morris Regional High School [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No.
37-88; repealed 12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 41-98]
§ 203-40. Schedule IIIA: No Stopping or Standing During Certain
Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 203-11, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle between the hours specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Fieldstone Drive East 9:00 p.m. to 5:00
a.m.
Entire length
Fieldstone Drive West 9:00 p.m. to 5:00
a.m.
Entire length
§ 203-40.1. Schedule IIIB: No Stopping or Standing Except for
Buses. [Added 10-19-1998 by Ord. No. 33-98]
In accordance with the provisions of § 203-10 and notwithstanding the
provisions of § 203-39, no person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time
upon any of the following described streets except that an omnibus may
stop for the purpose of picking up or discharging passengers:
Name of Street Side Location
County Route 513 (East
Mill Road)
South From the easterly curbline of
Fairmount Road (County Route 517)
proceeding in an easterly direction for
a distance of 175 feet
County Route 513 (East
Mill Road)
South 310 feet from the easterly curbline of
Fairmount Road (County Route 517)
proceeding in an easterly direction to
105 feet west of the westerly curbline
of Old Farmers Road
County Route 517
(Schooley's Mountain
Road)
East Beginning at 105 feet from the
southerly curbline of East Springtown
for a distance of 895 feet
County Route 517
(Schooley's Mountain
Road)
West Beginning at 100 feet from the
southerly curbline of West Springtown
Road for a distance of 900 feet
§ 203-41. Schedule IV: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 203-12, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following streets or
parts of streets:
§ 203-39 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-41
196:707
Name of Street Side Time Limit Location
West Morris Regional High School [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No.
27-88; repealed 12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 41-98]
§ 203-42. Schedule V: Trucks Over Four Tons Excluded.
§ 203-43. Schedule VA: Trucks Over 14 Tons Excluded.
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 203-15, trucks over four tons'
gross vehicle weight are hereby excluded from the following described
streets or parts of streets, except for the pickup and delivery of
materials on such streets:
Name of Street Location
Black River Road [Added
5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 19-02]
From the intersection of
Hacklebarney Road to the
Tewksbury Township/Washington
Township corporate line
(Hunterdon County)
Coleman Road [Added
6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 19-97]
From Bartley Road (County Route
No. 625) to East Mill Road
(County Route No. 513)
Drakestown Road From U.S. Route 46 easterly
intersection to U.S. Route 46
westerly intersection
East Avenue From U.S. Route 46 to Drakestown
Road
East Avenue From U.S. Route 46 to
Hackettstown/Washington
Township corporate line (Warren
County)
B. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined an
amount equal to $0.02 per pound for each pound of the total excess
registered vehicle weight, provided the total excess registered vehicle
weight is 10,000 pounds or less; or shall be fined an amount equal to
$0.03 per pound for each pound of the total excess registered vehicle
weight, provided the total excess registered vehicle weight is more than
10,000 pounds, but in no event shall the fine be less than $50. [Added
10-17-2011 by Ord. No. 15-11]
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 203-16, trucks over 14 tons'
gross vehicle weight are hereby excluded from the following described
streets or parts of streets, except for the pickup and delivery of
materials on such streets:
§ 203-41 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-43
196:708
§ 203-43.1. Schedule VAA: Trucks Over 15 Tons Excluded. [Added
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 06-15]
§ 203-44. Schedule VB: Trucks Over 20 Tons Excluded.
Name of Street Location
Kings Highway From Pleasant Grove Road to the
Warren County line
B. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined an
amount equal to $0.02 per pound for each pound of the total excess
registered vehicle weight, provided the total excess registered vehicle
weight is 10,000 pounds or less; or shall be fined an amount equal to
$0.03 per pound for each pound of the total excess registered vehicle
weight, provided the total excess registered vehicle weight is more than
10,000 pounds, but in no event shall the fine be less than $50. [Added
10-17-2011 by Ord. No. 15-11]
A. Trucks over 15 tons' gross registered vehicle weight are hereby
excluded from the following described streets or parts of streets, except
for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets and emergency
vehicles:
Name of Street Location
Schooley's Mountain Road
(County Road 517) [Amended
11-16-2015 by Ord. No. 13-15]
From the Warren County and
Morris County border to East/
West Mill Road
B. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be liable to the
penalty set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-84.3.
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 203-17, trucks over 20 tons,
gross vehicle weight are hereby excluded from the following described
streets or parts of streets, except for the pickup and delivery of
materials on such streets:
Name of Street Location
Schooley's Mountain Road
(County Road 517) [Amended
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 06-15]
From the intersection of
Newburgh Road to the
Hackettstown, Warren County,
border
B. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined an
amount equal to $0.02 per pound for each pound of the total excess
registered vehicle weight, provided the total excess registered vehicle
weight is 10,000 pounds or less; or shall be fined an amount equal to
$0.03 per pound for each pound of the total excess registered vehicle
weight, provided the total excess registered vehicle weight is more than
10,000 pounds, but in no event shall the fine be less than $50. [Added
10-17-2011 by Ord. No. 15-11]
§ 203-43 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-45
196:709
§ 203-45. Schedule VI: One-way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 203-18, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
LONG VALLEY POST OFFICE
North access road Westbound Entire length
South access road Eastbound Entire length
WEST MORRIS REGIONAL HIGH SCHOOL [Repealed 12-21-1998 by
Ord. No. 41-98]
§ 203-46. Schedule VII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 203-19, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop
signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting
the through street, except where yield signs are provided for in the
designations:
Bartley Road (County Route 625)
Entire length
Beacon Hill Road
a. Between West Mill Road (County Route 513) and West Valley Brook
Road
b. Between West Valley Brook Road and the Tewksbury Township
(Hunterdon County) corporate line
Drakestown Road
Between Naughright Road and its easterly terminus at the Mount
Olive Township - Washington Township corporate line
East Valley Brook Road
Between Fairmount Road (County Route 517) and East Mill Road
(County Route 513)
Fairmount Road (County Route 517)
Entire length
Flocktown Road
a. Between Schooley's Mountain Road (County Route 517) and
Naughright Road
b. Between Naughright Road and Drakestown Road
Mission Road [Added 11-18-2002 by Ord. No. 43-02]
Between Naughright Road and Spring/Reservior Road
Naughright Road
§ 203-45 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-46
196:710
Between the Mount Olive Township - Washington Township corporate
line and Bartley Road (County Route 625)
North Four Bridges Road
Between Drakestown Road and County Route 625 (Bartley Road).
A yield sign shall be installed on Laketown Road on the northbound
approach facing eastbound traffic.
Old Farmers Road [Amended 11-18-1996 by Ord. No. 28-96]
a. From East Mill Road to East Valley Brook Road.
b. From East Valley Brook Road to Parker Road.
c. From Parker Road to Hacklebarney Road.
Parker Road
Between Fairmount Road (County Route 517) to the Chester Township
- Washington Township corporate line
Pleasant Grove Road
Between the Lebanon Township - Washington Township corporate line
and Schooley's Mountain Road (County Route 517)
Rock Road
Between Flocktown Road and East Springtown Road [Added
3-18-1991 by Ord. No. 6-91]
Schooley's Mountain Road (County Route 517, Route 24)
Entire length
Spring/Reservoir Road [Added 11-18-2002 by Ord. No. 43-02]
Between Naughright Road and Route US 46 East
Stephensburg Road
Between Pleasant Grove Road and the Washington Township -
Mansfield Township (Warren County) corporate line
West Mill Road - East Mill Road (County Route 513, Route 24)
Entire length
West Springtown Road
Between Schooley's Mountain Road (Legislated N.J. Route 24, County
Route 517) and Zellers Road
West Valley Brook Road
Between the Tewksbury Township - Washington Township corporate
line and Fairmount Road (County Route 517)
Zellers Road
Between Middle Valley Road and Pleasant Grove Road
§ 203-46 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-47
196:711
§ 203-47. Schedule VIII: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 203-20, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections:
Black River Road and Pickle Road: Stop signs shall be installed on Pickle
Road.
Coleman Road and Beaver Brook Drive: Stop signs shall be installed on
Beaver Brook Drive.
Drakestown Road and Mine Hill Road (Mt. Olive Township): Stop signs
shall be on Drakestown Road for westbound traffic.
East Avenue and Drakestown Road: Stop shall be installed on the westerly
approach to Drakestown Road facing eastbound traffic. [Added
2-18-1991 by Ord. No. 2-91]
East Springtown Road and Rock Spring Park driveway: Stop signs shall be
installed on the Rock Spring Park driveway.
Fairview Avenue and Laketown Road: Stop signs shall be installed on
Laketown Road.
Fawnridge Drive (east leg) and Fawnridge Drive (west leg): Stop
signs shall be installed on Fawnridge Drive (west leg).
Fawnridge Drive and Acorn Drive: Stop signs shall be installed on Acorn
Drive.
Fawnridge Drive and Locust Drive: Stop signs shall be installed on Locust
Drive.
Hacklebarney Road and Hacklebarney State Park entrance/exit: Stop
signs shall be installed on Hacklebarney State Park entrance/exit.
Hacklebarney Road and Long Hill Road: Stop signs shall be installed on
Long Hill Road.
Jackie Drive and Kim Lane: Stop sign shall be installed on Kim Lane.
Middle Valley Road and Zellers Road: Stop signs shall be installed on
Zellers Road.
Middle Valley Road and Califon Road: Stop sign shall be installed on
Middle Valley Road.
Mission Road and Spring Lane: Stop signs shall be installed on Spring
Lane.
Newburgh Road and Esna Drive: Stop signs shall be installed on Esna
Drive.
Rock Road and East Springtown Road: Stop signs shall be installed on
easterly approach of East Springtown Road facing westbound traffic.
South Four Bridges Road and West Morris Central High School rear
access road: Stop signs shall be installed on West Morris Central High
School rear access road.
§ 203-47 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-47
196:712
Spring Lane and Nestlingwood Drive: Stop signs shall be installed on
Nestlingwood Drive.
East Springtown Road and Camp Washington Road: Stop signs shall be
installed on the southerly approach of East Springtown Road facing
northbound traffic.
U.S. Route and Long Hill Plaza parking lot entrance/exit: Stop signs shall
be installed at the parking lot entrance/exit driveways.
West Morris Central High School Parking Lot access road and main
entrance road [Repealed 12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 41-98]
§ 203-48. Schedule IX: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 203-21, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections:
Old Farmers Road and Hacklebarney Road: Yield signs shall be installed
on all island approaches. [Added 4-15-1991 by Ord. No. 1-91]
§ 203-49. Schedule X: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 203-22, the following locations are
hereby designated as loading zones:
West Morris Central High School [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No.
37-88; repealed 12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 41-98]
§ 203-50. Schedule XI: Taxi Stands.
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 203-51. Schedule XII: Bus Stops.
The locations described are hereby designated as Bus Stops. No vehicle
other than an omnibus picking up or discharging passengers, shall be
permitted to occupy said location between the hours indicated.
[Amended 10-19-1998 by Ord. No. 33-98]
§ 203-47 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-51
196:713
Name of Street Side Location Hours
East Mill Road (County
Route 513)
North East Gate Road (near
side) beginning at the
prolonga-tion of the
easterly curbline of Old
Farmers Road and
extending 105 feet
easterly therefrom
All
East Mill Road (County
Route 513)
North Old Farmers Road (near
side) beginning at the
prolongation of the
easterly curbline of Old
Farmers Road and
extending 105 feet
easterly therefrom
All
East Mill Road (County
Route 513)
North Schooley's Mountain
Road (near side)
beginning at the easterly
curbline of Schooley's
Mountain Road and
extending 105 feet
easterly therefrom
All
East Mill Road (County
Route 513)
South East Gate Road (near
side) beginning at the
westerly curbline of East
Gate Road and extending
105 feet westerly
therefrom
All
East Mill Road (County
Route 513)
South Fairmount Road and
Mountain View Avenue
(mid-block) beginning
175 feet east of the
easterly curbline of
Fairmount Road and
extending 135 feet
easterly therefrom
All
East Mill Road (County
Route 513)
South Old Farmers Road (near
side) beginning at the
westerly curbline of Old
Farmers Road and
extending 105 feet
westerly therefrom
All
§ 203-51 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-51
196:714
Name of Street Side Location Hours
Schooley's Mountain
Road
North East Springtown Road
(near side) beginning at
the westerly curbline of
East Springtown Road
and extending 105 feet
westerly therefrom
All
Schooley's Mountain
Road
North Fairview Avenue and
Maple Avenue (midblock)
beginning 337 feet
west of the westerly
curbline of Fairview
Avenue and extending
135 feet westerly
therefrom
All
Schooley's Mountain
Road
North Hastings Drive (near
side) beginning at the
westerly curbline of
Hastings Drive and
extending 105 feet
westerly therefrom
All
Schooley's Mountain
Road
North Pleasant Grove Road and
East Springtown Road
(mid-block) beginning
185 feet west of the
westerly curbline of
Pleasant Grove Road and
extending 135 feet
westerly therefrom
All
Schooley's Mountain
Road
South Hastings Drive (near
side) beginning at the
prolongation of the
westerly curbline of
Hastings Drive and
extending 105 feet
westerly therefrom
All
Schooley's Mountain
Road
South Maple Avenue and
Fairview Avenue (midblock)
beginning 287 feet
west of the westerly
curbline of Fairview
Avenue and extending
135 feet westerly
therefrom
All
§ 203-51 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-51
196:715
Name of Street Side Location Hours
Schooley's Mountain
Road
South Pleasant Grove Road and
Springtown Road (midblock)
beginning 612 feet
east of the easterly
curbline of Pleasant
Grove Road and
extending 135 feet
easterly therefrom
All
Schooley's Mountain
Road
South West Springtown Road
(far side) beginning at
the easterly curbline of
West Springtown Road
and extending 100 feet
easterly therefrom
All
§ 203-52. Schedule XIII: Left Turn Prohibitions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 203-25, no person shall make a left
turn at any of the following locations:
Location
From southbound on County Route 517 (legislated N.J. Route 24,
Schooley's Mountain Road) to eastbound into the driveway of Hastings
Square Plaza
From west on Fox Hill Road south on County Road 517 [Added
4-15-1991 by Ord. No. 9-91]
From the driveway of Block 54, Lot 3, 25 Middle Valley Road, onto Middle
Valley Road [Added 2-20-2012 by Ord. No. 01-12]
From Our Lady of the Mountain Church Parking Lot onto County Route
517 (Schooley's Mountain Road)
§ 203-53. Schedule XIV: U-Turns Prohibited.
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 203-54. Schedule XV: No Turns.
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 203-55. Schedule XVI: Lane Use.
In accordance with the provisions of § 203-28, the following locations are
hereby designated as land use reservations:
§ 203-51 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-55
196:716
Intersection Movement
County Route 517 (Schooley's
Mountain Road) and James Trail
[Added 2-17-1997 by Ord. No.
2-97]
Northbound left lane of County
Route 517 (Schooley's Mountain
Road) reserved for left turns only
Naughright Road and Spring Lane
[Added 2-17-1997 by Ord. No.
2-97]
Northbound left lane of Naughright
Road reserved for left turns only
§ 203-56. Schedule XVII: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 203-29, limits for certain streets and
parts of streets, in both directions, shall be described as follows:
Name of Street Location
Speed Limit
(mph)
Acorn Drive [Added 5-17-1999
by Ord. No. 10-99]
Entire length 25
Ann Road [Added 7-20-1998
by Ord. No. 27-98]
Entire length 25
Arrowhead Drive [Added
6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 08-18]
Entire length, in both
directions of travel
30
Ashwood Terrace [Added
7-20-1998 by Ord. No. 27-98]
Entire length 25
Beacon Hill Road Zone 1
Between West Mill
Road and a point
3,200 feet east of
West Mill Road
40
Zone 2
Between a point 3,200
feet east of West Mill
Road and the Morris
County - Hunterdon
County line
35
Black River Road [Added
10-21-1991 by Ord. No.
33-91]
Zone 1
From Parker Road to
2,250 feet east of
Pickle Road
35
§ 203-55 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-56
196:717
Name of Street Location
Speed Limit
(mph)
Zone 2
From 2,250 feet east
of Pickle Road to the
Washington -
Tewksbury Township
line.
25
Camp Washington Road - East
Springtown Road
Zone 1
Between County
Route 517 and East
Springtown Road/
Camp Washington
Road
35
Zone 2
Between East
Springtown Road/
Camp Washington
Road and Naughright
Road
40
Chancellor Way [Added
11-15-2010 by Ord. No.
25-10]
Entire length 25
Coleman Road Entire length 35
Drakestown Road Zone 1
Between U.S. Route
46 and Naughright
Road
25
Zone 2
Between Naughright
Road and its easterly
terminus at Mt. Olive/
Washington Township
corporate line (North
Four Bridges Road)
35
§ 203-56 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-56
196:718
Name of Street Location
Speed Limit
(mph)
Drakestown Road Zone 1
Between the U.S.
Route 46 easterly
intersection to its
terminus at the U.S.
Route 46 westerly
intersection (entire
length)
30
Eagle Nest Lane [Added
7-20-1998 by Ord. No. 27-98]
Entire length 25
East Avenue Zone 1
Between the southerly
Washington Township
line (Morris County -
Warren County line)
and U.S. Route 46
40
Zone 2
Between U.S. Route
46 and Drakestown
Road 870 feet north of
U.S. Route 46
30
East Mill Road [Added
12-18-2000 by Ord. No.
31-00]
Zone 1
Between Hunterdon
County-Morris County
line and 2,500 feet
west of Middle Valley
Road
50
Zone 2
Between 2,500 feet
west of Middle Valley
Road and 900 feet
east of Middle Valley
Road
40
Zone 3
Between 900 feet east
of Middle Valley Road
and 1,950 feet west of
Schooley's Mountain
Road (County Route
517)
50
§ 203-56 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-56
196:719
Name of Street Location
Speed Limit
(mph)
Zone 4
Between 1,950 feet
west of Schooley's
Mountain Road and
625 feet west of
Schooley's Mountain
Road
35, except 25
within the Long
Valley Middle
School Zone
(approximately)
1,800 feet west of
Schooley's
Mountain Road)
during recess
when the
presence of
children is clearly
visible from the
roadway, or while
children are
going to or
leaving school,
during opening or
closing hours
Zone 5
Between 625 feet
west of Schooley's
Mountain Road and
825 feet east of
Schooley's Mountain
Road
25
Zone 6
Between 825 feet east
of Schooley's
Mountain Road and
Mountain View
Avenue
35
Zone 7
Between Mountain
View Avenue and 300
feet east of Old
Farmer's Road
40
§ 203-56 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-56
196:720
Name of Street Location
Speed Limit
(mph)
Zone 8
Between 300 feet east
of Old Farmer's Road
and the Washington
Township - Chester
Township line
45
East Springtown Road Zone 1
Between County
Route 517 (Schooley's
Mountain Road) and a
point 1,250 feet north
of Rock Road
25
Zone 2
Between a point 1,250
feet north of Rock
Road and Camp
Washington Road
30
East Valley Brook Road Zone 1
Between County
Route 517 (Fairmount
Road) and County
Route 513 (East Mill
Road)
40
Fairview Avenue Zone 1
Between County
Route 517 (Schooley's
Mountain Road) and
Scenic Falls Road
25
Zone 2
Between Scenic Falls
Road and Naughright
Road
35
Zone 3
Between Naughright
Road and Drakestown
Road
30
Falcon Lane [Added
4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 9-98]
Entire length 25
§ 203-56 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-56
196:721
Name of Street Location
Speed Limit
(mph)
Fawnridge Drive [Added
5-17-1999 by Ord. No. 10-99]
Entire length 25
Flocktown Road Zone 1
Between Schooley's
Mountain Road and
Naughright Road,
except 25 miles per
hour in the Flocktown
Road Elementary
School zone during
recess when the
presence of children
is clearly visible from
the roadway or while
children are going to
or leaving school,
during opening or
closing hours
40
Zone 2
Between Naughright
and Drakestown Road
35
Hacklebarney Road Zone 1
Between Black River
Road and the
entrance to
Hacklebarney State
Park
30
Zone 2
Between the entrance
of Hacklebarney State
Park and the Chester
Township line
35
Harmony Court [Added
7-20-1998 by Ord. No. 27-98]
Entire length 25
Hunter Drive [Added
4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 9-98]
Entire length 25
Kings Highway Entire length 35
Mallard Lane [Added
4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 9-98]
Entire length 25
Laketown Road Entire length 30
§ 203-56 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-56
196:722
Name of Street Location
Speed Limit
(mph)
Middle Valley Road Zone 1
Between Califon Road
and a point 3,000 feet
west of Zellers Road
15
Zone 2
Between a point 3,000
feet west of Zellers
Road to West Mill
Road (County
Route 513)
30
Mission Road Zone 1
Between Reservoir
Road and 900 feet
west of Marjorie Drive
35
Zone 2
Between 900 feet
west of Marjorie Drive
and 1,075 feet east of
Nancy Terrace
30
Zone 3
Between 1,075 feet
east of Nancy Terrace
and Naughtright Road
35
Mountain View Avenue Entire length 35
Mount Lebanon Road [Added
2-19-1990 by Ord. No 1-90]
Entire length 25
Naughright Road Zone 1
Between Bartley Road
(County Route 625)
and Fairview Avenue
35
Zone 2
Between Fairview
Avenue and a point
1,550 feet south of
Fawnridge Drive
30
§ 203-56 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-56
196:723
Name of Street Location
Speed Limit
(mph)
Zone 3
Between a point 1,550
feet south of
Fawnridge Drive and
a point 1,000 feet
north of Arrowhead
Drive
40
Zone 4
Between a point 1,000
feet north of
Arrowhead Drive and
Mission Road
45
Zone 5
Between Mission
Road and Drakestown
Road
40
Nestlingwood Drive [Added
5-17-1999 by Ord. No. 10-99]
From intersecion with
Flocktown Road to
intersection with
Spring Lane
30
Newburgh Road Entire length 40
North Four Bridges Road Zone 1
Between Bartley Road
(County Route 625)
and Laketown Road
30
Zone 2
Between Laketown
Road and Drakestown
Road
35
Old Farmers Road Zone 1
Between
Hacklebarney Road
and East Valley Brook
Road
30
§ 203-56 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-56
196:724
Name of Street Location
Speed Limit
(mph)
Zone 2
Between East Valley
Brook Road and East
Mill Road (County
Route 513) except for
25 miles per hour
when passing through
the Old Farmers Road
Elementary School
Zone while "25 MPH
When Flashing" signs
are operating, during
recess or when
children are arriving
or departing school
during opening or
closing hours
35
Partridge Lane [Added
4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 9-98]
Entire length 25
Pheasant Drive [Added
4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 9-98]
Entire length 25
Old Turnpike Road [Added
11-18-1991 by Ord. No.
35-91; amended 9-18-1995
by Ord. No. 32-95]
Zone 1
From the Mansfield
Township -
Washington Township
line to 2,800 feet west
thereof
30
Zone 2
From 2,800 feet west
of the Mansfield
Township -
Washington Township
line
35
Zone 3
From Stephensburg
Road to the Lebanon
Township -
Washington Township
line
30
Parker Road Entire length 40
§ 203-56 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-56
196:725
Name of Street Location
Speed Limit
(mph)
Pleasant Grove Road Zone 1
Between the westerly
Washington Township
line (also Hunterdon
County - Morris
County line) and
Stephensburg Road -
Califon Road
40
Zone 2
Between
Stephensburg Road -
Califon Road and
1,700 feet west of
Heath Lane
45
Zone 3
Between 1,700 feet
west of Heath Lane
and Schooley's
Mountain Road
40
Quail Run [Added 4-20-1998
by Ord. No. 9-98]
Entire length 25
Reservoir Road, both directions
[Amended 3-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 5-98; 2-21-2005 by Ord.
No. 4-05]
Between Route U.S.
46 and Spring Lane
30
Ridgeline Drive [Added
11-15-2010 by Ord. No.
25-10]
Entire length 25
Rock Road Entire length 35
South Four Bridges Road Entire length 40
Sparrow Lane [Added
7-20-1998 by Ord. No. 27-98]
Entire length 25
Spring Lane [Amended
2-21-2005 by Ord. No. 5-05]
Zone 1
Between Naughright
Road and
Nestlingwood Drive
30
§ 203-56 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-56
196:726
Name of Street Location
Speed Limit
(mph)
Zone 2
Between
Nestlingwood Drive
and Reservoir Road
35
Stephensburg-Califon Road
[Amended 2-15-1993 by Ord.
No. 3-93]
Zone 1
From the Hunterdon/
Morris County line to
Pleasant Grove Road
40
Zone 2
From Pleasant Grove
Road to 0.33 mile
north of Fishers Mine
Road
25
Zone 3
From 0.33 mile north
of Fishers Mine Road
to 0.33 mile south of
Old Turnpike Road
20
Zone 4
From 0.33 mile south
of Old Turnpike Road
to the Morris/Warren
County line
25
Vernoy Road Entire length 20
Wehrli Road [Added
5-17-1999 by Ord. No. 10-99]
From intersection
with Grove Road to
intersection with
Springtown Road
30
West Mill Road (County Route
513) and East Mill Road
(County Route 513 - 510 or
Legislative Route 24)
[Amended 12-20-1999 by
Ord. No. 32-99]
Zone 1
Between the
Hunterdon County -
Morris County line
and 2,500 feet west of
Middle Valley Road
50
§ 203-56 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-56
196:727
Name of Street Location
Speed Limit
(mph)
Zone 2
Between 2,500 feet
west of Middle Valley
Road and 900 feet
east of Middle Valley
Road
40
Zone 3
Between 900 feet east
of Middle Valley Road
and 2,100 feet west of
Schooley's Mountain
Road
50
Zone 4
Between 2,100 feet
west of Schooley's
Mountain Road and
600 feet west of
Schooley's Mountain
Road, except 25 miles
per hour when
passing through the
Long Valley Middle
School zone during
recess when the
presence of children
is clearly visible from
the roadway or while
children are going to
or leaving school,
during opening or
closing hours
35
Zone 5
Between 600 feet
west of Schooley's
Mountain Road and
875 feet east of
Schooley's Mountain
Road
25
§ 203-56 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-56
196:728
Name of Street Location
Speed Limit
(mph)
Zone 6
Between 875 feet east
of Schooley's
Mountain Road and
Mountain View
Avenue
30
Zone 7
Between Mountain
View Avenue and
North Washington
Valley Road
35
Zone 8
Between North
Washington Valley
Road and the
Washington Township
- Chester Township
line
45
West Morris Central High School [Repealed 12-21-1998 by Ord. No.
41-98]
West Springtown Road
[Amended 11-20-1989 by
Ord. No. 26-89]
Zone 1
Between Schooley's
Mountain Road (Route
517) and Wehrli Road
35
Zone 2
Between Wehrli Road
and Zellers Road
30
West Valley Brook Road Zone 1
Between the
Washington Township
- Tewksbury Township
line (Vernoy Road)
and Frog Hollow Road
30
Zone 2
Between Frog Hollow
Road and Beacon Hill
Road
35
§ 203-56 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-56
196:729
Name of Street Location
Speed Limit
(mph)
Zone 3
Between Beacon Hill
Road and Fairmount
Road (Route 517)
40
Winay Terrace [Added
7-20-1998 by Ord. No. 27-98]
Entire length 25
Zellers Road [Added
12-19-1988 by Ord. No.
38-88]
Entire length 30
§ 203-56 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-56
196:730
ARTICLE VI
Enclave at Long Valley Development
[Added 7-16-2018 by Ord. No. 09-18]
§ 203-57. General parking.
§ 203-58. Speed limits.
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
B. Nothing herein shall relieve the streets within Enclave at Long Valley
from the parking restrictions set forth in the Township Code,
specifically but not limited to no winter parking and no parking on
streets during snowstorms.
C. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described below, except in areas covered by other parking
restrictions.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Welsh Farm
Road
Both All As indicated on site plan126
Dairy Lane Both All As indicated on site plan
Raspberry Lane Both All As indicated on site plan
D. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (reserved
parking sign and penalty plate) in the designated parking areas for
persons who have been issued the handicapped parking permit by the
Motor Vehicle Commission.
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lot(s) shall be
25 miles per hour.
B. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following roadways
is:
Name of Roadway Miles Per Hour Limit
Welsh Farm Road 25 Entire length
Dairy Lane 25 Entire length
Raspberry Lane 25 Entire length
C. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits.
126. Editor's Note: The site plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 203-57 TREES AND SHRUBS § 203-59
196:731
§ 203-59. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 203-60. Signs.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the Enclave at Long Valley pursuant to Township Code § 203-32. All
signage shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
§ 203-61. Penalty.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by the New Jersey Statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 203-59 WASHINGTON CODE § 203-61
196:732
Chapter 207
VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 125.
Taxicabs and limousines — See Ch. 185.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 200.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 203.
§ 207-1. Prohibited operation.
No person shall operate any type of unlicensed motor-driven vehicle or
conveyance, including but not necessarily limited to snowmobiles, twowheel
motor vehicles known as "mini bicycles," "trail bicycles" and "motor
scooters," and four-wheel motor vehicles known as "go-carts," under the
following circumstances:
§ 207-2. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to the following:
A. On private property in the township without the express written
permission to do so of the owner or occupant of the property.
B. On any public road in the township.
C. On public property in the township without written permission to do so
of the proper public authority.
D. In a manner so as to make, create, continue or cause to be made or
continued loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so as to disturb or
interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons.
E. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger, or be
likely to endanger, the safety of any person or the property of any other
person.
A. Police and emergency vehicles.
B. Any organization of good moral repute which has applied to the
Township Committee and been given permission to use specified
vehicles on township-owned lands in connection with organized and
supervised activities. This permission may be subject to such conditions
as the Township Committee deems proper; provided, however, that an
insurance policy or a certificate of insurance is filed with the Township
Clerk and approved as to amount and coverage of the proposed
activities by the Township Committee, and provided further that the
Township Committee is satisfied that the township will be held harmless
for any such use of its land.
§ 203-61 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 207-3
207:733
§ 207-3. Confiscation of vehicles. [Amended 7-21-1986 by Ord. No.
24-86]
The police shall immediately confiscate the unlicensed motor-driven vehicle
operated in the prohibited areas or in the prohibited manner described
in § 207-1. The unlicensed motor-driven vehicle shall be returned upon
payment of towing charges, storage fees and an administrative restoration
fee in the amount of $100.
§ 207-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-15-1984 by Ord. No.
25-84; 4-16-2007 by Ord. No. 9-07]
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be subject,
upon conviction, to the penalties provided in § 1-3 of this Code.
Chapter 213
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 92.
Sewer connections — See Ch. 155, Art. I.
Water — See Ch. 255.
§ 207-3 WASHINGTON CODE § 207-4
213:734
ARTICLE I
Connections127
[Adopted 7-21-1986 by Ord. No. 22-86 (Ch. XIV of the Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 213-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Any building or structure heretofore or hereinafter
constructed and designed or used for dwelling purposes or occupancy by
persons, whether temporary or permanent or in which water is used for
human consumption or otherwise.
WATERLINE — Any pipe or conduit designed or used for the transmission
of potable water within the township, whether owned and operated by the
township itself or the Township of Washington Municipal Utilities Authority.
WATER SUPPLY PROJECT AREA — That portion of the Township of
Washington contained within the area established by the New Jersey State
Department of Environmental Protection and Energy and more specifically
described by lot and block numbers on Schedules A and B attached
hereto.128[Added 12-21-1992 by Ord. No. 23-92]
WELL RESTRICTED AREA — That portion of the Township of Washington
contained within the ten-year well restricted area established by the New
Jersey State Department of Environmental Protection and more specifically
described by lot and block numbers on Schedule A attached
hereto.129[Added 9-15-1986 by Ord. No. 33-86]
§ 213-2. Connection required where available.
A. The owner or owners of each improved property within the Township of
Washington and having reasonable access to a street, highway or alley
in which the water supply system of the township or the Municipal
Utilities Authority is located shall, upon receipt of written notice from
the township that water service is available and that connection is
required, connect such improved property to the water supply system
within 60 days of said notice so that the public water supply shall be
used for all domestic purposes, dwelling purposes or for any purpose
relating to human occupancy and/or consumption.
B. As or when, from time to time, a public water supply becomes available
to additional properties within the township by reason of the
improvement of properties located on or having reasonable access to a
127. Editor's Note: Former Ch. XIV, Utilities, adopted 9-9-1966, as amended, was repealed
5-18-1981 by Ord. No. 18-81.
128. Editor's Note: Schedules A and B are attached to Ord. No. 23-92 which is on file in the
township offices.
129. Editor's Note: Schedule A is attached to Ord. No. 33-86 which is on file in the township
offices.
§ 213-1 WATER § 213-2
213:735
§ 213-3. Compliance with other codes.
Every connection required by this article shall comply in all respects with
the Plumbing Code of the Township of Washington, the Uniform
Construction Code130 or such other code as shall be in force and effect at
the time connection is required.
§ 213-4. Notice.
The Township Administrator or such department or office as he/she may,
from time to time, designate shall give notice to the owner of property
required to connect with the public water supply system. Such notice shall
be addressed to the owner of said property as the name of the owner
appears in the last tax duplicate of the Township of Washington and shall
describe the property by lot and block designation as the same appears in
the Tax Map of the Township of Washington and by the street address if a
street address exists. The notice shall state that the owner is required to
connect each building on said property with the waterline in accordance
with the terms of this article on or before 60 days of receipt of the notice.
Said notice shall also describe the penalty which may be imposed hereunder
for failure to comply with the notice.
§ 213-5. Failure to connect.
street, highway or alley in which the water supply system of the
Municipal Utilities Authority is located or by reason of the construction
of extensions or additions to the water supply system by the township
or the Municipal Utilities Authority, the owner or owners of such
additional property shall likewise, upon receipt of written notice from
the township ordering the connection, connect his/their property to the
water supply system within 60 days of said notice.
A. If any owner of improved property within the township required to be
connected to the water supply system of the township or Municipal
Utilities Authority pursuant to this article shall fail to connect therewith
promptly after written notice to do so, the township or the Municipal
Utilities Authority shall give such owner written notice of this article,
describing the property required to be connected sufficiently definite to
identify it, describing the required connection and stating that unless
connection shall be completed within 30 days of the service of such
notice, the township or Municipal Utilities Authority may proceed to
make such connection or to cause same to be made.
B. Upon failure of such owner to make the required connection within said
thirty-day period, the township or the Municipal Utilities Authority may
make such connection or cause the same to be made and shall send an
itemized bill for the cost of such connection to the property owner,
which shall be payable forthwith. In case of failure of the owner to pay
130. Editor's Note: See Chapter 56, Building Construction, Article II, Uniform Construction
Code.
§ 213-2 WASHINGTON CODE § 213-5
213:736
§ 213-6. Service of notice.
All notices to be served under this article shall be served in the manner
prescribed by the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 213-7. Fees and charges.
Every owner required to connect to a township-owned or -operated public
water supply shall pay a connection fee and the water service charge
prescribed by the township ordinance. Every owner required to connect
to a public water supply owned or operated by the Municipal Utilities
Authority shall pay the connection fee and water service charge established
by Municipal Utilities Authority regulations.
§ 213-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3, General penalty.
§ 213-9. Water supply project area connections. [Amended
9-15-1986 by Ord. No. 33-86; 12-21-1992 by Ord. No. 23-92]
such bill, it shall be the duty of the proper township officials to cause
the confirmation and assessment of the amount thereof as a lien against
the property and to proceed with the collection and enforcement
thereof, all in the manner provided by the laws of the State of New
Jersey.
A. Capping of wells. When a public water supply is made ready and
available for connection, all owners of property within a water supply
project area as defined by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection and Energy shall cap and fill so as to permanently destroy
any water-producing capacity of any well, whether for human
consumption or not, located upon said premises within 30 days after
such time as public water has been hooked up or within 60 days of
receipt of notice to hook into the public water supply, whichever occurs
first.
B. Compliance. The sealing of the well shall be done in compliance with all
state and municipal laws and regulations of the Municipal Utilities
Authority.
C. Connection fees and capping assessments. There shall be no fee
charged for connection to a public water supply or for the capping of
existing wells within a well restricted area, provided that the property
owner has given the Municipal Utilities Authority permission to enter
onto the property to perform such work. Where the property owner fails
to provide the Municipal Utilities Authority with permission to arrange
for or make the connection or where the property owner has not
received a well sealing exemption from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and Energy (NJDEPE) and refuses access to
§ 213-5 WATER § 213-9
213:737
§ 213-10. Well capping exemptions.
Capping of wells shall not be required where specific written authorization
is received from the New Jersey State Department of Environmental
Protection and Energy exempting a well from capping.
the Municipal Utilities Authority for well sealing, then connection to
the water supply system and well sealing shall be required under the
provisions of § 213-5, Failure to Connect, of this article. All costs for
such work shall then be borne solely by the property owner. The abovereferenced
fee exemptions shall apply only to wells in existence prior to
May 16, 1986. [Amended 7-18-1994 by Ord. No. 16-94]
§ 213-9 WASHINGTON CODE § 213-10
213:738
Chapter 217
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 56.
Drug-free school zones — See Ch. 79.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 92.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 111.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 121.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 148.
Sewers — See Ch. 155.
Site plan review — See Ch. 159.
Solid waste — See Ch. 168.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 172.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 175.
§ 213-10 WATER § 213-10
213:739

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 217-1. Title.
This chapter may be cited and referred to as the "Washington Township
Zoning Ordinance."131
§ 217-2. Purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter:
A. To guide the appropriate use or development of all lands in Washington
Township in a manner which will promote the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare.
B. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters.
C. To provide adequate light, air and open space.
D. To ensure that land development does not conflict with the development
and general welfare of neighboring municipalities, the county and the
state as a whole.
E. To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons and
neighborhoods and preservation of the environment.
F. To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds
by the coordination of public development with land use policies.
G. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
agricultural, residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses
and open space, both public and private, according to their respective
environment requirements.
H. To encourage the location and design of transportation routes which
will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging location of such
facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight.
I. To promote a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangements.
J. To promote the conservation of historic sites and districts, open space,
energy resources and valuable natural resources and to prevent urban
131. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided, in part, as follows: "The Washington Township
Zoning Ordinance, as amended from time to time, and including minor revisions in the
Township Zoning Map recently adopted by Ord. No. RO-13-83, is being readopted in order
to replace the Township's prior Zoning Ordinance declared null and void during the trial
of the consolidated cases of Albano, et al. v. Mayor and Township Committee of the
Township of Washington, and Claremont Painting and Decorating Co., Inc., et al. v.
Township of Washington, Docket Nos. L-45788-78P.W. and L-24425-78P.W., and to comply
with the order/judgment of the Court in the aforesaid cases dated March 10, 1983."
§ 217-1 WATER § 217-2
213:741
§ 217-3. Definitions. [Amended 6-8-1984 by Ord. No. 16-1984;
3-18-1985 by Ord. No. 5-85; 10-21-1985 by Ord. No. 34-85;
5-19-1986 by Ord. No. 14-86; 4-16-1990 by Ord. No. 12-90;
10-15-1990 by Ord. No. 34-90]
As defined under Chapter 111, Land Use Procedures, Article VI, Definitions.
sprawl and degradation of the environment through improper use of
land. [Amended 12-15-1986 by Ord. No. 46-86]
K. To encourage development which incorporates the best features of
design and relate the type, design and layout of residential,
commercial, industrial and recreational development to the particular
site.
L. To encourage coordination of the various public and private procedures
and activities shaping land development with a view of lessening the
cost of such development and to the more efficient use of land.
M. To establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for
residential, commercial, industrial, office or other uses within such
lines and to fix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures
shall conform.
N. To prohibit uses, buildings or structures which are incompatible with
the character of development or the permitted uses within specified
zoning districts.
O. To prevent additions to, and alterations or remodeling of, existing
buildings or structures as would not comply with the restrictions and
limitations imposed hereunder.
P. To protect against hazards and to provide protection against fire,
explosions, noxious fumes and other hazards in the interest of the
public health, safety, comfort and the general welfare.
Q. To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the
Township.
R. To meet the housing needs of the future citizens of the Township of
Washington and the region and to assure a full range of housing types
to meet all income levels.
§ 217-2 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-3
213:742
ARTICLE II
Zoning Districts
§ 217-4. Establishment. 132
For purposes of this chapter, the Township of Washington is hereby divided
into the following zones, differentiated according to use, area and bulk
requirements, to be designated as follows:
R-5 Washington Township Conservation [Amended 10-15-2001 by
Ord. No. 32-01]
R-1/R-2 Single-Family Residential [Amended 10-15-2001 by Ord. No.
32-01]
R-1 Single-Family Residential
R-20 Single-Family Residential
R-MDU Single-Family and Multiple Dwelling Unit Residential
PUD Planned Unit Development
C-1 Neighborhood Business
C-2 Highway Business
OR/I Office Research/Industrial [Added 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
5-99133]
RCH Reduced-Cost Housing [Added 12-15-1986 by Ord. No. 43-86]
Historic Preservation Overlay [Added 12-15-1986 by Ord. No.
46-86]
AU Agricultural Use Overlay [Added 7-18-1994 by Ord. No.
15-94]
GC/R Golf Course/Residential [Added 2-14-1996 by Ord. No.
1-96134]
RCH-SC Reduced-Cost Housing - Senior Citizen [Added 2-14-1996 by
Ord. No. 2-96]
CAD Carbonate Area District [Added 4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 4-98]
VARH Village Age-Restricted Housing Overlay Zone [Added 2-16-2004
by Ord. No. 1-04]
132. Editor's Note: The R-2A, Single-Family Residential/Mobile Home District, which previously
appeared in this list, was repealed 3-20-1989 by Ord. No. 4-89. The R-2GC, Single-Family
Residential/Golf Course District, added 4-16-1990 by Ord. No. 12-90, which also previously
appeared in this list, was repealed 4-15-1996 by Ord. No. 13-96. The A/OSC, Agricultural/
Open Space Overlay Zone, which previously appeared in this list, as added 6-21-1993 by
Ord. No. 17-93, was repealed 5-18-1998 by Ord. No. 16-98. The R-3 Single-Family
Residential District, which previously appeared on this list, was repealed 10-15-2001 by
Ord. No. 32-01.
133. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of the I Industrial,
Manufacturing, Research and Office Zone.
134. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of the PUD-RC Planned Unit
Development - Reduced-Cost Housing Zone, added 11-21-1983 by Ord. No. 28-83,
amended 7-21-1986 by Ord. No. 25-86.
§ 217-4 WATER § 217-4
213:743
MARH Musconetcong Age-Restricted Housing Overlay Zone [Added
7-19-2004 by Ord. No. 16-04]
OR Office Research [Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 03-11]
§ 217-5. Zoning Map. [Amended 11-21-1983 by Ord. No. 28-83;
12-19-1983 by Ord. No. 33-83; 10-20-1986 by Ord. No. 39-86;
12-15-1986 by Ord. No. 43-86; 3-20-1989 by Ord. No. 4-89;
4-16-1990 by Ord. No. 12-90; 4-16-1990 by Ord. No. 14-90;
9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 31-90; 11-19-1990 by Ord. No. 35-90;
7-19-1993 by Ord. No. 22-93; 8-21-1995 by Ord. No. 30-95;
2-14-1996 by Ord. No. 1-96; 2-14-1996 by Ord. No. 2-96; 4-15-1996
by Ord. No. 13-96; 4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 4-98; 5-18-1998 by Ord.
No. 16-98; 6-19-2000 by Ord. No. 17-00; 10-15-2001 by Ord. No.
32-01]
The location and boundaries of said zones or zone districts are hereby
established on the Zoning Map of the Township of Washington, Morris
County, dated July 12, 2001, which is attached hereto and made a part
of this chapter. Said map or maps and all notations, references and
designations shown thereon shall be, as such, a part of this chapter as if the
same were all fully described and set forth herein.
§ 217-6. Interpretation of boundaries.
A. Designation of zone boundaries.
(1) The zone boundary lines are intended generally to follow the center
lines of streets; the center lines of railroad rights-of-way; existing
lot lines; the center lines of rivers, streams and other waterways;
and municipal boundary lines.
(2) Where a district boundary line does not follow such a line, its
position shall be shown on the Zoning Map by a specific dimension
expressing its distance in feet from a street line or other boundary
line as indicated.
B. Determination of doubtful lines. In cases of uncertainty or
disagreement as to the true location of any zone boundary line, the
determination thereof shall be with the Board of Adjustment, under the
provisions of § 217-110B of this chapter.
C. Boundary line to coincide with lot line.
(1) If a zone boundary line falls within 50 feet of a lot line existing at
the time of passage of this chapter, then the lot line shall be
considered the zone boundary line.
(2) In the event that a zone boundary line divides one or more lots,
other than as provided in Subsection C(1) above, then the zone
boundary line shall be utilized in all area, bulk, yard, buffer and any
other dimension requirements in this chapter, except that land in a
§ 217-4 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-6
213:744
residence zone which requires a smaller lot area may be used to
meet area and side yard requirements for abutting or adjacent land
in residence zones requiring larger lot areas.
§ 217-6 WATER § 217-6
213:745

ARTICLE III
Use Regulations
§ 217-7. Applicability.
The use regulations applicable to each zone within the Township of
Washington are as follows. Section references following each use specify
the specific use regulations.
§ 217-8. Dual zones. [Amended 2-18-1985 by Ord. No. 2-85]
The lower density zones shall prevail if the requirements for public water
and sewers in higher density cannot be met. Higher density applications
must include, at the time of the filing of the application, a letter from the
Municipal Utilities Authority certifying the availability of public water and
sewers within three years.
§ 217-9. R-5 Washington Township Conservation Zone. [Amended
10-15-2001 by Ord. No. 32-01135]
A. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Any form of agriculture or horticulture, including the storage,
processing or sale of farm products where produced.
(3) Public uses and buildings, including but not limited to schools
pursuant to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, and § 217-59.2,
Schools; libraries, municipal buildings and offices; police, fire and
first aid stations; parks; playgrounds; athletic fields; jogging trails;
horse trails; swimming pools and similar recreation facilities owned
or operated exclusively by a municipal or other governmental
agency, excluding private proprietary use. [Added 7-20-1992 by
Ord. No. 10-92; amended 3-18-1996 by Ord. No. 8-96;
6-18-2001 by Ord. No. 14-01]
(4) The installation of wireless telecommunications antennas on
existing structures subject to site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 159 and consistent with visual compatibility requirements
of § 217-57 of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09]
(5) Houses of worship pursuant to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, and
§ 217-59.1, Houses of worship. [Added 6-18-2001 by Ord. No.
14-01]
B. Permitted accessory uses.
135. Editor's Note: This ordinance changed the title of the district from "R-5 Single-Family
Residential Zone" to "R-5 Washington Township Conservation Zone."
§ 217-7 WATER § 217-9
213:747
§ 217-10. (Reserved)138
(1) Any use or structure customarily incidental to a principal permitted
use.
(2) Private garages and carports.
(3) Signs.
(4) Home occupations in compliance with § 217-41A of this chapter.
[Amended 4-17-1995 by Ord. No. 12-95]
(5) Roadside stands in conjunction with a principal permitted use.
(6) Keeping of equestrian animals.
(7) Family day-care home. [Added 11-18-1991 by Ord. No. 31-91]
(8) The installation of wireless telecommunications antennas on
existing structures subject to site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 159 and consistent with visual compatibility requirements
of § 217-57 of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09]
C. Conditional uses. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 10-92]
(1) Essential services.
(2) Cluster subdivisions.
(3) (Reserved)136
(4) Golf course. [Amended 3-20-2000 by Ord. No. 2-00]
(5) (Reserved)137
(6) Kennels. [Amended 7-19-1999 by Ord. No. 20-99]
(7) Riding stables.
(8) Home occupations in compliance with § 217-41B of this chapter.
[Amended 4-17-1995 by Ord. No. 12-95]
(9) Wireless telecommunications towers in compliance with §§ 217-76
and 217-57A(2), (3) and (4) of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by
Ord. No. 9-97]
(10) Veteran's micro housing unit. [Added 9-17-2018 by Ord. No.
14-18]
136. Editor's Note: Former § 217-9C(3), Houses of worship, was repealed 6-18-2001 by Ord. No.
14-01.
137. Editor's Note: Former § 217-9C(5), Large-scale office and research uses, was repealed
4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 7-99 and 7-19-1999 by Ord. No. 20-99.
138. Editor's Note: Former § 217-10, R-3 Single-Family Residential Zone, was repealed
10-15-2001 by Ord. No. 32-01.
§ 217-9 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-11
213:748
§ 217-11. R-1/R-2 Single-Family Residential Zone. [Amended
10-15-2001 by Ord. No. 32-01139]
§ 217-12. R-1 Single-Family Residential Zone.
§ 217-13. R-20 Single-Family Residential Zone.
A. Principal permitted uses: same as R-5.
B. Permitted accessory uses: same as R-5.
C. Conditional uses: same as R-5.140
A. Principal permitted uses: same as R-5.
B. Permitted accessory uses: same as R-5.
C. Conditional uses: same as R-5, excluding golf courses. [Amended
3-20-2000 by Ord. No. 2-00]
A. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Any form of agriculture or horticulture, including the storage,
processing or sale of farm products where produced.
(3) Public uses and buildings, including but not limited to schools
pursuant to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, and § 217-59.2,
Schools; libraries; municipal buildings and offices; police, fire and
first aid stations; parks; playgrounds; athletic fields; jogging trails;
horse trails; swimming pools and similar recreation facilities owned
or operated exclusively by a municipal or other governmental
agency, excluding private proprietary use. [Added 7-20-1992 by
Ord. No. 10-92; amended 3-18-1996 by Ord. No. 8-96;
6-18-2001 by Ord. No. 14-01]
(4) The installation of wireless telecommunications antennas on
existing structures subject to site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 159 and consistent with visual compatibility requirements
of § 217-57 of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09]
(5) Houses of worship pursuant to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, and
§ 217-59.1, Houses of worship. [Added 6-18-2001 by Ord. No.
14-01]
139. Editor's Note: This ordinance changed the title of the district from "R-2 Single-Family
Residential Zone" to "R-1/R-2 Single-Family Residential Zone."
140. Editor's Note: Former Subsection 17-4.5, R-2A Single-Family Residential/Mobile Homes
Zone, was repealed 3-20-1989 by Ord. No. 4-89. Former Subsection 17-4.5, R-2CG Single-
Family Residential/Golf Course, added 4-16-1990 by Ord. No. 12-90, was repealed
4-15-1996 by Ord. No. 13-96.
§ 217-11 WATER § 217-13
213:749
§ 217-14. R-MDU Single-Family and Multiple Dwelling Unit
Residential Zone.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Any use of structure customarily incidental to a principal permitted
use.
(2) Private garages.
(3) Signs.
(4) Home occupations in compliance with § 217-41A of this chapter.
[Amended 4-17-1995 by Ord. No. 12-95]
(5) Roadside stands in conjunction with a principal permitted use.
(6) Keeping of equestrian animals.
(7) Family day-care home. [Added 11-18-1991 by Ord. No. 31-91]
(8) The installation of wireless telecommunications antennas on
existing structures subject to site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 159 and consistent with visual compatibility requirements
of § 217-57 of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09]
C. Conditional uses. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 10-92]
(1) Essential services.
(2) Cluster subdivisions.
(3) (Reserved)141
(4) Home occupations in compliance with § 217-41A of this chapter.
[Amended 4-17-1995 by Ord. No. 12-95]
(5) Wireless telecommunications towers in compliance with §§ 217-76
and 217-57A(2), (3) and (4) of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by
Ord. No. 9-97]
A. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Any form of agriculture or horticulture, including the storage,
processing or sale of farm products where produced.
(3) Public uses and buildings, including but not limited to schools
pursuant to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, and § 217-59.2,
Schools; libraries; municipal buildings and offices; police, fire and
141. Editor's Note: Former § 217-13C(3), Houses of worship, was repealed 6-18-2001 by Ord.
No. 14-01.
§ 217-13 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-14
213:750
first aid stations; parks; playgrounds; athletic fields; jogging trails;
horse trails; swimming pools and similar recreation facilities owned
or operated exclusively by a municipal or other governmental
agency, excluding private proprietary use. [Added 7-20-1992 by
Ord. No. 10-92, amended 3-18-1996 by Ord. No. 8-96;
6-18-2001 by Ord. No. 14-01]
(4) The installation of wireless telecommunications antennas on
existing structures subject to site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 159 and consistent with visual compatibility requirements
of § 217-57 of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09]
(5) Houses of worship pursuant to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, and
§ 217-59.1, Houses of worship. [Added 6-18-2001 by Ord. No.
14-01]
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Any use or structure customarily incidental to a principal permitted
use.
(2) Private garages and carports.
(3) Signs.
(4) Home occupations in compliance with § 217-41B of this chapter.
[Amended 4-17-1995 by Ord. No. 12-95]
(5) Roadside stands in conjunction with a principal permitted use.
(6) Keeping of equestrian animals.
(7) Family day-care home. [Added 11-18-1991 by Ord. No. 31-91]
(8) The installation of wireless telecommunications antennas on
existing structures subject to site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 159 and consistent with visual compatibility requirements
of § 217-57 of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09]
C. Conditional uses. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 10-92]
(1) Essential services.
(2) Cluster subdivisions.
(3) Multiple dwellings.
(4) (Reserved)142
142. Editor's Note: Former § 217-14C(4), Houses of worship, was repealed 6-18-2001 by Ord.
No. 14-01.
§ 217-14 WATER § 217-14
213:751
§ 217-15. PUD Planned Unit Development Zone.
(5) Home occupations in compliance with § 217-41B of this chapter.
[Amended 4-17-1995 by Ord. No. 12-95]
(6) Wireless telecommunications towers in compliance with §§ 217-76
and 217-57A(2), (3) and (4) of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by
Ord. No. 9-97]
A. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Any form of agriculture or horticulture, including the storage,
processing or sale of farm products where produced.143
(3) Public uses and buildings, including but not limited to schools
pursuant to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, and § 217-59.2,
Schools; libraries; municipal buildings and offices; police, fire and
first aid stations; parks; playgrounds; athletic fields; jogging trails;
horse trails; swimming pools and similar recreation facilities owned
or operated exclusively by a municipal or other governmental
agency, excluding private proprietary use. [Added 7-20-1992 by
Ord. No. 10-92; amended 3-18-1996 by Ord. No. 8-96;
6-18-2001 by Ord. No. 14-01]
(4) The installation of wireless telecommunications antennas on
existing structures subject to site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 159 and consistent with visual compatibility requirements
of § 217-57 of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09]
(5) Houses of worship pursuant to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, and
§ 217-59.1, Houses of worship. [Added 6-18-2001 by Ord. No.
14-01]
(6) Business and commercial uses as provided in § 217-16A, with the
exception of gasoline service stations, which shall not be permitted.
[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 03-11]
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Any use or structure customarily incidental to a principal permitted
use.
(2) Private garages and carports.
(3) Signs.
143. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2), Private, commercial and noncommercial outdoor
recreational facilities, as amended 4-19-1982 by Ord. No. 8-82, was repealed 3-20-2000 by
Ord. No. 2-00. This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsection
A(3) through (5) as Subsection A(2) through (4), respectively.
§ 217-14 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-15
213:752
§ 217-16. C-1 Neighborhood Business Zone.
(4) Home occupations in compliance with § 217-41B of this chapter.
[Amended 4-17-1995 by Ord. No. 12-95]
(5) Roadside stands in conjunction with a principal permitted use.
(6) Family day-care home. [Added 11-18-1991 by Ord. No. 31-91]
(7) The installation of wireless telecommunications antennas on
existing structures subject to site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 159 and consistent with visual compatibility requirements
of § 217-57 of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09]
C. Conditional uses. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 10-92]
(1) Essential services.
(2) Cluster subdivisions.
(3) Planned unit developments.
(4) (Reserved)144
(5) Home occupations in compliance with § 217-41B of this chapter.
[Added 4-17-1995 by Ord. No. 12-95]
(6) Wireless telecommunications towers in compliance with §§ 217-76
and 217-57A(2), (3) and (4) of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by
Ord. No. 9-97]
A. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Single-use or multiple-use buildings including retail or personal
service establishments, such as but not limited to the following:
appliance sales; banks; bakeries; barbershops and beauty parlors;
bars; book, card and stationery stores; candy and cigar stores;
child-care center; drugstores; dry goods and variety stores; dry
cleaners without processing and laundries; eating and drinking
places (excluding drive-ins); fraternal organizations; florists; food
stores; funeral homes; garden supplies; hardware stores;
locksmiths; medical services; newsstands; business and
professional offices; package liquor stores; pet stores; printing and
publishing; photographic supplies; services and equipment; radio,
TV and appliance sales and service; gasoline service stations; shoe
sales and repair service; soda fountains; tailors and dressmakers;
and wearing apparel stores. [Amended 11-18-1991 by Ord. No.
31-91; 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 27-06]
144. Editor's Note: Former § 217-15C(4), Houses of worship, was repealed 6-18-2001 by Ord.
No. 14-01.
§ 217-15 WATER § 217-16
213:753
(2) 145Any form of agriculture or horticulture, including the storage,
processing or sale of farm products where produced.
(3) Public uses and buildings, including but not limited to schools
pursuant to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, and § 217-59.2,
Schools; libraries; municipal buildings and offices; police, fire and
first aid stations; parks; playgrounds; athletic fields; jogging trails;
horse trails; swimming pools and similar recreation facilities owned
or operated exclusively by a municipal or other governmental
agency, excluding private proprietary use. [Added 7-20-1992 by
Ord. No. 10-92; amended 3-18-1996 by Ord. No. 8-96;
6-18-2001 by Ord. No. 14-01]
(4) The installation of wireless telecommunications antennas on
existing structures subject to site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 159 and consistent with visual compatibility requirements
of § 217-57 of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09]
(5) Houses of worship pursuant to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, and
§ 217-59.1, Houses of worship. [Added 6-18-2001 by Ord. No.
14-01]
(6) Dwelling units as part of a business establishment in the same
structure at a ratio not to exceed two dwelling units for each
business. [Added 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 27-06]
(7) Single-family detached dwellings in existence on the effective date
of this subsection. [Added 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 27-06]
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Other uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use.
(2) Public and private parking.
(3) Signs. (See Chapter 159, Site Plan Review.)
(4) The installation of wireless telecommunications antennas on
existing structures subject to site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 159 and consistent with visual compatibility requirements
of § 217-57 of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09]
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Essential services.
(2) Animal hospitals and animal kennels.
145. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2), concerning single-family detached dwellings, was
repealed 12-16-2002 by Ord. No. 45-02. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation
of former Subsection A(3) through (6) as Subsection A(2) through (5), respectively.
§ 217-16 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-16
213:754
§ 217-16.1. AHRO Affordable Housing Redevelopment Overlay.
[Added 10-15-2018 by Ord. No. 15-18]
(3) (Reserved)146
(4) (Reserved)147
(5) Wireless telecommunications towers in compliance with §§ 217-76
and 217-57A, (3) and (4) of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by
Ord. No. 9-97]
(6) Automobile repair and service stations. [Added 8-17-2009 by
Ord. No. 21-09]
D. Design standards. The visual compatibility standards set forth in
§ 217-138G shall be applicable to the development of all lots in the C-1
zone that do not abut a state highway. [Added 11-18-2002 by Ord.
No. 28-02]
E. Changes of use in the C-1 Historic District in buildings or on lots that do
not conform to the minimum lot area, setback and parking
requirements for the zone may be permitted without the need for
variance relief for lot area, setback and parking, subject to review by
the Planning Board in accordance with § 159-5C(1) through (7), and
provided that it can be demonstrated that public parking and/or shared
parking for patrons is available within reasonable proximity of the
proposed change of use. [Added 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 27-06;
amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 27-09]
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Residential dwelling units: 16 residential rental dwelling units,
including multifamily rental apartments and townhouses, of which
four shall be affordable rental apartments.
(2) Commercial retail uses: 1,600 square feet maximum/lot.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Other uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use.
(2) Public and private parking.
(3) Signs. (See Chapter 159, Site Plan Review.)
C. Conditional uses.
(1) None.
146. Editor's Note: Former § 217-16C(3), Houses of worship, was repealed 6-18-2001 by Ord.
No. 14-01.
147. Editor's Note: Former § 217-16C(4), Dwelling units as part of a business establishment,
was repealed 2-18-2006 by Ord. No. 27-06.
§ 217-16 WATER § 217-16.1
213:755
D. Design standards.
(1) All development shall be subject to review in accordance with
Article VIII, Affordable Housing, and Article XIII, Historic
Preservation Overlay Zone, of this chapter.
(2) Permitted rehabilitation of 20 Schooley's Mountain Road shall be
guided by and generally consistent with the Historic District
Design Guidelines as enumerated in the Washington Township
Historic District Design Guidelines manual prepared by the
Washington Township Historic Preservation Commission, dated
2012, which may be found at this link: http://www.wtmorris.org/
images/Design_Guidelines_-_FINAL_compressed.pdf.
Rehabilitation consistent with the New Jersey Rehabilitation
Subcode may be eligible for the federal historic properties
Investment Tax Credit Program.
(3) The existing building fronting on Schooley's Mountain Road shall
be retained and rehabilitated and may be adaptively reused for not
more than four residential apartments and approximately 1,600
square feet of retail use in accordance with the use regulations for
the C-1 Zone.
(4) Architectural review. In addition to Historic Preservation
Commission review, new development shall be guided by the
following additional design objectives and standards, which shall
be applied through an interactive planning process between the
developer and the Planning Board prior to, or during, site plan
review.
(a) Respect the village scale. Historic buildings in the Township's
historic districts are located in intimate proximity to Route 24
(CR 513 and 517), establishing a streetscape building wall.
New development should provide a similar type of closure
along the frontage of the developed area, to avoid the
appearance of an expansive parking area strip retail
orientation. This standard is intended to provide the
development of a redevelopment streetscape along Schooley's
Mountain Road with additional retail and nonresidential
elements with a consistent set back from Route 24.
(b) Streetscape facades should incorporate elements which reflect
the historic development, including the rhythm and spacing of
windows, roof pitches, use of exterior finish materials,
staggered setbacks within individual buildings and similar
features. Any other facades which are visible from a public
right-of-way shall receive similar treatment.
(c) Exterior.
[1] Exterior building facade materials and textures shall be
visually consistent and thematically compatible in scale
§ 217-16.1 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-16.1
213:756
and appearance with historic properties in the Historic
District. Materials that are visually consistent with the
Township's 18th and 19th century stone architecture and
vernacular framed construction with clapboard siding are
encouraged. Building shapes, proportions, roof lines,
porches, dormers, fenestration, and details and
ornamentation, etc., should be consistent with the shape,
mass, proportion, height, appearance and style of the
historic properties in the C-1 Zone.
[2] Exterior features. The exterior features of buildings, such
as steps and railings, columns, patios and porches, flower
boxes, canopies and awnings, lighting, fences, gardens,
lawn areas, signs, sidewalks, driveways, and parking areas
shall be integrated into site and building design and
compatible with the features of the historic structures
found in the Historic District. The use of vinyl siding,
aluminum siding, three-tab asphalt roof shingles and
plastic fences shall be prohibited in favor of more
traditional historically sensitive materials.
(d) The Planning Board may require that building facades subject
to public view on buildings with an excess of 2,000 square feet,
or where a single vertical plane of a building extends
horizontally 30 feet or more (where exposed to public view),
that such building facade shall be staggered with a minimum
offset (i.e., 10 feet) to create the appearance of multiple
attached buildings. The Planning Board may require that the
exterior facade materials of such staggered vertical surfaces of
the building to be differentiated from the adjoining vertical
plane through the use of varied siding materials, textures,
coloration, porches, roof shapes, dormers, or combination of
these.
(e) Restoration, rehabilitation of historic properties. A condition of
any approval shall be the restoration or rehabilitation adaptive
reuse of the existing building fronting on Schooley's Mountain
Road.
(5) Streetscape development pattern. A streetscape frontage
development is required. The streetscape frontage, defined as that
portion of the tract within 200 feet of Schooley's Mountain Road,
shall consist of two-story buildings occupying no less than 55% and
no more than 75% of the lot frontage with building frontage.
Buildings shall have a minimum separation of 25 feet and a
maximum separation of 40 feet, except where it can be shown that
reduced setbacks assist in achieving the overall design objectives
set forth herein.
E. Schedule of area, yard and building requirements. In recognition of the
existing nonconforming conditions of the buildings and improvements
§ 217-16.1 WATER § 217-16.1
213:757
within the AHRO, the following area, yard and bulk standards are
established for comprehensive redevelopment of a site including
affordable housing as permitted in this section.
C-1 AHRO Affordable Housing Redevelopment Overlay Zone
Minimum lot size 28,000
Minimum lot frontage 75 feet1
Minimum front yard setback 15 feet
Minimum side yard
One side 15 feet2
Second side 15 feet2
Minimum rear yard 10 feet
Minimum side yard (combined) 30 feet2
Maximum improved lot coverage 90%
Maximum floor area ratio N/A
Maximum building height 2 1/2 stories/35 feet
Maximum density N/A
Maximum number of dwelling units 16
Maximum nonresidential floor area 1,600 square feet
Parking
Dwelling units As per RSIS
Commercial floor area 1/150 square feet
NOTES:
1 May be reduced to less than 75 feet as part of an overall
comprehensive redevelopment plan including affordable housing.
2 May be reduced to zero feet by the Planning Board without the
need for a variance when proposed as part of an overall
comprehensive redevelopment plan including affordable housing,
provided that the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board that a perpetual off-site maintenance and access
easement is provided along the entire length of the property
abutting the reduced side yard setback condition. The perpetual
maintenance and access easement shall provide for unrestricted
access sufficient to repair and maintain the exterior of the building
for which reduced setback may be approved.
F. Affordable housing requirements.
(1) Affordable units shall conform to the requirements of the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq. ("FHA"), the
"Round 2" regulations adopted by the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing, N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.1 et seq., the Uniform Housing
§ 217-16.1 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-16.1
213:758
§ 217-17. C-2 Highway Business Zone.
Affordability Controls ("UHAC"), N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., all other
relevant statutes, regulations, and policies, and the Washington
Township court-approved Third-Round Affordable Housing
Ordinance.148
(2) At least one very-low-income dwelling unit shall be provided.
(3) At least 50% of the affordable units provided shall be low-income
units, inclusive of one very-low-income unit.
(4) Affordability average; bedroom distribution. Affordable units shall
be provided in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, Affordability
average; bedroom distribution.
(5) Affordable units shall be affirmatively marketed in accordance with
the affirmative marketing provisions identified at N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
(6) Controls on affordability. There shall be an income control period
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11 of at least 30 years, and thereafter
until the Township takes action to release the controls on
affordability for all affordable units.
(a) The applicant shall submit a copy of the draft deed restriction
to be placed on the affordable units at the time of application
for site plan approval for Planning Board Attorney review and
approval prior to the Planning Board granting preliminary site
plan approval.
(b) Affordability controls shall be established in the form of a deed
restriction, which shall be approved by the Planning Board
Attorney and recorded with the County Clerk and filed with
Washington Township Municipal Clerk and Washington
Township Municipal Housing Liaison.
(7) The developer shall enter into an agreement with the Township to
pay for the cost of administration of affordable units in the
development or the developer shall annually provide evidence that
a contract is in full force and effect between the developer and a
qualified affordable housing administrative agent for all aspects of
administration of the affordable units.
G. Development shall be subject to site plan approval in accordance with
Chapter 159.
H. Development within the C-1 AHRO shall conform to any applicable
municipal zoning or site plan requirement pertaining to development in
the C-1 Neighborhood Business Zone not specifically modified herein.
148. Editor's Note: See Ch. 217, Zoning, Art. VIII, Affordable Housing.
§ 217-16.1 WATER § 217-17
213:759
A. Principal permitted uses. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 10-92;
3-18-1996 by Ord. No. 8-96; 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
6-18-2001 by Ord. No. 14-01; 10-21-2002 by Ord. No. 37-02;
12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 27-06]
(1) Same as § 217-16A(1).
(2) Regionally oriented retail shopping centers, consisting of
integrated developments of such uses as retail stores and shops,
personal service establishments, banks, post offices, theaters,
auditoriums, hotels and motels, housed in an enclosed building or
buildings and utilizing such common facilities as customer parking
areas, pedestrian walks, truck loading and unloading docks and
areas, utilities and sanitary facilities.
(3) Essential services, animal hospitals and houses of worship
pursuant to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, and § 217-59.1, Houses
of worship.
(4) Any form of agriculture or horticulture, including the storage,
processing or sale of farm products where produced.
(5) Public uses and buildings, including but not limited to schools
pursuant to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, and § 217-59.2,
Schools; libraries; municipal buildings and offices; police, fire and
first aid stations; parks; playgrounds; athletic fields; jogging trails;
horse trails; swimming pools and similar recreation facilities owned
or operated exclusively by a municipal or other governmental
agency, excluding private proprietary use.
(6) The installation of wireless telecommunications antennas on
existing structures subject to site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 159 and consistent with visual compatibility requirements
of § 217-57 of this chapter. [Amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No.
14-09]
(7) Large-scale retail. Large-scale retail uses not to exceed 145,000
square feet per building, inclusive of outdoor areas for display and
sale of garden and landscaping materials and other home products
for which outdoor storage is appropriate (e.g., winter deicers, bags
of sand and plants), in accordance with § 217-59.3.
(8) Mixed-use residential and nonresidential uses, provided that the
residential use is for affordable housing purposes only in
accordance with the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
affordability guidelines and procedures.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Other uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use.
(2) Public and private parking.
§ 217-17 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-17
213:760
§ 217-18. OR/I Office Research/Industrial Zone. [Amended
11-18-1991 by Ord. No. 31-91; 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 10-92;
8-21-1995 by Ord. No. 27-95]
(3) Signs. (See Chapter 159, Site Plan Review.)
(4) The installation of wireless telecommunications antennas on
existing structures subject to site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 159 and consistent with visual compatibility requirements
of § 217-57 of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09]
C. Conditional uses: new car, truck, farm machinery, construction
equipment, recreational vehicle sales and service and wireless
telecommunications towers in compliance with §§ 217-76 and
217-57A(2), (3) and (4) of this chapter. [Amended 3-17-1997 by Ord.
No. 9-97]
A. Principal permitted uses. [Amended 3-18-1996 by Ord. No. 8-96;
3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97; 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 5-99]
(1) Office for business management, executive, professional and
administrative purposes.
(2) Laboratories devoted exclusively to research, design and
experimentation; provided, however, that:
(a) Pilot plants for the testing of manufacturing, processing or
fabrication methods or for the testing of products or materials
shall be permitted only as accessory to a research laboratory,
and in no case shall more than 40% of the total floor area be
devoted to such uses. No materials or finished products shall
be manufactured, processed or fabricated on said premises for
sale except such as are incidental to said laboratory research,
design or experimental work.
(3) Computer centers, data processing centers and call centers.
(4) Conference centers with associated lodging.
(5) Printing and publishing establishments.
(6) Development and manufacturing of engineering and scientific
instruments, computer components, mechanical measuring and
control devices, optical instruments and lenses, medical
instruments and supplies, ophthalmic goods, photographic
equipment and supplies, watches and clocks.
(7) Manufacturing laboratory, printing and publishing uses.
[Amended 6-21-1999 by Ord. No. 15-99]
(8) Corporate and industrial park development involving any
combination of the above uses.
§ 217-17 WATER § 217-18
213:761
(9) Essential services
(10) Any form of agriculture or horticulture, including the storage,
processing or sale of farm products where produced.
(11) Child-care centers.
(12) Public uses and buildings, including but not limited to municipal
buildings and offices and police, fire, and first aid stations.
(13) The installation of wireless telecommunications antennas on
existing structures subject to site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 159 and consistent with visual compatibility requirements
of § 217-57 of this chapter. [Amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No.
14-09]
(14) Business and vocational schools, colleges, universities and similar
institutions of higher education.
(15) Restaurants with a minimum floor area of 10,000 square feet,
excluding drive-in and/or drive-through restaurants, provided that
such restaurants are located no closer than 2,000 feet from any lot
upon which another restaurant is located and that no more than
one restaurant is situated on any lot.
(16) Houses of worship pursuant to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, and
§ 217-59.1, Houses of worship. [Added 6-18-2001 by Ord. No.
14-01]
(17) Schools pursuant to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, and § 217-59.2,
Schools. [Added 6-18-2001 by Ord. No. 14-01]
B. Permitted accessory uses. [Amended 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 5-99]
(1) Other uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use.
(2) Public and private parking.
(3) Signs. (See Chapter 159, Site Plan Review.)
(4) Cafeteria and similar services for use solely by employees and their
guests.
(5) Warehouse facilities necessary to a principal permitted use,
consisting of 40% or less of the total floor area.
(6) The installation of wireless telecommunications antennas on
existing structures subject to site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 159 and consistent with visual compatibility requirements
of § 217-57 of this chapter. [Amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No.
14-09]
§ 217-18 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-18
213:762
§ 217-19. OR Office Research Zone.
C. Conditional uses. [Amended 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97]
(1) Planned development.
(2) Wireless telecommunications towers in compliance with §§ 217-76
and 217-57A(2), (3) and (4) of this chapter.
A. Principal permitted uses. [Amended 11-18-1991 by Ord. No. 31-91;
7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 10-92; 3-18-1996 by Ord. No. 8-96;
3-19-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97; 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 5-99]
(1) Offices for business management, executive, professional and
administrative purposes.
(2) Laboratories devoted exclusively to research, design and
experimentation; provided, however, that:
(a) Pilot plants for the testing of manufacturing, processing or
fabrication methods or for the testing of products or materials
shall be permitted only as accessory to a research laboratory,
and in no case shall more than 25% of the total floor area be
devoted to such uses. No materials or finished products shall
be manufactured, processed, or fabricated on said premises for
sale except such as are incidental to said laboratory research,
design or experimental work.
(3) Computer centers, data processing centers and call centers.
(4) Conference centers.
(5) Corporate park development involving any combination of the
above uses.
(6) Essential services.
(7) Any form of agriculture or horticulture, including the storage,
processing or sale of farm products where produced.
(8) Child-care centers.
(9) Public uses and buildings, including but not limited to municipal
buildings and offices and police, fire and first aid stations.
(10) The installation of wireless telecommunications antennas on
existing structures subject to site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 159 and consistent with visual compatibility requirements
of § 217-57 of this chapter. [Amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No.
14-09]
(11) Business and vocational schools, colleges, universities and similar
institutions of higher education.
§ 217-18 WATER § 217-19
213:763
§ 217-20. GC/R Golf Course/Residential Zone. [Added 2-14-1996 by
Ord. No. 1-96149]
(12) Hotels.
(13) Restaurants, excluding drive-in and/or drive-through restaurants,
with a minimum floor area of 10,000 square feet.
(14) Houses of worship pursuant to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, and
§ 217-59.1, Houses of worship. [Added 6-18-2001 by Ord. No.
14-01]
(15) Schools pursuant to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, and § 217-59.2,
Schools. [Added 6-18-2001 by Ord. No. 14-01]
(16) Municipally sponsored multifamily affordable rental housing
projects in accordance with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:94 et seq.,
and provided that not less than 50% of the affordable dwelling units
shall be affordable to low-income households and that not more
than 50% of the affordable dwelling units shall be affordable to
moderate-income households. See § 217-59.5. [Added 7-17-2006
by Ord. No. 14-06]
B. Permitted accessory uses. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 5-99]
(1) Other uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use.
(2) Public and private parking.
(3) Signs. (See Chapter 159, Site Plan Review.)
(4) Cafeteria and similar services for use solely by employees and their
guests.
(5) The installation of wireless telecommunication antennas on
existing structures subject to site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 159 and consistent with visual compatibility requirements
of § 217-57 of this chapter. [Amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No.
14-09]
C. Conditional uses. [Amended 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97]
(1) Planned development.
(2) Wireless telecommunications towers in compliance with §§ 217-76
and 217-57A(2), (3) and (4) of this chapter.
(3) Single-family detached dwellings located on Drakestown Road and
in existence as of the effective date of this Subsection C(3), subject
to the setback and lot size requirements set forth in § 217-108.1.
[Added 12-21-2009 by Ord. No. 29-09; amended 2-15-2010 by
Ord. No. 01-10]
§ 217-19 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-20
213:764
A. Purpose. This zone is being created pursuant to a mediation agreement
in connection with the Township's petition for substantive certification
from the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing, to permit the
establishment of a restaurant/catering facility and either an eighteenhole
full or reduced-size golf course or 100 single-family dwelling units.
The zone is located in an area constrained by wetlands, flood hazard
areas, floodplains and steep slopes. The permitted uses allow the land
to be developed in a manner which would preserve these
environmentally constrained lands.
B. Principal permitted uses.
(1) A restaurant and catering facility (with or without a liquor license)
on a lot totaling no more than three acres.
(2) Either an eighteen-hole full- or reduced-size golf course or
clustered single-family detached residential dwellings totaling no
more than 100 units in the zone.
(3) The installation of wireless telecommunications antennas on
existing structures subject to site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 159 and consistent with visual compatibility requirements
of § 217-57 of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09]
(4) Houses of worship pursuant to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, and
§ 217-59.1, Houses of worship. [Added 6-18-2001 by Ord. No.
14-01]
(5) Schools pursuant to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, and § 217-59.2,
Schools. [Added 6-18-2001 by Ord. No. 14-01]
C. Permitted accessory uses - restaurant.
(1) Ancillary structures and uses reasonably related to the
construction, maintenance and operation of a restaurant.
(2) Signs.
(3) The installation of wireless telecommunications antennas on
existing structures subject to site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 159 and consistent with visual compatibility requirements
of § 217-57 of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09]
D. Permitted accessory uses; golf course.
(1) Customarily related accessory uses and structures such as
clubhouse with bar, restaurant and catering facilities with or
149. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection 17-4.14, PUD-RC Planned
Unit Development - Reduced-Cost Housing Zone, as amended.
§ 217-20 WATER § 217-20
213:765
§ 217-21. RCH Reduced-Cost Housing Zone. [Added 12-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 43-86]
without a liquor license, pro shop and locker facilities and
equipment storage and maintenance buildings.
(2) Signs.
(3) The installation of wireless telecommunications antennas on
existing structures subject to site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 159, and consistent with visual compatibility requirements
of § 217-57 of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 27-09]
E. Permitted accessory uses; residential.
(1) Any use or structure customarily incidental to a principal permitted
use.
(2) Private garages and carports.
(3) Signs.
(4) Home occupations (in single-family detached house only) in
compliance with § 217-41B of this chapter.
(5) Family day-care home.
(6) The installation of wireless telecommunications antennas on
existing structures subject to site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 159, and consistent with visual compatibility requirements
of § 217-57 of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 27-09]
F. Conditional uses.
(1) Essential services.
(2) Home occupations (in single-family detached houses only) in
compliance with § 217-41A of this chapter.
(3) Wireless telecommunications towers in compliance with §§ 217-76
and 217-57A(2), (3) and (4) of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by
Ord. No. 9-97]
A. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Garden-type apartments.
(2) Townhouse-style apartments.
(3) Public uses and buildings, including but not limited to schools
pursuant to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, and § 217-59.2,
Schools; libraries; municipal buildings and offices; police, fire and
§ 217-20 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-21
213:766
§ 217-22. Historic Preservation Overlay Zone. [Added 12-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 46-86; amended 3-20-1995 by Ord. No. 10-95]
first aid stations; parks; playgrounds; athletic fields; jogging trails;
horse trails, swimming pools and similar recreation facilities owned
or operated exclusively by a municipal or other governmental
agency, excluding private proprietary use. [Added 7-20-1992 by
Ord. No. 10-92; amended 3-18-1996 by Ord. No. 8-96;
6-18-2001 by Ord. No. 14-01]
(4) The installation of wireless telecommunications antennas on
existing structures subject to site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 159 and consistent with visual compatibility requirements
of § 217-57 of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09]
(5) Houses of worship pursuant to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, and
§ 217-59.1, Houses of worship. [Added 6-18-2001 by Ord. No.
14-01]
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Any use or structure customarily incidental to a principal permitted
use.
(2) Private garages and carports.
(3) Signs.
(4) Family day-care home. [Added 4-17-1995 by Ord. No. 12-95]
(5) The installation of wireless telecommunications antennas on
existing structures subject to site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 159 and consistent with visual compatibility requirements
of § 217-57 of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09]
C. Conditional uses: wireless telecommunications towers in compliance
with §§ 217-76 and 217-57A(2), (3) and (4) of this chapter. [Added
3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97]
A. Principal permitted uses. All uses, including but not limited to bed-andbreakfast
usage and historic inns, in the zone district wherein the
property is located are permitted in an Historic Preservation Overlay
zone, except that in the portion of the Historic Preservation Overlay
Zone that lies within the R-20 District, historic inns shall not be
permitted. 150 [Amended 4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 7-98]
150. Editor's Note: Former Section 17-4.17, Agricultural/Open Space Overlay Zone, added
6-21-1993 by Ord. No. 17-93, amended 4-17-1995 by Ord. No. 12-95; 4-17-1997 by Ord.
No. 9-97; which immediately followed this section, was repealed 5-18-1998 by Ord. No.
16-98.
§ 217-21 WATER § 217-23
213:767
§ 217-23. Agricultural Use Overlay Zone. [Added 7-18-1994 by Ord.
No. 15-94]
In order to preserve agricultural land and retain the rural character of
the Township, especially for tracts of agricultural land not eligible for the
agricultural/open space cluster option, the agricultural use overlay option
shall be permitted in any zone pursuant to the following conditions:
A. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Any form of agriculture or horticulture, including the storage,
processing or sale of farm products where produced.
(3) The installation of wireless telecommunications antennas on
existing structures subject to site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 159 and consistent with visual compatibility requirements
of § 217-57 of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09]
(4) Houses of worship pursuant to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, and
§ 217-59.1, Houses of worship. [Added 6-18-2001 by Ord. No.
14-01]
(5) Schools pursuant to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, and § 217-59.2,
Schools. [Added 6-18-2001 by Ord. No. 14-01]
B. Permitted accessory uses: same as in the R-5 Zone.
C. Conditional uses: wireless telecommunications towers in compliance
with §§ 217-76 and 217-57A(2), (3) and (4) of this chapter. [Added
3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97]
D. The following lot area and yard regulations apply:
(1) The minimum lot size shall be 400,000 square feet.
(2) Lots shall be deed restricted to prohibit further subdivisions and to
prohibit more than one single-family dwelling unit.
(3) Lots fronting on an existing public road shall have a minimum front
yard setback of 300 feet from that public road. The three-hundredfoot
area shall be subject to a conservation easement to preserve
existing wooded/farmland areas. Farming shall be specifically
permitted on the conservation easement.
(4) Access shall be via a privately owned and maintained road no more
than 2,000 feet in length, serving a maximum of six lots. Where
possible, the dwellings should be located near the private road to
enable larger wooded/farmland areas.
(5) The placement of dwellings and other structures shall conform to
the following setbacks:
§ 217-23 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-23
213:768
§ 217-24. RCH-SC Reduced-Cost Housing - Senior Citizen Zone.
[Added 2-14-1996 by Ord. No. 2-96]
Type Requirement
Front yard along private road 75 feet
Side yard 30 feet
Rear yard 100 feet
Combined width of back and side
yards
None
Maximum percentage of improved
lot
51%
coverage
Maximum height
Stories 2 1/2
Buildings 35 feet
Accessory buildings:
Side yard 25 feet
Rear yard 25 feet
(6) Shape and suitability. The shape of the lot shall be such that a circle
with a radius of 200 feet could be placed within the lot. The location
of the circle shall be in an area suitable for building purposes and
shall contain the proposed dwelling.
(7) The use of the agricultural overlay zone option shall prelude the
use of:
(a) Flag Lot Ordinance.151
(b) Cluster ordinance,152 including agricultural cluster, although
the applicant has the option, with the Planning Board's
concurrence and approval, of dedicating land for open space
uses pursuant to § 217-62D and E.
A. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Apartments restricted to low- and moderate-income senior citizen
households, as defined by the Council on Affordable Housing.
(2) Single-family detached houses.
(3) Public uses and buildings, including but not limited to schools
pursuant to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, and § 217-59.2,
Schools; libraries; municipal buildings and offices; police, fire and
151. Editor's Note: See § 217-37.
152. Editor's Note: See § 217-62.
§ 217-23 WATER § 217-24
213:769
§ 217-24.1. Musconetcong Age-Restricted Housing Overlay Zone.
[Added 2-21-2000 by Ord. No. 3-00; amended 7-19-2004 by Ord. No.
16-04; 2-10-2016 by Ord. No. 03-16]
first aid stations; parks; playgrounds; athletic fields; jogging trails;
horse trails; swimming pools and similar recreation facilities owned
or operated exclusively by a municipal or other governmental
agency, excluding private proprietary use. [Amended 6-18-2001
by Ord. No. 14-01]
(4) The installation of wireless telecommunications antennas on
existing structures subject to site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 159 and consistent with visual compatibility requirements
of § 217-57 of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09]
(5) Houses of worship pursuant to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, and
§ 217-59.1, Houses of worship. [Added 6-18-2001 by Ord. No.
14-01]
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Any use or structure customarily incidental to a principal permitted
use.
(2) Private garages and carports.
(3) Signs.
(4) Home occupations, in single-family detached houses only, in
compliance with § 217-41A of this chapter.
(5) Family day-care home.
(6) The installation of wireless telecommunications antennas on
existing structures subject to site plan approval pursuant to
Chapter 159 and consistent with visual compatibility requirements
of § 217-57 of this chapter. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09]
C. Conditional uses: wireless telecommunications towers in compliance
with §§ 217-76 and 217-57A(2), (3) and (4) of this chapter. [Added
3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this overlay zone is to provide an optional
alternative to the underlying OR/I Zoning to permit the development of
housing and services for the growing population of senior citizens in
Washington Township and the surrounding region. The intent is to
restrict the housing to the senior citizen population and to permit
related health care, recreational and social services, which are required
by the population.
B. Principal permitted uses.
§ 217-24 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-24.1
213:770
(1) Age-restricted attached and detached dwelling units.
(2) Multifamily dwelling units restricted to low- and moderate-income
senior citizen households.
(3) Supportive and special needs housing for low- and moderateincome
persons and households.
(4) Senior health care uses and facilities, health care support facilities
and skilled rehabilitation nursing facilities such as:
(a) Assisted living residences.
(b) Long-term care and subacute care skilled nursing facility.
(c) Inpatient and outpatient rehabilitation facility.
(d) Health and wellness center.
(e) Medical offices.
(f) Personal service uses.
(g) Restaurant (for residents, staff and visitors of Heath Village
and affiliated communities and facilities, including assisted
living residence, skilled nursing facility, inpatient and
outpatient rehabilitation facility, health and wellness center).
(5) Adult day-care facility/intergenerational child-care facility.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Off-street parking.
(2) Recreational, social, cultural and communal facilities, including
active recreation and equestrian uses and passive recreation trails
providing access throughout the tract and along the Musconetcong
River.
(3) Agricultural use, where "agricultural use" is defined as land
devoted to the production for sale of plants and animals useful to
man, including but not limited to forages and sod crops; grains and
feed crops; dairy and dairy products; poultry and poultry products;
livestock, including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules
or goats, including the breeding, boarding, raising, rehabilitating,
training or grazing of any or all such animals; bees and apiary
products; fur animals; trees and forest products or when devoted to
and meeting the requirements and qualifications for a farmland
assessment under New Jersey's Farmland Assessment Act of 1964.
(4) Appurtenant woodland, where "appurtenant woodland" is defined
as a wooded piece of property which is contiguous to, part of, or
beneficial to a tract of land, which tract of land has a minimum area
of at least five acres devoted to agricultural or horticultural uses
§ 217-24.1 WATER § 217-24.1
213:771
§ 217-24.2. Village Age-Restricted Housing Overlay Zone. [Added
2-16-2004 by L.L. No. 1-04]
other than the production for sale of trees and forest products,
exclusive of Christmas trees, to which tract of land the woodland is
supportive and subordinate.
(5) Necessary accessory buildings and uses, including facilities for
maintenance, administration, streets and off-street parking
facilities.
D. All development in the Musconetcong Age-Restricted Housing Overlay
Zone shall comply with the standards of § 217-55.1.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this overlay zone is to encourage the
redevelopment of the outdated industrial and manufacturing facilities
located adjacent to the Village of Long Valley. The intent is to replace
these aging facilities within the OR/I Zone by encouraging the
construction of age-restricted housing which will enhance the
residential character of the village and benefit from and support the
commercial services offered within the village center.
B. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Age-restricted dwelling units.
(a) Duplex dwellings.
(b) Townhouses.
(c) Townhouse-duplex combinations.
(d) Multifamily-dwellings.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Model home(s) for dwelling(s) to be sold only within the project.
(2) Sales office of a temporary nature not to extend beyond the
occupancy of the last dwelling in the community and to be solely
used for sale of properties within the Village Age Restricted
Housing Overlay Zone.
(3) Recreational and cultural facilities for the sole use of the residents
of the community and their guests, including but not limited to
clubhouse, swimming pool, library, media center, court games,
picnic areas and other active and passive recreation facilities.
(4) Construction office and/or trailer for the duration of the
construction of the project.
(5) The following subordinate uses used exclusively for the benefit of
the residents of the community:
§ 217-24.1 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-24.2
213:772
§ 217-25. Carbonate Area District Overlay Zone. [Added 4-20-1998
by Ord. No. 4-98; amended 8-16-2010 by Ord. No. 17-10]
All development in the Carbonate Area District Overlay Zone shall comply
with the standards of §§ 217-30 and 217-59.154
(a) Off-street parking areas.
(b) Maintenance facilities as required for the maintenance of the
common elements of the community.
(c) Public utilities and essential services facilities.
(d) One freestanding identification sign for each entrance,
provided the total display area of each sign shall not exceed 16
square feet. The design and location of the sign(s) shall in all
other ways conform to the regulations listed in § 159-42, Signs.
(e) Fences as regulated in § 159-41D, Fences.153
(f) Mailboxes, singles or in clusters.
D. Development in the Village Age-Restricted Housing Overlay Zone shall
be guided by the requirements of § 217-55.2.
153. Editor's Note: For provisions related to fences, see § 217-44.
154. Editor's Note: Former § 217-25.1, Telecommunications antennas and towers on Township
property, added 8-20-2001 by Ord. No. 24-01, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09.
§ 217-24.2 WATER § 217-25
213:773

ARTICLE IV
Zone Regulations
§ 217-26. Restrictions and controls. [Added 12-15-1986 by Ord. No.
46-86]
The restrictions and controls intended to regulate development in each zone
are as set forth in the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements,155
which is supplemented by other sections of this chapter. Any property
located in an Historic Preservation Zone shall be regulated in accordance
with the area, yard and building requirements otherwise applicable in the
zone district wherein the property is located and shall additionally be
subject to the specific requirements of Article XIII, Historic Preservation
Overlay Zone.
§ 217-27. Application of regulations.
A. No building or structure shall be erected and no existing building or
structure shall be moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any
land or building be designed, used or intended to be used, for any
purpose or in any manner other than as specified among the uses
hereinafter listed, as permitted in the zone in which such building or
land is located.
B. No building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally
altered to exceed in height the limit hereinafter designated for the zone
in which such building or structure is located.
C. No building or structure shall be erected and no existing buildings or
structures shall be altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open
space surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in any
manner, except in conformity with the yard, lot area and building
location regulations hereinafter designated for the zone in which such
building or open space is located.
D. No yard or other open space provided about any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be
considered as providing a yard or other open space for any buildings,
and no yard or other open space on one lot shall be considered as
providing a yard or open space for a building on any other lot.
E. No land in a residential zone shall be used to fulfill open space, parking
or other similar requirements for use in nonresidential zones. Vehicle
access for nonresidential or multifamily uses shall be directly from a
street specified as a primary arterial street as shown in the duly
adopted Master Plan of the Township of Washington.
155. Editor's Note: Said Schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 217-26 WATER § 217-28
213:775
§ 217-28. General use restriction.
Any use not specifically designated as a principal permitted use, a permitted
use, a permitted accessory use or a conditional use is specifically prohibited
from any zone district in the Township of Washington.
§ 217-29. Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements.156
§ 217-30. Establishment of Carbonate Area District Overlay Zone
Restrictions. [Added 4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 4-98]
The Carbonate Area District (CAD) Overlay Zone is comprised of all land
areas underlain by limestone or carbonate rock and therefore is subject
to the hazards attendant with development in these areas. This district
shall be secondary, or an overlay, to the districts heretofore established
by the Zoning Map and may encompass all or portions of more than one
underlying zoning district. Regulation of this district shall be in addition to
those requirements governing the underlying zoning districts.
156. Editor's Note: The Schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 217-28 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-30
213:776
ARTICLE V
Supplementary Lot, Height and Yard Regulations
§ 217-31. Lot regulations.
A. Preexisting lot of record. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this
chapter, any existing lot in a residential zone under separate ownership
and not adjoining any other land owned by the owner of said lot shall be
considered a conforming lot under this chapter, provided that setback
and yard requirements shall be in accordance with this chapter for any
new development.
B. Existing structure on a right-of-way. Where there is an existing
structure on a lot which has no frontage on a street, alterations may be
made to said structure without the approval of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, provided that the structure, including the proposed
alterations, is in conformity with the requirements of this chapter in all
respects, except those pertaining to frontage on a street.
C. Lot width. On all lots, the minimum lot width shall be measured at the
building front yard setback line. In addition, for lots which narrow
toward the rear, the lot's shape shall be sufficient to include a circle of a
diameter equal to the minimum lot width. The location of the circle shall
be in an area suitable for building purposes and shall contain the
proposed dwelling. [Amended 9-16-1985 by Ord. No. 33-85]
D. Corner lots. At all street intersections no obstruction to vision
exceeding 30 inches in height above the established grade of the street
at the property line shall be erected or maintained on any lot within the
area bounded by the line drawn between points along such street lot
lines or their extension thereof 30 feet distant from their intersection.
The determination of the front yard of a corner lot shall be at the option
of the owner or developer and shall be so designated on all maps and
official records. On any corner lot, the minimum lot width shall be
increased by 25 feet for both potential front yards.
E. Through lots. A through lot shall be considered as having two street
frontages, both of which shall be subject to the minimum front yard
requirements of this chapter.
F. Required area of space cannot be reduced. The area or dimension of
any lot, yard, parking area or other space shall not be reduced to less
than the minimum required by this chapter, and if already existing as
less than the minimum required by this chapter, said area or dimension
may be continued and shall not be further reduced.
G. Frontage upon a street. Every principal building shall be built upon a lot
with the minimum lot width fronting upon a street.
§ 217-31 WATER § 217-32
213:777
§ 217-32. Height regulations. [Amended 8-21-1995 by Ord. No.
27-95; 5-17-1999 by Ord. No. 13-99157]
No building or structure shall have a building height in excess of that
permitted in the zone where such building or structure is located except
that steeples, spires, belfries and similar appurtenances located on houses
of worship may extend to a height of 75 feet, as measured from ground
level, inclusive of any cross, star or similar symbol located thereon.
§ 217-33. Yard regulations.
§ 217-34. Improved lot coverage.
A. General.
(1) Required yards shall be open to the sky, unobstructed except for
the ordinary projection of parapets, windowsills, door posts,
rainwater leaders, cornices, canopies, eaves, bay windows,
stairways and similar ornamental or structural fixtures which may
not project more than two feet into such yards.
(2) Chimneys or flues may be erected within any yard, provided that
they do not exceed 15 square feet in aggregate cross-section area.
(3) On-grade patios or outdoor barbecues may be located in any side or
rear yard, provided that they are not closer than five feet to any
property line.
(4) Self-supporting walls and fences may project into any required
yard, provided that any accessory retaining wall or fence shall not
obstruct sight distances.
B. Front yard requirements affected by Official Map or Master Plan.
Where any lot fronts on a street right-of-way which is proposed to be
widened as indicated on the Official Map of the Township, or in the
Master Plan of the Township, or Master Plan of Morris County, or by the
State of New Jersey as adopted by the appropriate agency pursuant to
law, all minimum required yards shall be measured from such proposed
future right-of-way line.
C. Side yard exceptions.
(1) Corner lot. Any corner lot shall provide a side street setback line
which shall be the same as the minimum front yard required on any
adjoining lot fronting on the side street.
A. Residential uses. The maximum improved lot coverage on each lot shall
not be greater than is permitted in the zone where such building and
157. Editor's Note: Section 2 of this ordinance provided for the following: "Any house of
worship constructed prior to the effective date of this ordinance which, on the effective
date of this ordinance, exceeds the height limit established by this ordinance shall be
exempt from the provisions of this ordinance."
§ 217-32 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-34
213:778
§ 217-35. Number of buildings restricted. [Amended 11-21-1983 by
Ord. No. 28-83; amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 5-99; 12-16-2002 by
Ord. No. 45-02; 9-17-2007 by Ord. No. 26-07]
structures are located. "Improved lot coverage" is defined in § 111-46.
[Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 03-11]
B. Institutional and conditional uses. The Planning Board shall determine
on an individual basis the appropriate floor area ratio (FAR) and
maximum improved lot coverage for institutional and conditional uses.
In its determination, the Planning Board shall consider similar uses in
the zone, surrounding uses, topography, drainage and soil
characteristics.
C. Bonus for decrease in improved lot coverage. In all nonresidential
zones, the maximum FAR may be increased by an amount directly
proportional to decreases in the maximum improved lot coverage.
A. Except in the R-MDU, PUD, RCH, RCH-SC, OR/I and OR Zones and as
provided herein, there shall not be more than one principal structure on
each lot in any zone, except as permitted for planned development.
B. Within the C-1 Zone, more than one principal building may be
permitted; provided, however, that the maximum coverage area of any
building on a lot shall not be more than 20,000 square feet.
C. More than one principal building may be permitted on farmland
preserved pursuant to the Agriculture Development and Retention Act,
N.J.S.A. 4:1C-11 et seq., provided that the additional principal
building(s) is erected on an exclusion area approved by the Morris
County Agriculture Development Board (CADB) and the State
Agriculture Development Committee (SADC), and further provided
that:
(1) In the case of constructing a new single-family dwelling:
(a) The total number of dwellings permitted on the preserved
farmland lot exclusion area(s) shall not exceed the total
number of dwellings approved by the CADB and SADC at the
time that the deed of easement preserving the farmland was
filed; and
(b) The total number of dwellings permitted on the preserved
farmland lot shall not exceed the number of dwellings that
would be permitted for the amount of land on the farm
excluded from the development restrictions in the deed of
easement preserving the farm.
(2) In the case of replacing a single-family dwelling, the replacement
dwelling shall be limited to replacement of a single-family
residential dwelling in existence at the time that the deed of
easement preserving the farmland was filed.
§ 217-34 WATER § 217-36
213:779
§ 217-36. Setbacks from stream corridors and state open waters.
[Amended 2-17-1997 by Ord. No. 3-97; 12-19-2005 by Ord. No.
43-05]
§ 217-37. Flag lots. [Amended 5-20-1985 by Ord. No. 13-85;
6-19-1995 by Ord. No. 19-95158; 10-15-2001 by Ord. No. 32-01]
Flag lots are permitted in the R-5 Zone.
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no development
shall be permitted adjacent to a C1 or other stream or state open waters
except in conformance with Chapter 92, Floodplain Management. In
addition, except in connection with subdivisions and site plans as
provided in Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land, § 175-47B and Chapter
159, Site Plan Review, § 159-44, or in connection with variance
applications, an easement of not less than 25 feet along each side or
edge of a C1 or other stream or state open waters shall be dedicated to
the Township, in form satisfactory to the Township Attorney, which shall
carry the following limitations:
(1) No trees or shrubs shall be removed or destroyed on lands in the
easement except in accordance with approved forest management
practices.
(2) No topsoil, sand, gravel or minerals shall be excavated or removed,
except as may be required to build a pond, and then only after the
Township Planning Board approves the design and structure of the
pond, it being the intent to preserve the natural function of the
floodplain.
(3) No buildings or structures of any description shall be erected.
(4) No fill of any kind shall be permitted, except as may be required to
build a road, and then only after the Planning Board approves the
design of such road.
(5) No fertilizers or pesticides, except for Rodeo, shall be applied.
B. With regard to existing lawn areas, residents are encouraged to
substitute fine fescues (i.e., red fescue, chewings fescue, hard fescue)
within the twenty-five-foot zone, as measured from the edge of the bank
of the water, in which fertilizers and pesticides are prohibited pursuant
to Chapter 85, in place of turf grasses such as Kentucky bluegrass and
perennial ryegrass. Fine fescues are low growing and can be left
nonmowed or need to be mowed only two or three times per year.
Residents are encouraged to maintain wooded buffers along streams
and open waters within their properties wherever possible.
158. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that flag lots in existence as of the effective
date of this ordinance are to be exempt from the terms hereof and are to be considered as
conforming lots, except that the access strips shall be improved as set forth in Chapter
172, Streets and Sidewalks, Article III, Driveway Construction.
§ 217-36 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-37
213:780
A. Minimum area required. Area requirements of the interior portion of
the lot, exclusive of the flag stem portion, shall conform to the Schedule
of Area, Yard and Building Requirements for the R-5 Zone.159
B. Minimum yard requirements. All minimum yard setbacks for principal
buildings shall be 75 feet. All minimum yard setbacks for accessory
buildings shall be 25 feet.
C. Access strip. The access strip into the interior portion of the lot shall be
at least 25 feet wide and shall be straight with no bends or curves. The
access strip length shall be no more than 800 feet, and on dead-end
streets the combined length of the access strip and the distance along
the street from the access strip to the beginning of the street shall not
exceed the dead-end street lengths listed in Chapter 175, Subdivision of
Land, § 175-44G(1). The access strip shall be improved in accordance
with requirements and approval of the Superintendent of Public Works
as follows:
(1) Compliance with Chapter 172, Streets and Sidewalks, Article III,
Driveway Construction.
D. Other requirements. Each flag lot shall have its own access strip except
that two adjoining flag lots may share the same roadway, provided that
a total frontage and access strip width shall be at least 50 feet. Except
as hereinabove provided, at least twice the minimum lot width at
building setback for the zone shall be required between a pair of access
strips on the same side of the street.
E. Flag lots shall not be permitted on a cul-de-sac turnaround.
F. No structures, septic systems or other obstructions shall be placed
wholly or partially in the access strip.
G. Flag lots in existence as of the effective date of this chapter are to be
exempt from the terms hereof and are to be considered as conforming
lots.
H. Shape. The shape of the flag portion of the lot shall be such that a circle
with a radius of at least 150 feet can be placed within the lot lines, and
the edge of the circle shall be located within 50 feet of the end of the
access strip.
I. Suitability for dwelling. The location of the circle in § 217-37H shall be
in an area suitable for building purposes and shall contain the proposed
dwelling.
J. Limitation of the number of flag lots. Flag lots shall be permitted on
tracts being subdivided, provided that the applicant for the subdivision
can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that:
159. Editor's Note: The Schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 217-37 WATER § 217-37
213:781
§ 217-38. Steep slopes, ridgeline, mountainside, hillside and
viewshed protection areas. [Amended 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 23-94;
8-21-1995 by Ord. No. 29-95; 10-16-1995 by Ord. No. 37-95;
9-21-1998 by Ord. No. 30-98; 11-16-1998 by Ord. No. 36-1998;
10-15-2001 by Ord. No. 30-01; 4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 15-03;
7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 23-03; 7-18-2005 by 27-05; 9-19-2005 by Ord.
No. 36-05; 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 44-05]
(1) The shape, topography, limited or small usable road frontage
relative to its total size or other characteristics of the tract make
installation of public roads, to avoid the need for any flag lots,
impractical.
(2) Flag lots are necessary to permit the reasonable effective use of the
land consistent with its natural characteristics, shape and the
applicable zoning.
(3) The proposed flag lots would not interfere with the traffic
circulation plan of the Township.
(4) The flag lot created can properly serve as a residential lot
considering soil types, slope characteristics, vegetation,
watercourses, lot configuration, ingress and egress and public
safety and environmental concerns.
A. Statement of purpose.
(1) It is the express purpose of this section to provide special
qualitative and quantitative development controls for all lands
located within the Township that have present within their
boundaries topographical conditions, hereinafter defined as "steep
slopes areas" and as "ridgeline, mountainside, hillside and
viewshed protection areas."
(2) These special development controls are provided in recognition of
the potentially negative impacts of construction in steep slopes
areas and in ridgeline, mountainside, hillside and viewshed
protection areas in the form of erosion, siltation, excessive removal
of vegetation and soil, flooding, soil slippage, water runoff and
destruction of unique land forms and scenic vistas. It is further the
purpose of this section to encourage good land use planning and
design, maximize optimal use of the natural terrain and maintain
ridgeline, mountainside, hillside and viewshed protection areas.
(3) Effective and reasonable application of these regulations will
protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
Township.
(4) This section is further promulgated to provide a functional land use
design and control mechanism that will augment the basic land use
controls of this chapter and the administrative implementation
§ 217-37 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-38
213:782
devices contained within Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, and
Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land, respectively.
(5) The regulation of development within the ridgeline, mountainside,
hillside and viewshed protection areas is intended to promote a
desirable visual environment through good civic design and
arrangements by requiring development to be sited behind existing
vegetation and requiring the establishment of vegetated buffers to
screen proposed development within ridgeline, mountainside,
hillside and viewshed protection areas from public view in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2.
(6) Several purposes of the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. will be advanced through this steep slopes areas and
ridgeline, mountainside, hillside and viewshed protection areas
section, including, without limitation, the following:
(a) To ensure that the development of individual municipalities
does not conflict with the general welfare of neighboring
municipalities, the county and state as a whole (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-2d).
(b) To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a
variety of residential uses and open space, both public and
private, according to their respective environmental
requirements in order to meet the needs of all New Jersey
citizens (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2g).
(c) To promote conservation of open space and valuable natural
resources in this state and to prevent urban sprawl and
degradation of the environment through the improper use of
land (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2j).
(7) This ridgeline, mountainside, hillside and viewshed protection
areas section is designed to respond to the objective of preserving
the existing predominantly unspoiled vistas of wooded
mountainsides, hillsides, ridgelines and viewsheds within the
Township of Washington when viewed from public areas or public
open space or the public traveled way.
(8) ridgeline, mountainside, hillside and viewshed vistas are valued
assets of the landscape which require protection from destruction,
diminution and loss that can result in visually undesirable impacts
of development. The unique mountainous topography of the
Township of Washington is characterized by steeply sloped
mountainsides and hillsides, which meet wide plateau-like
mountaintops. This line where the hillside meets the plateau is
perceived to be the ridgeline (top of the mountain) when viewed
from the public traveled way or public areas or public open space.
While it is acknowledged that development within the ridgeline,
mountainside, hillside and viewshed protection areas results in a
visual impact, the purpose of this section in certain cases is to
§ 217-38 WATER § 217-38
213:783
prevent such impact and in other cases to minimize the visual
impact of permitted development to the extent reasonably
achievable.
B. Applicability. The requirements, guidelines and controls promulgated
under this section shall be applicable to all properties within all zone
districts situated in the Township in their existing physical state or
condition as of the date of the passage of this section. The requirements
of Subsections C, D and E of this § 217-38 shall apply where said
properties have a slope area of 15% or greater. The ridgeline
requirements of Subsection F shall apply where said properties are
within 100 feet of the ridgeline area. In addition, the ridgeline,
mountainside, hillside and viewshed protection areas requirements
shall apply as more specifically set forth in Subsection F. An applicant
shall not be required to comply with the provisions of Subsection F
below if it can be clearly demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board that the proposed activity shall not be inconsistent with
the purposes of § 217-38.
C. Construction control limitations. Disturbance of steep slopes shall be
limited to the following based on the indicated slopes:
Slope Permitted activity
Less than 15% All activities permitted
15% to less than
20%
All activities, subject to review and approval of
individual grading plans per Subsection E
below
Greater than 20% No disturbance permitted, except that
disturbance shall be permitted in man-made
areas greater than 20%
D. Exception. The above construction control limitations are not
applicable for isolated steep slopes with an area of 1,000 square feet or
less.
E. Lot grading/driveway/drainage plans. For all lots with proposed
disturbance of steep slope area, a lot grading/driveway/drainage plan
shall be approved by the Township Engineer prior to the issuance of a
building permit. Said plans shall be at one inch equals 30 feet. Said plan
shall include, but not be limited to, existing and proposed contours,
limits of soil disturbance, construction details, soil erosion,
sedimentation control measures and drainage calculations and, where
required by the Township Engineer, stormwater control measures. A
five-hundred-dollar escrow fee deposit shall be paid to the Township for
review and inspections of lot grading/driveway/drainage plans. The
deposit shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of
§ 159-53E and F. The design standards for lot grading plans shall be
pursuant to the following standards:
§ 217-38 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-38
213:784
(1) No soil shall be excavated, removed, deposited or disturbed except
as a result of and in accordance with a lot-grading plan approved
under the terms of this chapter.
(2) Proposed disturbance of soil shall be for purposes consistent with
the intent of this chapter, and it shall be executed in a manner that
will not cause erosion or other unstable conditions.
(3) Provision shall be made for the proper disposition of surface water
runoff so that it will not create unstable conditions. Appropriate
storm drainage facilities shall be provided for downstream
properties.
(4) Provision shall be made for any structure or protective measures
that proposed slopes may require for the protection of the public
safety, including but not limited to retaining walls, guide rails,
headwalls and fences.
(5) Provision shall be made for a safe water supply and for the disposal
of sanitary sewage as approved by the Board of Health.
(6) Any proposed building or structure or attendant protective
measures will not impede the flow of surface water through any
watercourse. Only a nominal increase in water surface elevation
and velocities will be allowed due to construction.
(7) Any proposed vehicular facilities, including roads, drives or
parking areas, shall be so designed that any land disturbances shall
not cause excessive erosion. Both the vertical and horizontal
alignment of vehicular facilities shall be so designed that
hazardous circulation conditions will not be created.
(8) Final grades of the proposed driveway shall be in conformance with
Chapter 172, Streets and Sidewalks, Article III, Driveway
Construction.
(9) Any fill placed on the lot shall be properly stabilized and, when
found necessary depending upon existing slopes and soil types,
supported by retaining walls or other appropriate structures as
approved by the Township Engineer.
(10) All cuts shall be supported by retaining walls or other appropriate
retaining structures when, depending upon the nature of the soil
characteristics, such structures are found necessary by the
Township Engineer in order to prevent erosion.
(11) There shall be no alteration of site elevations in excess of one foot
within five feet of an adjoining property.
(12) Changes in grade shall not exceed a slope of 3 to 1 unless
supported by retaining walls. [Amended 2-16-2009 by Ord. No.
01-09]
§ 217-38 WATER § 217-38
213:785
(13)No retaining wall on a residential site shall exceed six feet in
height, and there shall be at least 10 feet between stepped
retaining walls. All retaining walls greater than four feet in height
require a certification by a professional engineer that the wall was
constructed in accordance with approved plans.
F. Ridgeline, mountainside, hillside and viewshed protection areas
requirements.
(1) Applicability; review of plans; compliance. The requirements,
guidelines and controls promulgated under this section shall be
applicable to site plan and subdivision applications and building
permits for new buildings. The Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, shall review all plans submitted
under this section as part of any application for site plan,
subdivision or variance approval. The Construction Official shall
refer applications for building permits for new buildings within the
ridgeline, mountainside, hillside and viewshed protection areas to
the Township Engineer for review to assure compliance with this
section. An applicant shall not be required to comply with the
provisions of this Subsection F if it can be clearly demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the Planning Board that the proposed activity
shall not be inconsistent with the purposes of § 217-38.
(a) Exempt development. A shed 200 square feet in area or less
with a height of 10 feet or less, or an accessory pool involving
2,000 square feet or less of disturbance and clearing, provided
that such disturbance or clearing does not involve steep slope
disturbance in excess of 1,000 square feet, shall be exempt
from the requirements of this section, provided that the shed
or pool is installed within required setbacks. [Added
6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 09-14]
(2) Purpose. In addition to the purposes as set forth in § 217-38A, the
intention and purpose of the ridgeline area protection measures set
forth herein is to eliminate the denuding of trees and other
vegetation, and the disturbance of land within the defined ridgeline
area, except as otherwise specifically permitted under this section.
The intention and purpose of the ridgeline, mountainside, hillside
and viewshed protection areas measures as set forth herein is to
protect the scenic view and vista of vegetated ridgelines,
mountainsides, hillsides and viewsheds from the viewing
perspective from the public traveled way, public area or public
open space.
(3) Requests for zoning permits and/or building permits.
(a) Applicants for zoning permits or building permits where no
approvals from the Zoning Board of Adjustment or the
Planning Board are required shall initially determine whether
the ridgeline area depicted on a map entitled "Ridgeline,
§ 217-38 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-38
213:786
Mountainside, Hillside and Viewshed Protection Area,"160
dated October 2005, adopted by this section, is within 100
feet of the property which is the subject of the building permit
application and shall depict all ridgeline areas as shown on the
map which are on or within 100 feet of applicant's property
The determination of the presence of all ridgeline areas above
mentioned shall be done on a map provided by the applicant
with topography depicted at two-foot contour intervals. All
determinations by the applicant concerning the location of
ridgelines shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Township Engineer. In addition, the applicant shall initially
determine and then depict on a map all ridgeline,
mountainside, hillside and viewshed protection areas as
defined in this section on or within 100 feet of the property
which is the subject of the application. The applicant shall
utilize a sketch to define the area of protection for ridgeline,
mountainside, hillside and viewshed protection areas as set
forth in Figure 1. The sketch set forth in Figure 1 below depicts
the manner in which buffer treatments are to be retained or
provided as may be appropriate to maintain the viewshed area.
The maps and sketches abovementioned shall be at a scale of
one inch equals 50 feet and shall be provided by the applicant
with the topography depicted at two-foot contour intervals.
All determinations by the applicant concerning the location
of the ridgeline area and the ridgeline, mountainside, hillside
and viewshed protection areas shall be subject to review and
approval of the Township Engineer and Township Planner.
160. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 217-38 WATER § 217-38
213:787
(b) If it is then determined and that the parcel in question is
located within the ridgeline, mountainside, hillside and
viewshed protection areas, no building permit shall be issued
until a ridgeline, mountainside, hillside and viewshed
certificate of compliance is procured from the Planning Board.
Said certificate of compliance will document that the proposed
activity has received the regulatory approval for the
construction proposed within the ridgeline, mountainside,
hillside, and viewshed protection areas. This certificate of
compliance shall be required when applicable as a condition
for the issuance of a building permit for the particular
structure in question.
(c) No such certificate of compliance shall be required for an
addition to an existing dwelling located within the ridgeline,
mountainside, hillside and viewshed protection areas except
when such addition shall increase the habitable floor area of a
dwelling by more than 25%. Incremental additions occurring
after the date of adoption of this section which result in a
cumulative increase in habitable floor area of 25% beyond the
habitable floor area of the dwelling as of the date of the
adoption of this section shall be permitted only when such
certificate of compliance has been received. Construction of
new accessory structures, such as detached garages, on
§ 217-38 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-38
213:788
existing developed lots of record within the ridgeline,
mountainside, hillside and viewshed protection areas shall
require the issuance of such a certificate of compliance prior
to the issuance of a building permit; provided, however, that
no certificate of compliance shall be required for a building
permit for an accessory structure on an existing lot of record
when: [Amended 6-20-2016 by Ord. No. 09-16]
[1] The accessory structure is 500 square feet or less in area;
and
[2] The accessory structure is 16 feet or less in height; and
[3] The Township Engineer or Planner determines that the
objectives of § 217-38F are met or are not applicable to the
proposed accessory structure development; and
[4] The review fee as required by § 217-38F(10) has been
paid.
(d) For proposed new development on existing developed lots
within the ridgeline, mountainside, hillside and viewshed
protection area that is within and adjacent to existing
development and exceeds the provisions of § 217-38F(3)(c)
above and conforms to applicable zoning standards, an
applicant may request, and the Township Engineer may grant,
an administrative approval for development within the
ridgeline, mountainside, hillside and viewshed protection area
without the need for a separate application to the Township
Planning Board or Township Board of Adjustment for a
certificate of compliance that is otherwise required when:
[Added 11-18-2019 by Ord. No. 13-19]
[1] The applicant submits an application with sufficient
documentation to illustrate and describe the proposed new
development to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Township Engineers that:
[a] The purposes of this § 217-38F are not violated;
[b] Viewshed mitigation required in § 217-38F(6)(a)
through (c), as applicable, is provided; and
[c] The visual impact of proposed development does not
rise to a level of concern such that review by the
Township Planning Board or Township Zoning Board
of Adjustment is required.
[2] The review fee for an application under the provisions of
this § 217-38F(3)(d) shall be $250. The review fee for a
resubmittal of an application under this § 217-38F(3)(d)
shall be $150.
§ 217-38 WATER § 217-38
213:789
[3] When the Township Engineer determines that review by
the Township Planning Board or Township Zoning Board of
Adjustment is required, an applicant for proposed
development within the ridgeline, mountainside, hillside
and viewshed protection area shall be subject to the
application procedures and requirements for a certificate
of compliance in accordance with the provisions of
§ 217-38F(4) below.
(4) Applications to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(a) Applicants to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall initially determine whether the ridgeline area
depicted on the map entitled "Ridgeline, Mountainside,
Hillside and Viewshed Protection Area," dated October 2005,
adopted by this section, is within 100 feet of the property
which is the subject of the application and shall depict all
ridgeline areas as shown on said map which are on or within
100 feet of applicant's property. In addition, the applicant shall
initially determine and then depict on a map all ridgeline,
mountainside, hillside and viewshed protection areas as
defined in this section on or within 100 feet of the property,
which is the subject of the application. The applicant shall
utilize a sketch to define the area of protection for ridgelines,
mountainsides, hillsides and viewshed protection areas as set
forth in Figure 1.
(b) The maps and sketches above mentioned shall be at a scale of
one inch equals 50 feet and shall be provided by the applicant
with the topography depicted at two-foot contour intervals. All
determinations by the applicant concerning the location of the
ridgeline area and the ridgeline, mountainside, hillside and
viewshed protection areas shall be subject to review and
approval of the Township Engineer and Township Planner.
(5) Standards of review. Applicants for construction on properties to
which this section applies shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the reviewing board or Township Engineer, as the case may be, that
the proposed buildings or structures will not extend above the
predominant tree line along the ridgeline area. No structure that is
the subject of this section shall be located within 60 feet of the
ridgeline area, as determined by the Township Engineer, unless, in
the reviewing board's or Township Engineer's opinion, as the case
may be, such requirements would render an existing lot unusable,
in which case the reviewing board or Township Engineer, as the
case may be, may permit the minimum encroachment necessary to
prevent the rendering of the existing lot unusable. In such a case,
the reviewing board or Township Engineer, as the case may be, may
recommend the issuance and the Zoning Officer may issue a zoning
permit for an existing lot of record which does not meet the
requirements of this section upon his determination that no
§ 217-38 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-38
213:790
suitable conforming location is available. There shall be no
disturbance within this sixty-foot area except for access driveways.
Snow fencing or other similar methods of tree protection approved
by the Township Engineer shall be placed at the edge of this sixtyfoot
protection area during construction. [Amended 12-21-2009
by Ord. No. 30-09; 2-15-2010 by Ord. No. 02-10]
(6) Applicants for construction within ridgeline, mountainside, hillside
and viewshed protection areas.
(a) Applicants for construction within ridgeline, mountainside,
hillside and viewshed protection areas as depicted on the map
submitted by the applicant as set forth above and approved or
confirmed by the Township Engineer and Township Planner
shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the reviewing board
and Township Engineer and Township Planner, as the case may
be, that all construction within the ridgeline, mountainside,
hillside and viewshed protection areas shall maintain the view
of vegetated hills as viewed from the public traveled way or
public areas or public open space.
(b) Views of ridgeline, mountainside, hillside and viewshed
protection areas are to be protected permanently by screening
development from view behind existing woodland and forest
vegetation or through the establishment of landscaped buffer
plantings of indigenous deciduous and coniferous trees.
(c) Development constructed within ridgeline, mountainside,
hillside and viewshed protection areas shall utilize materials
which are designed to camouflage the appearance of the
structure within the landscape and viewscape. The use of earth
tone colors and textures on roofing and siding shall be required
to protect ridgeline, mountainside, hillside and viewshed
protection areas vistas and reinforce the integrity of these
views. In addition, building heights shall be adjusted, road
network oriented in such a way to eliminate visibility from the
public traveled way or preserved areas and other innovative
and flexible design and construction methodologies employed
as required by the appropriate board with the active
participation of the applicant.
(7) Existing undeveloped parcels of land within the ridgeline,
mountainside, hillside and viewshed protection areas shall be
required to comply with the design standards set forth above.
(8) Development should be sited behind and below visual buffers such
as trees, ridgelines and other topographic features. The height and
location of development shall not alter the views of, and from, the
natural ridgeline.
§ 217-38 WATER § 217-38
213:791
§ 217-39. Minimum lot requirements where public water and sewer
are not proposed. [Added 2-15-1988 by Ord. No. 3-88; amended
10-15-2001 by Ord. No. 32-01]
Where connection to public water and a public sanitary sewer system are
not proposed, no lot in a residential zone shall be created after the effective
date of this section which does not meet the bulk requirements of the
R-1/R-2 Zone or the zone in which they are actually located, whichever is
greater.
§ 217-39.1. Resource conservation calculations. [Added 7-18-2005
by Ord. No. 27-05; amended 9-19-2005 by Ord. No. 36-05]
This section shall be used to compute the total area of a tract that is suitable
for development after subtracting identified resource conservation areas.
This section is to be used to determine the maximum number of residential
lots that may be created on a tract of land and will assist the board in
guiding, to the greatest extent practicable, all development activities to
suitable area(s) of the tract.
(9) Development shall be located and designed to preserve views of
cultural/historic landmarks and of unique geographic and
topographic features identified in the Conservation Plan Element
and Historic Preservation Plan Element of the Washington
Township Master Plan.
(10) There shall be a review fee of $500 per lot in addition to any other
applicable fees, for any application for development of a property
subject to this § 217-38F, except that the review fee shall be $250
per lot for accessory sheds 200 square feet or less and 16 feet in
height or less. [Amended 11-18-2019 by Ord. No. 13-19]
A. Applicability. The calculations required in Subsection B below shall be
submitted as part of any conceptual subdivision plan for informal
subdivision review and/or any minor or major subdivision or site plan
application.
B. Resource conservation factors - maximum tract yield. The Maximum
Tract Yield Calculation Form shall be prepared by the applicant and
submitted to the Board, along with a map of the entire tract illustrating
natural resource identifying features, including floodplains, wetlands,
NJDEP-required wetlands transition areas, stream channels, stream
corridors, areas of slopes greater than 15%, but less than 20%, and
areas of slopes 20% and greater. [Amended 7-17-2006 by Ord. No.
15-06; 2-15-2010 by Ord. No. 05-10]
§ 217-38 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-39.1
213:792
Resource Conservation Area
Maximum Tract Yield Calculation Form
Column A Column B Column C
Acres
Resource
Conservation
Ratio Acres
1. Gross tract area
2. Area of existing
conservation easements
3. Adjusted gross tract area
(Line 1 less Line 2)
Resource conservation
areas:
see Notes (a) and (b)
4. Bodies of water, area of
floodplains, wetlands,
stream corridors
1
5. Area of slopes 20% and
greater based on two-foot
contour intervals
1
6. Area of slopes greater than
15% but less than 20%
based on two-foot contour
intervals
0.75
7. NJDEP-required wetlands
transition areas
0.75
8. Area of three-hundred-foot
buffer to Category 1 waters
1
9. Highlands special resource
protection area
0.5
10. Total deductible resource
conservation area (sum of
Lines 4 through 9)
11. Net site area adjusted for
resource conservation areas
(Line 3 less Line 10)
12. Maximum number of
residential lots
1 dwelling
unit/
200,000
square feet
§ 217-39.1 WATER § 217-39.1
213:793
Resource Conservation Area
Maximum Tract Yield Calculation Form
Column A Column B Column C
Acres
Resource
Conservation
Ratio Acres
13. Maximum permitted number
of residential lots [Line 11
multiplied by Line 12 - see
note (c) & (d)]
NOTES:
(a) Enter appropriate acreage in Column A, multiply Column A by
factor in Column B and place result in Column C.
(b) When resource conservation areas overlap, enter the affected
acreage on the line with the higher resource conservation factor
and do not include it in the calculation of the resource
conservation area having the lower factor. Do not double-count
resource conservation acreage.
(c) Round down to the nearest dwelling unit or square foot.
(d) Within the Washington Township Conservation District (R-5), there
shall be provided on each lot a minimum improvable lot area
not less than 25,000 square feet, which shall be located entirely
within the building envelope for the principal building. For the
purpose of this subsection, the minimum improvable lot area shall
be a contiguous area of each lot that is free of all constrained
areas, including areas of existing conservation easements, bodies
of water, area of floodplains, wetlands, stream corridors; area of
slopes 20% and greater as measured and calculated between twofoot
contour intervals; NJDEP-required wetlands transition areas;
areas of three-hundred-foot buffer to Category 1 waters; and
highlands special resource protection areas; except that the
minimum improvable lot area may contain a total of 1,000 square
feet of area of slopes greater than 20%.
§ 217-39.1 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-39.1
213:794
ARTICLE VI
Supplemental Regulations Governing Certain Uses
§ 217-40. Agricultural uses. [Amended 3-18-1985 by Ord. No. 4-85;
3-19-2001 by Ord. No. 7-01]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to assure the continuation and
expansion of commercial and home agricultural pursuits by
encouraging a positive agricultural business climate and protecting the
farmer against municipal regulations and private nuisance suits where
recognized methods and techniques of agricultural production are
applied and are consistent with relevant federal and state law and
nonthreatening to the public health and safety; at the same time, this
section acknowledges the need to provide a proper balance among the
varied and sometimes conflicting interests of all lawful activities in the
State of New Jersey. The retention of agricultural activities is desirable
to all citizens in Morris County because it insures numerous social,
environmental and economic benefits, including the preservation of
open space, atmospheric habitat; the preservation of land as a
nonreplenishable resource and as a source for agricultural products for
this and future generations; and the protection and maintenance of the
aesthetic beauty of the countryside and rural character of the
community which includes farm architecture and scenic variety.
B. Definitions. For the purposes of this § 217-40 only, the following terms
shall be defined as follows:
ACCEPTABLE AGRICULTURAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — The
agricultural management practices recommended or endorsed by the
State Agriculture Development Committee, plus those practices
complying with a conservation plan.
AGRICULTURE — The production, principally for the sale to others,
of plants, animals or their products, worth $2,500 or more annually,
including, but not limited to, forage and sod crops; grain and feed
crops; dairy animals and dairy products; livestock including dairy and
beef cattle, poultry, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules and goats;
including grapes, nuts and berries; vegetables; nursery, floral,
ornamental and greenhouse products; and other commodities as
described in the Standard Industrial Classification for agriculture,
forestry, fishing and trapping. Agriculture shall not include intensive
poultry or swine production or extensive animal feedlot operations.
CONSERVATION PLAN — A set of decisions regarding the use of soil
and water resources. The plan is developed by the Natural Resources
Conservation Service and approved by the Morris County Soil
Conservation District.
FARM — An area of land made up of a single or multiple joining or
nonjoining parcels which is organized as a management unit actively
devoted to the production of agricultural or horticultural products
worth $2,500 or more annually in accordance with N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et
§ 217-40 WATER § 217-40
213:795
seq., including, but not limited to, cropland, pasture, idle or fallow land,
woodland, wetlands, farm ponds, farm roads and under farm buildings
and other enclosures related to agricultural pursuits, which occupies a
minimum of the lesser of five acres or five times the minimum lot size
of the zone in which the property is located, exclusive of the land upon
which the farmhouse is located and such additional land as may actually
be used in connection with the farmhouse as provided in the Farmland
Assessment Act of 1965, N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.3, 4-23.4, 4-23.5 and 4-23.11.
NUISANCE — Any private action which unreasonably interferes with
the comfortable enjoyment of another's property, which may be
enjoined or abated and for which the injured or affected property owner
may recover damages.
C. The right to engage in agriculture, as defined herein, shall be permitted
in any zone, and it shall be presumed that such uses, activities and
structures in connection therewith shall not constitute a public or
private nuisance, provided that such agricultural uses are conducted in
conformance with the acceptable agricultural management practices
defined herein.
D. All uses and structures customarily incidental to agriculture shall be
permitted accessory uses in all zones, including, but not limited to:
(1) The storage, processing and sale of farm products where produced;
(2) The use of irrigation pumps and equipment;
(3) The application of manure, chemical fertilizers, insecticides,
pesticides and herbicides;
(4) On-site disposal of organic agricultural waste;
(5) Installation of soil and water conservation practices in accordance
with a conservation plan approved by the Morris County Soil
Conservation District;
(6) Transportation of slow moving equipment over roads within the
municipality;
(7) Utilization of tractors and other necessary equipment;
(8) The employment of farm laborers;
(9) The creation of noise, dust, odors and fumes inherently associated
with such uses;
(10) The conducting of farm practices at any and all times when
necessary;
(11) Provisions for the wholesale and retail marketing of the
agricultural output of the farm which include the building of
temporary and permanent structures and parking areas for said
§ 217-40 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-40
213:796
§ 217-41. Home occupations. [Amended 4-17-1995 by Ord. No.
12-95]
It is the intent of this chapter to permit two classes of home occupations
hereinafter known as "conditional use home occupations" and "accessory
use home occupations." A home occupation shall be compatible with and
not impair the underlying residential use of the property and neighborhood
in which it is located. It shall not impair the residential character of the
dwelling or the neighborhood. Home occupations shall be permitted in all
residential zones in accordance with the following standards.
purpose which all must conform to municipal land development
standards; and
(12) The raising and keeping of farm animals, including pets, pastoral
farm animals (dairy and beef cattle, sheep and goats), swine, fowl,
horses, ponies and mules, provided that proper sanitation
standards, minimum acreage limits and boundary sizes between
fencing or enclosures and joining properties are established.
E. Appropriate housing for farm labor may be provided on any operating
farm under the following conditions:
(1) Such housing may be used only by those persons employed by the
owner or operator solely to work on the farm and during those
periods of time that they are actively doing so.
(2) The number of adults so housed, when added to the number of
housing units occupied by the owners or operators, shall not
exceed the number of housing units that would be permitted if the
farm were fully developed for residential purposes in accordance
with its zoning standards.
(3) Such housing complies with all applicable federal, state and local
requirements.
A. Conditional use home occupation. Home occupations shall be permitted
as a conditional use, after a public hearings in accordance with all the
following conditions:
(1) The applicant shall submit a site plan in accordance with Chapter
159, Site Plan Review and pay the application and review fees set
forth therein for minor site plans. [Amended 5-20-2013 by Ord.
No. 10-13]
(2) The home occupation shall be clearly subordinate to the residential
use.
(3) Such home occupation shall be conducted by the owner or tenant
residing on the premises.
(4) No more than three people, including employees, per lot at any one
time shall be engaged in the home occupation.
§ 217-40 WATER § 217-41
213:797
(5) No more than 25% of the total floor area of the primary residence,
excluding the garage area, is allowed to be devoted to the home
occupation. [Amended 7-19-1999 by Ord. No. 16-99]
(6) No outdoor storage or display of goods or materials is allowed.
(7) No home occupation is permitted in multifamily buildings.
(8) Any classes, lessons, tutoring or the like shall be limited to no more
than three students/clients at a time.
(9) No retail sales or rentals are permitted on the premises, except in
connection with services being rendered.
(10)Home occupation shall not create any unreasonable off-site noise,
odors, radiation, glare, radio interference, etc.
(11)Home occupations shall be allowed no more than two
nonpassenger vehicle deliveries per day, excluding United States
mail delivery.
(12) Only one sign is permitted with an area of no more than two square
feet per § 217-42 of this chapter.
(13) Adequate parking shall be provided and shall be screened from
adjacent residential uses pursuant to § 217-46A of this chapter and
Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, Article VII, Design Details.
(14) The hours of operation of the home occupation shall be limited
from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
(15) Any alteration to the dwelling for the home occupation shall
maintain the residential character and appearance of the building.
(16) Only one home occupation is permitted per lot at any one time.
(17) Approval from the Board of Health is required, especially with
regard to on-site waste disposal systems, if applicable.
B. Accessory use home occupations. Home occupations shall be permitted
as an accessory use if they conform to all the following criteria:
(1) The home occupation shall be clearly subordinate to the residential
use.
(2) Such home occupation shall be conducted by the owner or tenant
residing on the premises.
(3) No employees are permitted.
(4) No more than 25% of the total floor area of the primary residence,
excluding the garage area, is allowed to be devoted to the home
occupation. [Amended 7-19-1999 by Ord. No. 16-99]
(5) No outdoor storage or display of goods and materials is allowed.
§ 217-41 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-41
213:798
§ 217-42. Signs.
Signs for other than single-family residences shall be required to meet the
standards established under Chapter 159, Site Plan Review. For singlefamily
residences a sign indicating the name or address of the occupant
may be permitted, provided that the sign shall be no larger than two square
feet. A permitted home occupation may be included with the name of the
occupant. Only one sign per dwelling unit is permitted in addition to a
mailbox identification sign.
§ 217-43. Accessory uses in residential zones. [Amended
12-17-1984 by Ord. No. 35-84; 10-21-1985 by Ord. No. 34-85;
12-21-2009 by Ord. No. 30-09; 2-15-2010 by Ord. No. 02-10]
The following uses shall be permitted in all residence zones as accessory
uses to principal permitted uses and under the following requirements:
Accessory Use Lighting
Site Plan
Required
Front
Yard
Rear
Yard
Side
Yard
1. Swimming pool In pool
only
As required
by Zoning
Officer
X X
2. Tennis,
paddleball or
squash court(f)
n/a As required
by by Zoning
Officer
X
(6) Only occasional client/customer visits to the property shall be
permitted.
(7) No retail sales or rentals are permitted on the premises.
(8) Site plan approval is not required.
(9) Home occupation shall not cause any unreasonable off-site noise,
odors, radiation, glare, radio interference, etc.
(10)Home occupations shall be allowed no more than two
nonpassenger car deliveries per day, excluding United States mail
delivery.
(11) No signs shall be permitted.
(12)No additional parking, other than that required for the residential
use, shall be required.
(13) Any alteration to the dwelling for the home occupation shall
maintain the residential character and appearance of the building.
C. These regulations shall not apply to family day-care homes.
D. A zoning permit must be obtained for all home occupations. [Added
8-18-2008 by Ord. No. 13-08]
§ 217-41 WATER § 217-43
213:799
Accessory Use Lighting
Site Plan
Required
Front
Yard
Rear
Yard
Side
Yard
3. Patios Yes As required
by by Zoning
Officer
X
4. Storage sheds n/a As required
by Zoning
Officer
X X
5. Detached
garages(f)
n/a As required
by Zoning
Officer
X X
6. Radio tower(f) n/a As required
by Zoning
Officer
X X
7. Horse barns(c) n/a As required
by Zoning
Officer
X X X
8. Outdoor utility n/a As required
by Zoning
Officer
X X X
9. Fuel tanks(e) n/a As required
by Zoning
Officer
X X X
10. Dish antenna(g) n/a As required
by Zoning
Officer
X X X
11. Other
accessory
n/a As required
by Zoning
Officer
X X
NOTES:
(a) Normal and usual outdoor lighting, such as walkway, security or post
lights, are permitted for use in all zones.
(b) Specific minimum dimensions from lot lines are based on the zone,
where located and noted in the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building
Requirements161 as may be modified by these regulations.
(c) See § 217-47 below for specific regulations.
(d) See § 217-44 below for specific regulations.
(e) Only permitted for lots of more than one acre. See § 217-45B below for
restrictions.
(f) Permitted only on lots of 40,000 square feet or more in area.
161. Editor's Note: The schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 217-43 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-43
213:800
Accessory Use Lighting
Site Plan
Required
Front
Yard
Rear
Yard
Side
Yard
(g) Location shall be obscured from view of the general public to the extent
practicable.
§ 217-43.1. Dumpsters on residential property. [Added 8-16-2010 by
Ord. No. 17-10]
No dumpster having or exceeding a capacity of 30 cubic yards shall be
permitted on any residential property in the Township for a period
exceeding 30 days in any three-hundred-sixty-five-day period; however, if
an active construction project is ongoing for which a building permit has
issued and remains valid, the Zoning Officer may permit additional thirtyday
extensions.
§ 217-44. Fences.
Fences shall be allowed in all zones as accessory uses. They shall be located
and designed in accordance with the standards established in Chapter 159,
Site Plan Review. No permit shall be required for fences 50% or more open
for single-family uses. No permit shall be required for nonconforming fences
on land which qualifies as farms.
§ 217-45. Outdoor storage.
Uses with accessory outdoor storage areas, such as building materials yards
or research facilities with outdoor storage tanks, shall be governed by the
following requirements:
A. Abutting R-Zones. They shall not be within 200 feet of an existing
residential development, a residential street or any residential zone.
B. Flammable and explosive liquids. Quantities of 50 gallons or more of
flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall not be stored above
ground. Tanks or drums of fuel directly connecting with heating devices
or appliances located on the same premises as the tanks or drums of
fuel are excluded from this provision and shall be subject to
performance standards in Article IX. Storage of flammable and
explosive substances above ground on lands which qualify as farms is
permitted, provided that all applicable state and federal safety
standards are met.
C. Fencing and setbacks. All outdoor storage facilities shall be enclosed by
a fence or wall adequate to conceal such facilities and the contents
thereof from adjacent property. This provision shall not apply to the
outdoor storage of vehicles on the premises of new car, farm machinery,
construction equipment and recreation vehicle dealers.
§ 217-43 WATER § 217-46
213:801
§ 217-46. Parking and storage of motor vehicles and trailers.
[Amended 6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 09-14]
Parking and storage of motor vehicles and trailers. Parking and storage
of motor vehicles and trailers shall be permitted in accordance with the
following:
A. Residential areas.
(1) In all single-family residential zones, there shall be provided for
each dwelling unit a minimum of two parking spaces. Said spaces
shall be reasonably level, well-drained and covered with suitable
stone/gravel or otherwise paved.
(2) No commercial vehicle having a cargo capacity of more than 3/4
ton or a gross vehicle weight classification of more than 6,000
pounds or a commercial trailer shall be parked or stored at any
time in a residential zone except temporarily during the normal
course of conducting the activity for which such a vehicle is
primarily used.
(3) No motor vehicle or trailer without a current registration shall be
permitted on any lot for a period in excess of 10 days unless parked
or stored in a wholly enclosed garage.
(4) No motor vehicle or trailer shall be permitted to be stored or
repaired (including but not limited to removal of wheels) outside of
a garage so as to cause the same, at any time, to be in any
disassembled or disabled condition. This shall not be construed as
prohibiting an owner from working on one personal registered
vehicle for a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days.
(5) Any commercial vehicle or trailer used in connection with a
business or any vehicle or trailer containing or having displayed
upon it any advertising or advertisement shall not be parked or
stored in a parking area unless said area is in a side or rear yard
not fronting on a street and shall, to the maximum extent possible,
be obscured from view of the general public.
(6) Vehicles and trailers customarily incidental to farms and/or
agricultural uses shall be exempt from these provisions, provided
that such vehicles are located on a farm, as described and defined
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.3 et seq.
B. Commercial and industrial zones. Parking and storage of commercial
vehicles in commercial and industrial zones shall be permitted,
provided that:
(1) Said vehicles are not disabled or nonregistered, unless the same
are stored or parked in a wholly enclosed garage or are awaiting
repair at a public garage or are vehicles being stored or displayed
at a licensed motor vehicle dealership for the purpose of being sold.
§ 217-46 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-46
213:802
§ 217-47. Keeping of equestrian animals.
§ 217-48. Coin-operated amusement devices.
§ 217-49. Trailers, mobile homes and temporary portable storage
units. [Amended 8-18-1986 by Ord. No. 27-86; 8-16-2010 by Ord.
No. 17-10]
(2) The area in which any such vehicle is to be parked or stored shall
not preempt any off-street parking space required to be provided
by provision of any other land use ordinance of the Township.
(3) The parking or storing of such vehicle will not interfere with any
site distance requirement.
(4) No vehicle containing or having displayed upon it any advertising
matter intended to promote the interest of any business shall be
parked or stored in a parking area serving said business unless it is
parked in a side or rear yard of the lot not fronting on a street or in
a wholly enclosed garage.
A. General restriction. Equestrian animals may be kept only as pets or for
the use of the owner or tenant of the property except on farms, as
defined herein.
B. Minimum area. Two acres for first two animals, one additional acre for
each additional animal.
A. As used in this section, "coin-operated amusement device or devices"
means any amusement machine or device operated by means of the
insertion a coin, token or similar object for the purpose of amusement
or skill and for the playing of which a fee is charged. Specifically
included within this definition are pinball machines and electronic
games.
B. Installation and use of coin-operated amusement devices are permitted
only as an accessory to a permitted principal use and only within the
principal structure housing such principal use in the C-1 Business
Zones, and then only where the floor area occupied by and devoted to
the amusement devices does not exceed 15% of the floor area of the
permitted principal use which is open to the public. Rest rooms shall
not be included in computing this area. In no event, however, shall the
floor area devoted to the coin-operated amusement devices exceed a
total of 300 square feet.
C. The floor area devoted to the amusement devices shall include the area
occupied by the device and an area sufficient to accommodate players
and bystanders, but in no event shall this area be less than 25 feet per
device.
A. Trailers and mobile homes are not permitted in the Township.
§ 217-46 WATER § 217-49
213:803
§ 217-50. Signs. [Added 9-19-1983 by Ord. No. 21-83]
Signs shall conform to the regulations and standards set forth in Chapter
159, Site Plan Review, § 159-42, Signs.
§ 217-51. Utilities. [Added 11-18-1985 by Ord. No. 35-85]
§ 217-52. GC/R Golf Course/Residential Zone. [Added 2-14-1996 by
Ord. No. 1-96162]
B. Notwithstanding the above, trailers may be used as construction and
security headquarters when used on a site in conjunction with the
development of a site plan or a major subdivision. Such use may
continue until such time as a certificate of occupancy is obtained for the
final lot in a subdivision or for the site plan. Use of trailers as real estate
offices is strictly prohibited.
C. Notwithstanding the above, a permit may be obtained from the Zoning
Officer for a fee of $25 to maintain a temporary portable storage unit on
any residential property in the Township for a period of time not to
exceed 60 days, provided that if an active construction project is
ongoing for which a building permit has issued, the Zoning Officer may
permit extensions of 30 days each.
A. In all newly constructed homes, all utility distribution lines or mains
and all services shall be installed underground. Lots which abut
existing streets where overhead electric or telephone distribution
supply lines have heretofore been installed may be supplied with
electric and telephone service from those overhead lines, but the
service connections from the utilities overhead lines shall be installed
underground.
B. In any particular situation where the applicant can clearly demonstrate
that because of unusual topographic conditions or other unusual
conditions having to do with land, the installation of such utilities
underground is impractical or otherwise not feasible due to such
conditions, then the Zoning Board of Adjustment, in its discretion, may
waive the requirement for underground installation.
A. Purpose. This zone was created pursuant to a mediation agreement in
connection with the Township's petition for substantive certification
from the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing, to permit the
establishment of a restaurant/catering facility and either a full- or
reduced-size golf course or 100 single-family dwelling units. The zone is
located in an area constrained by wetlands, flood hazard areas,
floodplains and steep slopes. The permitted uses allow the land to be
162. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection 17-7.13, PUD-RC Planned
Unit Development - Reduced-Cost Housing, added 7-21-1986 by Ord. No. 25-86, as
amended.
§ 217-49 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-52
213:804
§ 217-53. RCH Reduced-Cost Housing. [Added 12-15-1986 by Ord.
No. 43-86]
developed in a manner which would preserve these environmentally
constrained lands.
B. Restaurant development regulations.
(1) Any such use shall be pursuant to the regulations for the C-2 Zone
in the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building requirements.163
C. Golf course development regulations.
(1) Golf course development will be pursuant to the requirements of
§ 217-74 of this chapter.
D. Residential development regulations.
(1) Common open space requirements. That portion of the tract which
is not developable due to environmental constraints shall be
dedicated as permanent open space pursuant to the requirements
of § 217-62D and E.
(2) Utilities required. The tract shall be served by public water and
sewers.
(3) Circulation. The development shall be served by a safe and efficient
circulation system per the requirements of Chapter 175,
Subdivision of Land, §§ 175-42 and 175-44, provided that the
proposed roads shall be classified as minor streets. The maximum
cul-de-sac length in this zone shall be 1,200 feet. Individual oneway
travel lanes of at least 20 feet in width, separated by at least 25
feet, shall be considered separate means of ingress and egress for
the purposes of calculating cul-de-sac length in this zone.
A. Principal permitted uses: garden-type or townhouse-style apartments.
B. Criteria for principal permitted uses. [Amended 8-16-1993 by Ord.
No. 25-93]
(1) Minimum tract size: 10 acres.
(2) Maximum tract size: 29 acres, including acreage to be dedicated to
the Township for public road right-of-way.
(3) Maximum number of tracts: one.
(4) Maximum development and housing need compliance. Consistent
with the adopted Washington Township Housing Plan Element and
Fair Share Plan and substantive certification from the New Jersey
Council on Affordable Housing, the maximum number of housing
163. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements is located at the end
of this chapter.
§ 217-52 WATER § 217-53
213:805
units developable in the RCH zone district is 232 of which at least
41 shall be for low- and moderate-income households.
(5) Utilities required.
(a) Water. A public water system shall be provided with service to
each unit.
(b) Sanitary sewer. A public sanitary sewer system shall be
provided with service to each unit.
(c) Electric.
(d) Telephone and other appropriate utilities shall be made
available.
(e) Central laundry facilities shall be available to units without
individual systems.
C. Buffers. The required yard setback distance around the perimeter of
the tract shall include a landscaped buffer area at least 25 feet in width.
D. Residential design standards.
(1) The placement of individual structures and the design of
neighborhoods and housing types shall be in a manner that uses
existing topographic and vegetative characteristics or man-made
contours and planting to minimize the visual impact of a large
development by separating tracts, screening major areas of
improvements and softening the visual impact of buildings and
paved areas.
(2) Individual segments of the RCH District may have design densities
greater than the maximum density established for the entire tract,
provided that sufficient open spaces are dedicated so that the
average density for the entire project is not exceeded and
recreation areas are not reduced. The maximum design densities as
outlined below shall be calculated for the area designated for each
housing type, including the area for driveways, parking, building
locations and yards, but excluding open space dedications.
(3) Garden-apartment- and townhouse-style housing developments
shall have site plan approval. The configuration of structures may
be any alignment that meets the yard requirements and the
following maximum overall or component building lengths: 160 feet
on one plane; 240 feet at any angle. The approving authority may
approve plans with lengths deviating from these standards if
adequate provisions are made for fire vehicles' access between
structures, convenient vehicular access within the project,
structural breaks and topographic and vegetative conditions to
prevent the appearance of excessive structural lengths. The
Planning Board shall be required to solicit police, Fire Department
and rescue squad comments on any proposed deviations.
§ 217-53 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-53
213:806
(4) Garden-apartment-style housing.
(a) Maximum lot coverage (building and paving): 50%.
(b) Maximum floor area ratio: not applicable.
(c) Minimum tract area: 10 acres.
(d) Minimum tract width: 400 feet.
(e) Minimum tract depth: 400 feet.
(f) Minimum tract front yard: two times the building height.
(g) Minimum tract side yard: same as the building height.
(h) Minimum tract rear yard: same as the building height.
(i) Minimum distance between buildings: 1 1/2 times the building
height or 35 feet, whichever is the lesser.
(j) Building height: No structure shall exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35
feet.
(5) Townhouse-style housing.
Dimensional
Requirement
Portion of Total
Tract Used for
Townhouses Per Townhouse Lot
Maximum coverage* 40% 60%
Minimum area 4 acres 2,000 square feet
Minimum width 300 feet 20 feet
Minimum depth 300 feet 50 feet
Minimum perimeter
setback
2 times building
height
Not applicable
Minimum front yard Not applicable 30 feet
Minimum side yard Not applicable 0 feet for interior
units; same as
building height for
end units
Minimum rear yard Not applicable Same as building
height
Maximum design
density
8 units per acre Not applicable
Minimum distance
between buildings
Not applicable Building height
Building height No structure shall
exceed 2 1/2 stories
or 35 feet**
§ 217-53 WATER § 217-53
213:807
Dimensional
Requirement
Portion of Total
Tract Used for
Townhouses Per Townhouse Lot
NOTES:
* Building and paving.
** Measured from mean ground level on the side of the structure
with greatest exposure.
(6) Circulation and off-street parking. The minimum number of parking
spaces shall be determined as follows:
(a) There shall be a minimum of 1 1/2 parking spaces provided for
each one-bedroom dwelling unit and two parking spaces for
each two-bedroom unit and 2 1/2 parking spaces for each
three-bedroom unit. Three-bedroom lower-income units will
have two spaces for each such unit.
(b) Unassigned spaces: full value.
(c) Garages and single-width driveways shall be counted as 3/4 of
a space.
(d) For multifamily projects designed and restricted to lowerincome
occupants aged 62 and over, the number of parking
spaces may be reduced to 50% of the above.
[1] Assigned parking other than for garages and/or driveways
is not permitted.
[2] Separate unpaved parking areas may be designed within
the development to accommodate boats, campers and
other recreational vehicles.
[3] Within a development project, bus and/or commuter van
stops shall be considered in the overall circulation and
parking design. Such features, if determined necessary
and/or advisable by the approving agency, shall be located
within the project.
[4] All applications shall comply with the minimum standards
set forth in Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, § 159-39A(1)(e),
Parking Area Design Standards, and the requirements set
forth in Subsection D(7) below.
(7) Parking design requirements.
(a) Parking stalls shall measure not less than nine feet in width
and 18 feet in length.
(b) The width of all aisles providing direct access to individual
parking stalls shall be in accordance with the following
§ 217-53 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-53
213:808
schedule, which modifies the schedule contained in Chapter
159, Site Plan Review, § 159-39A(1)(e)[2].
Parking Angle
(degrees)
Aisle Width
(feet)
0 12
30 12
45 13
60 18
90 24
(c) Only one-way traffic shall be permitted in aisles serving
parking spaces placed at an angle other than 90º.
(8) Common open space requirements.
(a) A minimum of 15% of the land area of any development, which
may include environmentally restricted land, shall be
designated for conservation, open space, recreation and/or
other common open space.
(b) All property owners and tenants shall have the right to use the
common open space.
(c) All common open space deeded to an open-space organization,
trust or private organization shall be owned and maintained as
provided for in § 217-62E and the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(d) Common open space may include tract setback areas for
computation purposes. Such space shall be readily accessible
to all residents of the development, and no area designated as
open space shall be less than 35 feet in width.
(e) Formal recreation activities, such as swimming pools, court
games, playgrounds and/or ballfields, may be installed on a
maximum of 10% of the gross tract area. The design of any
recreation facility plan shall be reviewed by the Washington
Township Recreation Committee.
(f) Lands to be dedicated shall be located so as to meet the needs
of open spaces, parks, playgrounds, rights-of-way protecting
major streams or open drainageways, buffer areas and other
environmental criteria, for agricultural purposes or to provide
additional neighborhood area for recreational purposes or
school purposes. The Planning Board shall make certain that
not only Township requirements shall be satisfied but that
dedicated areas shall be so located as to meet possible future
needs of the neighborhood or region.
§ 217-53 WATER § 217-53
213:809
(g) The Planning Board shall approve the location and size of the
various use need areas and their distribution. It shall not
generally approve areas of less than one acre, except when
such a site is considered adequate for its specific use, and it
shall make certain that a reasonable portion of required
dedicated area shall be located so as to specifically serve the
needs of the development where located.
(9) Drainage requirements.
(a) Storm sewers, open channels, bridges and culverts shall be
designed for minimum flow capacities as follows:
Design Capacity
Frequency of Storms
(years)
Collection systems 25
Culverts 25
Emergency spillway system from
detention system
100
Projects requiring a Department of
Environmental Protection stream
encroachment permit
100
(b) All materials used in the construction of drainage systems shall
be in accordance with the specifications of the Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction of the New
Jersey Department of Transportation, current edition, and any
supplements and modifications thereof, unless otherwise
specified by the approving agency.
(c) Surface water runoff shall be regulated by the provisions of
Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land, § 175-49.
(d) Where required by the Township, and as indicated on an
approved development plan, a drainage right-of-way easement
shall be provided to the Township where a tract or lot is
traversed by a drainage system, channel or stream. The
drainage right-of-way easement shall conform substantially to
the lines of such watercourse and in any event shall meet any
minimum widths and locations as shown on any Official Map
and/or Master Plan or as recommended by the Township
Engineer.
(10) Lighting.
(a) Lighting shall be provided for all parking areas and anywhere
else deemed necessary for safety reasons.
(b) Any outdoor lighting, such as illumination of buildings,
sidewalks, driveways with no adjacent parking, signs and
§ 217-53 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-53
213:810
ornamental lighting, shall be shown on the lighting plan in
sufficient detail to allow determination of the effects upon
adjacent properties, roads and traffic safety from glare,
reflection and overhead sky glow in order to recommend steps
needed to minimize these impacts.
(c) Specific lighting requirements. The maximum intensity of
lighting permitted on roadways shall be in accordance with the
average maintained horizontal illumination for residential
areas as follows:
[1] Street intersections: 1 1/2 footcandles.
[2] Parking areas: one footcandle.
(11) Streets.
(a) All developments shall be served by paved streets in
accordance with the approved subdivision and/or site plan, and
all such streets shall have adequate drainage.
(b) Local streets shall be planned so as to encourage traffic safety
and pedestrian safety.
(c) The minimum public street right-of-way and cartway and the
minimum private street cartway shall be in accordance with
the following schedule:
Type of Street
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Cartway
(feet)
Collector street 60 40
Local street with no on-street
parking
40 24
Local street with parallel onstreet
parking, 1 side only
40 30
(d) Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is
possible and shall in no case be less than 80º. Approaches to all
intersections shall follow a straight line for at least 100 feet or
a curve with a radius of not less than 600 feet. No more than
two streets shall meet or intersect at any point, and the center
lines of both intersecting streets shall pass through a common
point.
(e) A tangent of at least 100 feet shall be provided between
reverse curves on collector streets.
(f) No cul-de-sac shall be more than 1,200 feet in length nor
provide access to more than 50 dwelling units. A turnaround
shall be provided at the end of the cul-de-sac with a minimum
§ 217-53 WATER § 217-53
213:811
§ 217-54. Child-care center. [Added 11-18-1991 by Ord. No. 31-91]
A child-care center shall be permitted in all nonresidential zones and shall
be permitted as an accessory use to houses of worship and all public
or private schools in all zone districts in accordance with the following
standards and criteria:
paved turning radius of 50 feet and a minimum right-of-way
radius of 60 feet.
(g) The pavement standard for all roads shall be as follows:
[1] A firm well-compacted subgrade.
[2] A five-inch-thick bituminous stabilized base course
(NJDOT Mix No. 1-2).
[3] A one-and-one-half-inch-thick bituminous concrete surface
course (NJDOT Mix No. 1-5).
[4] All materials shall meet the requirements and shall be
installed in accordance with Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction of the New Jersey
Department of Transportation, current edition, and any
supplements and modifications thereof, unless otherwise
specified by the reviewing agency.
[5] Notwithstanding the provisions in § 217-53D(11)(g)[1]
through [3] herein, where soil conditions or heavy traffic
dictate, the usual Township pavement requirements shall
apply.
(h) Street grades. Grades for collector streets shall not exceed 8%,
and grades for local streets shall not exceed 10%. No street
shall have a grade less than 1%.
(i) Curbs shall only be required where necessary due to drainage,
environmental and/or safety factors, as determined by the
approving agency.
(12) Applicability of general development regulations. Unless otherwise
specified hereinabove and in 175-8A, all other provisions and
requirements of Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land, and Chapter
159, Site Plan Review, shall apply to all developments within the
RCH Zone.
A. Lot area. Property used for a child-care center shall conform to the
minimum area requirements of the zone district within which it is
located. The minimum lot size shall in no case be less than 40,000
square feet.
B. The center shall conform to all bulk and yard requirements of the zone
district within which it is located.
§ 217-53 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-54
213:812
§ 217-55. RCH-SC Reduced-Cost Housing - Senior Citizen Zone.
[Added 2-14-1996 by Ord. No. 2-96]
C. At least one on-site parking space shall be provided for each on-duty
staff person and one visitor space per each 10 children for which the
center is located.
D. No designated area for active play or play structures shall be located in
a front yard or within 15 feet of a side or rear lot line.
E. An on-site vehicle turnaround, such as a circular driveway, and a
passenger loading and unloading area shall be provided.
F. A designated outdoor area for active play shall be provided. It shall be
enclosed by a cyclone-type fence, minimum of four feet in height.
G. Signs shall conform to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, § 159-42, and
shall be limited to one freestanding sign per street frontage, maximum
area of five square feet, maximum height of six feet, minimum setback
of 10 feet from the nearest property line or lines or street line.
H. The property shall be attractively buffered and landscaped consistent
with Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, § 159-31, and as required by the
Planning Board.
I. Lighting shall be provided consistent with Chapter 159, Site Plan
Review, § 159-30, and as required by the Planning Board.
J. There shall be safe vehicular ingress and egress, site distance and
access to the child-care center.
K. No child-care center shall be located in close proximity to any place or
location wherein significant quantities of toxic, hazardous or dangerous
materials are stored, assembled or produced. For the purposes of this
chapter only, significant quantities shall not include those quantities
which are reasonably incidental to residential uses.164
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide land use, design and
development standards for the RCH-SC Zone, to enable timely
development of this zone in a manner that promotes a rural aesthetic,
provides infrastructure that protects the public welfare and the
environment and creates a substantial amount of housing affordable to
low- and moderate-income households. In accordance with COAH
substantive rules, these standards eliminate unnecessary costgenerating
features.
B. Principal permitted uses: senior citizen apartments and single-family
detached houses and public uses as defined in § 217-24A of this chapter.
164. Editor's Note: Former Subsection 17-7.16, Family Day-Care Home, added 11-18-1991 by
Ord. No. 31-91, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 7-20-1992 by Ord.
No. 9-92. Former Subsection 17-7.16, Agricultural/Open Space Overlay, added 6-21-1993
by Ord. No. 17-93; amended 4-17-1995 by Ord. No. 12-95, 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97; was
repealed 5-18-1998 by Ord. No. 16-98.
§ 217-54 WATER § 217-55
213:813
C. Criteria for principal permitted uses.
(1) Minimum tract size: 10 acres.
(2) Maximum tract size: 60 acres, including acreage to be dedicated to
the Township for public road right-of-way and other municipal
purposes.
(3) Maximum number of tracts: one.
(4) Maximum development. The maximum number of dwelling units
developable in the RCH-SC Zone District is 94 units, of which at
least 38 units, i.e., 40% of the total units, shall be for low- and
moderate-income senior citizen households, as defined by the
Council on Affordable Housing.
(5) Utilities required. The utilities requirements of the RCH zone, at
§ 217-53B(6), shall apply to all developments in the RCH-SC Zone.
(6) Access. Principal access shall be to and from Hearthstone Road and
to and from U.S. Route 46 (eastbound lane).
D. Buffers. The required yard setback distance around the perimeter of
the tract shall include a landscaped or naturally vegetated buffer area
at least 25 feet in width.
E. Residential design standards.
(1) Area, yard and building requirements: The area, yard and building
requirements of the following schedule shall apply to residential
developments in the RCH-SC Zone:
Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements for the
RCH-SC Zone
Senior Citizen
Apartments
(portion of
tract)
Single-Family
Detached Units
(per lot)
Minimum lot size (square
feet)
130,000 10,000
Lot frontage (feet) 200 75
Lot width (feet)
Interior lots 200 75
Corner lots Not applicable 100
Lot depth (feet) 300 90
Front yard (feet)
Principal buildings height 2 times the
building
30
§ 217-55 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-55
213:814
Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements for the
RCH-SC Zone
Senior Citizen
Apartments
(portion of
tract)
Single-Family
Detached Units
(per lot)
Side yard (feet)
Principal buildings height Same as the
building
10
Rear yard (feet)
Principal buildings height Same as the
building
30
Side yard (feet)
Accessory buildings 20 5
Rear yard (feet)
Accessory buildings 20 5**
Combined width of both side
yards (feet)
Principal buildings height 2 times the
building
20
Maximum percentage of lot
coverage (buildings and
pavement)
50% 30%
Minimum distance between
buildings height
Same as the
building
Not applicable
Maximum building height
Stories 2 1/2* 2 1/2
Feet 35 35
NOTES:
*Elevator required if more than one story.
**Increases to 25 feet where rear yard is in twenty-five-foot buffer
in compliance with § 217-55D of this chapter.
(2) Site plan required. The senior citizen apartments and single-family
detached housing developments shall have subdivision approval.
The set apartments shall have site plan approval.
(3) Circulation and off-street parking. The requirements of the RCH
Zone, at § 217-53D(6), shall apply to all developments in the RCHSC
Zone. Two parking spaces shall be provided for each singlefamily
detached unit.
§ 217-55 WATER § 217-55
213:815
(4) Parking design requirements. The requirements of the RCH Zone,
at § 217-53D(7), shall apply to all developments in the RCH-SC
Zone.
(5) Common open space requirements. The requirements of the RCH
Zone, at § 217-53D(8), shall apply to all developments in the RCHSC
Zone.
(6) Drainage requirements. The requirements of the RCH Zone, at
§ 217-53D(9), shall apply to all developments in the RCH-SC Zone.
(7) Lighting. The requirements of the RCH Zone, at § 217-53D(10),
shall apply to all developments in the RCH-SC Zone.
(8) Public streets.
(a) Right-of-way widths. The right of way of public streets shall be
50 feet wide throughout the development.
(b) Pavement widths. Pavement widths shall be 26 feet with
parallel parking permitted on one side within the pavement.
(c) Edge of pavement and shoulder. The edge of pavement shall be
provided with structural stability by extending the base course
of paving one foot beyond the surface course. The shoulder
shall begin at the edge of the surface course, have sufficient
topsoil for growth of grass, be graded at a two-percent-slope
away from the street and extend for a distance of 10 feet, if
used for a formally constructed sidewalk, or four feet
otherwise. Where slopes are steep, special measures shall be
taken to provide erosion protection, manage stormwater and
control the velocity of stormwater, such as riprap, rock or
grouted swales, or curbing or other measures as necessary.
(d) Grades. Street grades shall be at a minimum of 1% and a
maximum of 10%. Street grades shall not exceed 2% for a
distance of 60 feet from the center point of an intersection.
(e) Sight distance and design speed. Through streets shall be
designed for a sight distance of 300 feet. Vertical curves shall
be established based on a speed limit of 25 miles per hour
(mph).
(f) Intersections. Street intersections are preferred at right angles
but may be up to 80º or formed by center-line radii of up to 300
feet for a distance of 60 feet from the center point of an
intersection. Edge of pavement shall be defined by a radius of
25 feet. Traffic signage shall be installed as approved by the
Planning Board in accordance with police recommendations.
(g) Horizontal curves. On all streets, the center-line radius shall be
a minimum of 300 feet. Reverse curves shall be connected by a
tangent of not less than 100 feet.
§ 217-55 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-55
213:816
§ 217-55.1. RCH-SC Reduced-Cost Housing - Senior Citizen Zone.
[Added 2-14-1996 by Ord. No. 2-96; 8-20-2007 by Ord. No. 20-07;
2-10-2016 by Ord. No. 03-16]
(h) Sidewalks. Pedestrian access shall be provided to residents by
either a sidewalk on one side of the street, designated use of
shoulders, or walkways outside of the right-of-way, as approved
by the Planning Board. The construction materials for the
pedestrian accessways shall be as approved by the Planning
Board.
(i) Culs-de-sac. If required to accommodate the maximum
allowable development of the zone within the constraints of the
design and development standards of this section, culs-de-sac
shall be designed in accordance with the other provisions of
this section, with the turnaround radius in accordance with the
street design standards of Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land,
§ 175-44. The maximum length of a dead-end street in the
RCH-SC Zone shall be 1,200 feet.
(j) Pavement. The subgrade shall be well-draining and compacted.
The base course shall be five-inch thick stabilized base (NJDOT
Mix No. 1-2). The surface course shall be one-and-one-half-inch
thick bituminous concrete (NJDOT Mix No. I-5).
(9) Private roads for multifamily development. The street design
standards of the RCH Zone, at § 217-53D(11), shall apply to all
multifamily in the RCH-SC Zone.
(10) Stormwater drainage. Groundwater recharge and sheet flow runoff
shall be maximized. Collection of stormwater runoff shall be in
surface swales wherever possible. Special erosion control
measures within the swales shall be provided when required by
grades or the volume of flow.
(11) Conservation, erosion and sediment control. The standards of
Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land, § 175-48, shall apply in the RCHSC
Zone.
(12) Surface water management. The standards of Chapter 175,
Subdivision of Land, § 175-49, shall apply in the RCH-SC Zone.
F. Compliance with low- and moderate-income housing requirements. All
senior citizen housing developments in the RCH-SC Zone shall comply
with the low- and moderate-income housing requirements of Article
VIII.
A. The following are the minimum lot sizes for the principal uses of the
zone:
§ 217-55 WATER § 217-55.1
213:817
(1) Age-restricted housing development: 25 acres under the ownership
or control of a single entity and the subject of a development
application.
(2) Senior health care uses: 150,000 square feet.
(3) Adult day-care facility/intergenerational child-care facility: 80,000
square feet.
(4) Multifamily dwelling units restricted to low- and moderate-income
senior citizen persons and households: 20,000 square feet per
building.
B. The following are the maximum lot areas which can be devoted to
certain principal uses in the zone:
(1) Senior healthcare uses and facilities, healthcare support facilities
and skilled rehabilitation nursing facilities such as, but not limited
to, assisted living residences, long-term care and subacute care
skilled nursing facilities, inpatient and outpatient rehabilitation
facilities, health and wellness centers, and medical offices: 10
acres.
(2) Adult day-care/intergenerational child-care facility: five acres.
C. The following are the overlay zone design standards:
(1) There shall be no access to Newburgh Road. External and internal
vehicular and pedestrian circulation shall provide safe and efficient
traffic and pedestrian movement acceptable to the Planning Board.
(2) The development shall include a comprehensive internal
pedestrian and bicycle circulation plan, which includes access to
adjacent commercial areas on both sides of Route 24 and existing
Heath Village. Crosswalk pedestrian access shall be provided
across Schooley's Mountain Road. A pedestrian trail and public
access easement shall be provided along the northern edge of the
tract from Schooley's Mountain Road to the Musconetcong River.
The easement area shall be a maximum of 15 feet wide. The tread
width of the trail shall be a maximum of five feet and improved only
as necessary for safe pedestrian access and environmental
conditions. No off-street parking spaces shall be required for the
public. Public access limited to pedestrians shall be preserved by
an easement in a form acceptable to the Township Attorney.
(3) All natural and regulated areas not proposed for development,
recreational or agricultural use shall be preserved by a
conservation easement in a manner acceptable to the Planning
Board and in a form acceptable to the Township Attorney.
(4) A phasing plan shall be submitted which includes the proposed
schedule of development, including the installation of
§ 217-55.1 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-55.1
213:818
improvements. Such plan shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Planning Board.
(5) Each age-restricted housing or assisted living development shall
engage in a contract with a private ambulance/medical transport
service for their residents. In addition, private transportation
service shall be provided by the development for residents' access
to shopping, medical appointments and to meet residents' everyday
transportation needs.
(6) At least 35% of the tract shall be set aside as open space and shall
be subject to an open space deed restriction. Open space areas may
include agricultural uses as defined herein, and shall include the
pedestrian access easement in accordance with § 217-55.1C(2)
above.
(a) Approximately six to seven acres, more or less, of the southeast
corner of Block 19, Lot 7, shall be included within the required
open space set aside, the configuration of which shall be
determined by the Planning Board at the time of site plan
approval. This open space set aside shall maintain the existing
open field condition of the Schooley's Mountain Road and
Newburgh Road corner and to maximize retention of the
distant views across the Musconetcong River Valley as viewed
from the two roads across the open field. Agricultural use and
appurtenant structures, the existing HMUA well pump house,
fencing and landscaping are permitted within this open space
area. One-family and two-family attached one- and one-andone-
half-story residential dwelling units may be located
adjacent to this open space area, provided that all units,
required yards, roads and buffering are located within 360 feet
from the common property tract boundary with Block 19, Lot
7.01. Limited grading immediately adjacent to permitted
residential development may be approved by the Board within
the required open space area.
(b) Open space management plan. An open space management
plan shall be submitted for Board review and approval, which
shall identify all proposed open space and management areas,
which may include meadow, forest, agriculture, nature
interpretation areas, improved or unimproved walking and
hiking paths and other passive recreation uses. Agriculturerelated
structures, such as but not limited to pastures, corrals,
riding rings, barns, run-ins or other agricultural use
structures, may be included in the open space management
plan, subject to the Board's environmental consultant's
comments and Planning Board approval.
(c) Open space deed restriction. An open space deed restriction
shall be granted to the Township for the required 35% tract
area open space and the open space management plan, which
§ 217-55.1 WATER § 217-55.1
213:819
shall identify approved open space uses and improvements as
permitted in Subsection C(6)(b) above. Nothing herein shall
preclude future changes to the open space management plan,
subject to the provisions of Subsection C(6)(b) above, approval
by the Planning Board and acceptance by the Township
Committee.
(7) All development in the overlay zone shall be served by municipal
sewers and municipal water.
(8) All roads and parking facilities in the development shall be
privately owned and maintained. At the time site plan application is
submitted, the developer shall demonstrate that adequate
provisions for road maintenance and removal of snow shall be
established and maintained at all times.
D. Age-restricted dwelling units area, yard and building requirements.
(1) Minimum tract area. The minimum tract area for the development
of age-restricted dwelling units in this zone shall be 25 acres, under
the ownership or control of a single entity and the subject of a
development application, provided that an area of less than 25
acres may be added to an existing age-restricted housing
development if contiguous thereto and in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(2) Density. The maximum residential density permitted shall be not
more than six dwelling units per acre, which excludes the acreage
devoted to senior healthcare uses and facilities, healthcare support
facilities and skilled rehabilitation nursing facilities and day-care.
(3) Tract frontage and width. The minimum tract frontage and width
shall be 200 feet.
(4) Setback from rights-of-way. The minimum building setback from
existing public rights-of-way shall be 150 feet.
(5) Setback from property boundaries. The minimum building setbacks
shall be:
(a) From Schooley's Mountain Road and Newburgh Road rights-ofway:
150 feet.
(b) From preserved farmland: 100 feet.
(c) From all other tract boundaries: 75 feet.
(6) Setback from internal roadways.
(a) The minimum building setback from internal roadways shall be
25 feet from the right-of-way.
(b) Where there is no right-of-way, the minimum building setback
shall be 25 feet from the edge of pavement.
§ 217-55.1 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-55.1
213:820
(c) There shall be a four-foot setback of the sidewalk from any
curb, and the sidewalk shall be a minimum of four feet wide.
(7) Setback from sidewalk.
(a) There shall be a minimum twenty-four-foot building (garage)
setback from the edge of the sidewalk.
(8) Dwelling configuration.
(a) Market-rate dwellings shall be provided as detached or
attached units.
(b) Low- and moderate-income housing may be provided in
multifamily buildings.
(c) Attached units may not be provided in groups of more than four
dwelling units per building, except that low/moderate/special
needs attached units may be provided in buildings of no more
than 20 units, subject to the density limitations set forth in
Subsection D(2) above.
(9) Distance between residential buildings. The minimum distance
between residential buildings shall be as follows:
(a) Front to front: 75 feet.
(b) Rear to rear: 50 feet.
(c) Rear to side: 35 feet.
(d) Side to side: 20 feet.
(10) Building coverage. The maximum building coverage shall be not
more than 20% of the tract area.
(11) Improved lot coverage. The maximum improved lot coverage shall
be not more than 30% of the tract area.
(12) Building height. The maximum building height shall be no greater
than 35 feet.
(13) Buffer. There shall be a landscaped or naturally vegetated buffer
area of at least 50 feet in width located around the perimeter of the
tract and adjacent to preserved farmland. Where the tract abuts
Block 19, Lot 7.01, the buffer width shall be 25 feet. The Planning
Board may modify buffer planting requirements where, in the
opinion of the Planning Board, the objective of preserving open
views and scenic vistas may be better achieved.
(14) Parking. The number of parking spaces for the age-restricted
dwelling units shall be pursuant to the requirements of the New
Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards and shall be not
less than 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit. Parking spaces within
§ 217-55.1 WATER § 217-55.1
213:821
garages apply to this requirement and driveway parking spaces
shall be at least 22 feet long, exclusive of any sidewalk area.
Parking shall be provided in proximity to the community building
and recreational facilities at a ratio of four parking spaces per
1,000 square feet of gross floor area. Where possible, shared
parking with other uses in the zone shall be employed in order to
minimize the number of spaces provided. Should the developer be
able to demonstrate that fewer parking spaces are needed, the area
proposed for the construction of the excess spaces may be reserved
for their future construction.
(15) Design standards. Where not specifically modified herein, all other
design standards shall be pursuant to the New Jersey Residential
Site Improvement Standards.
(16) Community center and recreation amenity. The age-restricted
housing development shall include a centrally located community
building and appropriate recreational amenities to serve the
residents of the development, which may include a performing arts
center. The community building shall be a minimum of 4,000
square feet.
(17) Affordable housing.
(a) Each age-restricted housing development shall include an
affordable housing set-aside of 20% of the units built within the
development.
(b) Affordable housing provided on site within the development
may be provided as rental units in two-story multifamily
buildings.
(c) Up to 100% of the required affordable housing units may be
provided off site.
(d) Affordable units may be provided off site on Block 20, Lot 72,
which shall conform to the use, bulk and density zoning
requirements for the zone in which the affordable units may be
located.
(e) Beds in a state-licensed assisted living residence reserved for
Medicaid-eligible persons, in accordance with P.L. 2001, c. 234
(N.J.S.A. 26:2H-12.16 through 21), may be provided off site to
satisfy a portion of the affordable housing set-aside
requirement.
(f) Expiring affordability controls on existing affordable housing
units off site in the Township may be extended to satisfy the
affordable housing set-aside requirement, in accordance with
applicable rules adopted by the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing and codified at N.J.A.C. 5:97-6.14, as
§ 217-55.1 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-55.1
213:822
modified by the Supreme Court, subject to approval as to form
by the Township Attorney.
(g) If affordable units are provided off site to satisfy the set-aside
requirement, the developer shall have an obligation to provide
affordable housing units calculated as follows: total residential
units approved in the site plan multiplied by 0.2.
(h) If affordable units are provided off site, the affordable units
must be completed and provided in accordance with the
standard schedule relating the minimum percentage of lowand
moderate-income units completed to the maximum
percentage of market-rate units that may be completed, found
at § 217-80B.
(i) A fee-in-lieu of constructing some or all of the affordable
housing units on site may be negotiated between the Township
of Washington and the developer in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:93-8.10(c).
(18) Architectural review. The purpose of this subsection is to provide
the Planning Board with building elevations for approval of the
appearance of all buildings proposed in the age-restricted
development. Such review shall be guided by the following design
objectives:
(a) Style. Generally, building facades should incorporate
vernacular architectural style and elements which reflect
historic development styles of the Long Valley and
Hackettstown area, including the rhythm and spacing of
windows, roof pitches, use of exterior finish materials,
staggered setbacks within individual buildings and similar
features.
(b) Building facade. All facades visible from internal roads within
the age-restricted housing development and public rights-ofway
shall receive similar treatments, which shall vary from
building-to-building, and shall be architecturally compatible
within a unified architectural theme. No more than 30% of
building facades may be duplicated within the development
and at least three different models (floor plans) will be offered.
Not more than two facades may be alike in any group of five
homes located across the street from one another (i.e.,
diagonally adjacent to one another).
(c) Roof shape. Roof shapes shall respect the vernacular style and
shall not include the appearance of flat or mansard roofs. Roof
shape shall incorporate gable-end, opposing-gable and hip-roof
styles with dormers to the extent practicable.
E. Area, yard and building requirements for senior healthcare facilities,
healthcare support facilities and skilled rehabilitation nursing facilities.
§ 217-55.1 WATER § 217-55.1
213:823
(1) Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area devoted to senior
healthcare is 150,000 square feet. A facility must be part of a tract
area of at least 50 acres under the ownership and control of a
single entity and the subject of a development application.
(2) Density. The maximum density permitted shall be 16 beds per acre.
(3) Setback and bulk requirements. The setback and bulk
requirements for the OR/1 Zone shall apply, except that the
minimum side and rear yard setback shall be 30 feet.
(4) Parking.
(a) Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of 0.5 parking
spaces per bed.
(b) An additional one parking space shall be provided per
employee normally present on any single weekday shift.
(c) An additional one parking space shall be provided for each
non-full-time health care professional providing specialized
care.
(d) An additional one parking space shall be provided per
outpatient.
F. Intergenerational child and adult day-care parking requirements.
(1) Child day-care parking. At least one on-site parking space shall be
provided for each on-duty staff person and one visitor space per
each five children.
(2) Adult day-care parking. At least one on-site parking space shall be
provided for each on-duty staff person and two visitors' spaces for
each 10 people of maximum enrollment at the center.
G. Schedule.
Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements
Item
All Senior
Health Care
Uses and
Facilities
Adult Day-Care
and
Intergenerational
Child Care
Minimum lot size (square feet) 150,000 80,000
Lot frontage (feet) 75 75
Lot width (feet) 200 200
Front yard-principal building
(feet)
100 100
Side yard-principal building
(feet)
30 30
§ 217-55.1 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-55.1
213:824
Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements
Item
All Senior
Health Care
Uses and
Facilities
Adult Day-Care
and
Intergenerational
Child Care
Rear yard-principal building
(feet)
30 30
Side yard-accessory building
(feet)
30 30
Rear yard-accessory building
(feet)
30 30
Combined width of both side
yards-principal building (feet)
60 60
Maximum percentage of
improved lot coverage
60% 60%
Maximum floor area of (FAR) N/A 20,000 square feet
Maximum height
Stories 2.5 2.5
Feet 35 35
Maximum density beds per
acre
16 N/A
H. Age restrictions for dwelling unit occupancy. Approval of an agerestricted
housing development pursuant to this section shall require
the placement of restrictive covenants, in a manner satisfactory to the
Planning Board Attorney, on the deeds to all portions of a tract to insure
that occupancy will be limited to at least one member of the household
55 years of age or older with no children under 19 years of age in
permanent residence, pursuant to the Federal Fair Housing Act.
I. Age-restricted affordable multifamily dwelling units area, yard and
building requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet per building.
(2) Density: 15 units per acre.
(3) Setback and bulk requirements:
(a) Minimum lot frontage: 120 feet.
(b) Minimum lot width (at building setback line): 120 feet.
(c) Minimum front yard from internal roadways: 25 feet.
(d) Minimum front yard from Schooley's Mountain Road: 100 feet.
(e) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
§ 217-55.1 WATER § 217-55.1
213:825
§ 217-55.2. Village Age-Restricted Housing Overlay Zone. [Added
2-16-2004 by Ord. No. 1-04]
(f) Minimum side yard: 15 feet.
(g) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(h) Maximum impervious coverage of lot (structures and paving):
60%.
(i) Maximum height: 35 feet and 2 1/2 stories.
(j) Minimum building setback from streets (curb or cartway): 30
feet.
(k) Minimum building setback from parking areas: 20 feet.
(l) Minimum spacing between buildings: 30 feet.
(4) Site improvement and parking requirements: as required by
Residential Site Improvement Standards, N.J.A.C. 5:21.
A. Minimum tract area. The minimum tract area for the development shall
be 25 acres under the ownership or control of a single entity and the
subject of a development application.
B. Density. The maximum residential density shall be the lesser of 2.0
dwelling units per acre or 50 age-restricted housing units. If affordable
housing units are to be constructed on the tract, the maximum
residential density and the total number of dwelling units may be
increased one for one to accommodate the affordable housing units. In
no case shall more than 55 dwelling units be constructed on the tract.
C. Minimum tract frontage and width. The minimum tract frontage and
width shall be 200 feet.
D. Minimum building setback from tract boundary. All buildings shall be
located a minimum 25 feet from any tract boundary.
E. Minimum building setback from interior streets. All buildings shall be
located a minimum of 15 feet from the curb line of any street located
within the tract boundaries, except that the entrance to a garage shall
be set back a minimum of 28 feet from the curbline.
F. Minimum distance between principal buildings. In the village agerestricted
housing community, the minimum distance between
residential buildings shall be as follows:
(1) The front of one building to the front of another building: 70 feet.
(2) The front of one building to the side of another building: 60 feet.
(3) The front of one building to the rear of another building: 70 feet.
§ 217-55.1 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-55.2
213:826
(4) The side of one building to the side of another building (other than
an attached unit): 20 feet.
(5) The side of one building to the rear of another building: 35 feet.
(6) The rear of one building to the rear of another building: 50 feet.
G. Application of area, yard and bulk requirements to individual dwelling
lots. In the Village Age-Restricted Housing Overlay Zone, a dwelling
unit may or may not be located on an individual lot. Individual lots may
be created without regard to area or other bulk requirements, provided
that there is compliance with all required setbacks from the tract
boundary, from streets and between buildings. Building coverage,
improved coverage and open space requirements shall be calculated
only for the entire tract.
H. Permitted projections. Chimneys, bay windows, overhangs and other
protrusions shall be permitted to encroach up to four feet, and decks
and patios shall be permitted to encroach up to 10 feet within the
required setbacks from the tract boundary and within the required
areas between buildings. No such projections or encroachments,
however, shall be permitted within required buffer areas, and no deck
or patio shall be permitted to encroach within the required setback
from interior streets.
I. Buffer areas. The applicant shall maintain a buffer area along the entire
tract boundary. The buffer zone shall be no less than 15 feet in width
and shall in all other ways conform to the regulations listed in
§ 159-41C, Buffers. No use or structure shall be permitted within the
required buffer area, except for the following, and only when it is
demonstrated by the applicant that such use and/or structures must be
located within the buffer area in order to reasonably accommodate the
permitted development:
(1) Fences, freestanding walls and retaining walls.
(2) Streets and other access improvements providing direct access to
the tract from a roadway located outside the tract boundary.
(3) Drainage facilities and utility structures.
J. Maximum building coverage. The maximum coverage for all buildings
on the tract shall be 10%.
K. Maximum improved lot coverage. The maximum improved coverage by
all buildings and man-made improvements on the tract shall be 30%.
L. Common open space. At least 35% of the total land area of the tract
shall be designed for and devoted to common open space. In computing
the thirty-five-percent requirement, common recreation areas
accessory to the residential use and required buffer areas shall be
included, as well as the community building and any paved areas or
buildings devoted to open space and recreational use. Excluded from
§ 217-55.2 WATER § 217-55.2
213:827
the thirty-five-percent requirement shall be dwelling unit buildings,
private driveways, roadways, parking areas and any area located within
10 feet of such buildings, roadways, private driveways and parking
areas.
M. Open space and recreational improvements. Lands may be set aside for
permanent open space in private ownership that shall include
improvements for use by the residents as follows:
(1) A minimum of one community or clubhouse building containing at
least 20 square feet of floor area for each dwelling unit.
(a) The community building may include, but not be limited to, a
kitchen, offices, recreational and social activity rooms and a
multipurpose room designed for social activities.
(b) The height of the community building shall not exceed two
stories or 35 feet.
(2) A comprehensive internal pedestrian circulation system that
includes access to adjacent residential neighborhoods.
(3) Nature trails.
N. Maximum building height. The maximum height of all buildings shall be
no greater than 35 feet or 2.5 stories, except that buildings containing
affordable housing as defined in N.J.A.C. 5: 94-8 may be 45 feet or three
stories in height.
O. Maximum number of dwelling units per building. There shall be no
more than four dwelling units within any building.
P. Parking. The number of parking spaces for the age-restricted dwelling
units shall conform to the regulations listed in § 217-55.1D(14),
Parking, except that the minimum length of the driveway space shall be
reduced to 18 feet, exclusive of any sidewalk area.
Q. Utility and drainage improvements. All development within the overlay
zone shall be served by municipal sewer and municipal water. All utility
lines, including power, telephone and cable television lines, shall be
installed underground and adequately shielded.
R. Emergency facilities. The layout of roads, buildings and parking areas
shall be suitably designed to facilitate emergency access by police, firefighting
and ambulance service vehicles.
S. Phasing plan. The developer shall submit a phasing plan that includes
the proposed schedule of development, including the installation of
improvements. Such plan shall be subject to the review and approval of
the Planning Board.
T. Design standards. All other design standards shall be pursuant to the
New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards.
§ 217-55.2 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-55.2
213:828
§ 217-56. Affordable accessory apartment standards. [Added
3-18-1996 by Ord. No. 6-96; amended 2-19-2007 by Ord. No. 5-07;
3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 04-19]
U. Architectural Review. Development within the Village Age-Restricted
Housing Overlay Zone shall be subject to architectural review by the
Planning Board. Such review shall be guided by the following design
objectives:
(1) Respect the village scale. While it is not practical to require
authentic replication of architectural styles found in the village,
streetscape facades should incorporate elements which reflect the
historic development, including the rhythm and spacing of
windows, roof pitches, use of exterior finish materials, staggered
setbacks within individual buildings and similar features.
(2) All facades visible from a public right-of-way shall receive similar
treatment .
(3) Roof shapes shall respect the vernacular style and shall not include
the appearance of flat or mansard roofs.
V. Age restrictions for dwelling unit occupancy. Approval of an agerestricted
community pursuant to this section shall require the
placement of restrictive covenants, in a manner satisfactory to the
Planning Board Attorney, on the deeds to all portions of a tract to insure
that occupancy will be limited to at least one member of the household
55 years of age or older with no children under 19 years of age in
permanent residence, pursuant to the Federal Fair Housing Act.
A. Subject to the limitations set forth in Subsection B hereinbelow, any
existing single-family detached dwelling located in any single-family
residential zone may be converted to contain not more than one
affordable accessory apartment, provided that the following standards
and conditions are met:
(1) At the time of the initial occupancy of the affordable accessory
apartment and for at least 10 years thereafter, the affordable
accessory apartment shall be rented only to a very-low-, low- or
moderate-income household as those terms are defined in the Fair
Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., the Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., the applicable
requirements of the Courts of the State of New Jersey and the
applicable rules of the former New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing, including N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.1 et seq., as supplemented and
amended.
(2) The affordable accessory apartment and the existing unit shall have
separate doors with direct access to the outdoors.
(3) The gross area of the affordable accessory apartment shall be at
least 350 square feet.
§ 217-55.2 WATER § 217-56
213:829
(4) The affordable accessory apartment shall have living/sleeping
space, cooking facilities, a kitchen sink and a complete sanitary
facility for the exclusive use of its occupants. It shall consist of not
less than two rooms, one of which shall be a full bathroom, but shall
have no more than two bedrooms.
(a) The affordable accessory apartment may be served by the
same individual on-site septic system as the dwelling within
which the affordable accessory apartment is created, however,
the applicant for an affordable accessory apartment shall
submit proof of Board of Health approval of the adequacy of
the individual on-site septic system.
(5) At least one off-street parking space, in addition to the two required
for the existing dwelling, shall be provided.
(6) The conversion shall not result in the placement of an additional
door on the front facade of the structure.
(7) The applicant shall provide a plan for the proposed conversion
which provides sufficient information for the Zoning Enforcement
Officer to determine that all ordinance requirements will be met.
(8) The dwelling structure shall comply with all requirements for twofamily
dwellings in accordance with the New Jersey Building Code
and all the laws and housing regulations of the state and the
Township.
(9) There shall be a recorded deed or declaration of covenants and
restrictions applied to the property upon which the affordable
accessory apartment is located, running with the land and limiting
the subsequent rental or sale of the affordable accessory
apartment. The deed or declaration of covenants and restrictions
shall be reviewed and approved by the Township Attorney prior to
recording. The deed or declaration of covenants and restrictions
must be recorded prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for
the affordable accessory apartment. If the affordable accessory
apartment is not occupied by a very-low-, low- or moderate-income
household as required by Subsection A(1) above, then the
affordable accessory apartment shall be removed and the structure
shall comply with all requirements for a single-family detached
dwelling applicable to the zone in which it is located.
(10) During the month of January of each year, the owner shall provide
to the Zoning Enforcement Officer, on forms provided, a
certification that the above standards and conditions are in effect.
B. Subject to the limitations set forth in Subsection C hereinbelow, any
parcel of land located in any single-family residential zone may be
improved to contain not more than one affordable accessory apartment
located within the principal residential structure or in an accessory
§ 217-56 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-56
213:830
building on the parcel, provided that the following standards and
conditions are met:
(1) There shall be a principal residential structure on the parcel which
contains not more than one dwelling unit.
(2) At the time of the initial occupancy of the affordable accessory
apartment and for at least 10 years thereafter, the affordable
accessory apartment shall be rented only to a very-low-, low- or
moderate-income household as those terms are defined in the Fair
Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., the Uniform Affordability
Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., the applicable requirements of
the Courts of the State of New Jersey and the applicable rules of
the former New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing, including
N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.1 et seq., as supplemented and amended.
(3) The gross floor area of the affordable accessory apartment shall be
at least 350 square feet, but shall not exceed 800 square feet. The
affordable accessory apartment shall have a living/sleeping space,
cooking facilities, a kitchen sink and a complete sanitary facility for
the exclusive use of its occupants. It shall consist of not less than
two rooms, one of which shall be a full bathroom, but shall have no
more than two bedrooms.
(a) The affordable accessory apartment may be served by the
same individual on-site septic system as the dwelling within
which the affordable accessory apartment is created, however,
the applicant for an affordable accessory apartment shall
submit proof of Board of Health approval of the adequacy of
the individual on-site septic system.
(4) The affordable accessory apartment may be located over an
existing or proposed detached garage that serves, or is intended to
serve, the principal residential structure on the parcel or may be
located within an existing accessory building not used to meet the
garage requirement for the principal residential use.
(5) In the case of the new accessory buildings, bulk requirements for
the applicable zone shall be met.
(6) At least one off-street parking space, in addition to the two required
for the existing principal dwelling on the parcel, shall be provided.
(7) The applicant shall provide a plan for the proposed development
which provides sufficient information for the Construction Official
to determine that all ordinance requirements will be met.
(8) There shall be a recorded deed or declaration of covenants and
restrictions applied to the property upon which the affordable
accessory apartment is located running with the land and limiting
the subsequent rental or sale of the affordable accessory
apartment. The deed or declaration of covenants and restrictions
§ 217-56 WATER § 217-56
213:831
§ 217-57. Visual compatibility requirements for installation of
wireless telecommunications antennas and towers. [Added
3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97; amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 4-99;
6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09]
shall be reviewed and approved by the Township Attorney prior to
recording. The deed or declaration of covenants and restrictions
must be recorded prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy
for the affordable accessory apartment. If the affordable accessory
apartment is not occupied by a very-low-, low- or moderate-income
household as required by Subsection B(2) above, then the
affordable accessory apartment shall be removed.
(9) During the month of January of each year, the owner shall provide
to the Zoning Enforcement Officer, on forms provided, a
certification that the above standards and conditions are in effect.
C. There shall be not more than one affordable accessory apartment
created per lot.
D. The maximum number of affordable accessory apartments permitted
under this section shall be the number that the Township is permitted to
apply toward its fair share obligation in accordance with the applicable
statutes, regulations and requirements of the courts of the State of New
Jersey governing the Township's affordable housing obligation.
E. Building permit fees and all similar Township fees shall be waived in all
cases involving affordable accessory apartment development under this
section.
A. Wireless telecommunications antennas may be erected on existing
buildings or structures, and an equipment compound may be
constructed in support of such antennas consistent with the following
requirements:
(1) Antenna arrays may be mounted on existing buildings or structures
but shall not extend beyond the overall height of any such building
or structure by more than 10% of the height of such building or
structure.
(2) The equipment building or cabinet shall be situated within a solid
wooden fence at least seven feet and no more than eight feet high
as approved by the Township Engineer, which shall include a
locking security gate.
(3) An equipment compound consisting of no more than 4,000 square
feet in area and not more than 10 feet in height may be erected in
support of such antenna arrays, provided that:
(a) It is situated behind existing structures, buildings or terrain
features which will shield the compound from public view; or
§ 217-56 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-57
213:832
§ 217-58. Standards for historic inns. [Added 4-20-1998 by Ord. No.
7-98]
(b) When a location out of public view is not possible, a landscape
buffer of 20 feet in depth shall be provided around the
compound to shield the facility from public view. Landscaping
shall include evergreen trees at least eight feet high at the time
of planting and planted in staggered double rows at 15 feet on
center, or equivalent.
(c) Approval by the Planning Board shall consider any
recommendation by the Shade Tree Commission.165
(d) It is located in accordance with the minimum accessory
structure requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located.
(4) Antennas installed according to these provisions shall be suitably
finished and/or painted so as to minimize their visual impact on the
landscape. Depending on the placement of this equipment, color
should be selected to be consistent with the color scheme of the
building or structure on which they are mounted, in order to blend
with their surroundings. When this is not possible, color selection
shall be designed to minimize the visual impact of the antenna
arrays.
B. Wireless communications towers shall be located, designed and
screened to minimize visual impact on residential areas and the public
way through the use of stealth technology, whenever possible, including
color and camouflaging, architectural treatment, landscaping and other
available means, considering the need to be compatible with
neighboring residences and the character of the community. Stealth
tower and monopole structures shall be given preference.
(1) Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to
any applicable FAA standards, be painted a neutral color, so as to
reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(2) Tower design should take into consideration the preservation of
scenic vistas and views of cultural and historical landmarks and of
unique geographic and topographic features. Natural features such
as trees, hilltops and views, natural terrain, open waters and
ridgelines should be preserved whenever possible in locating and
designing a tower. Towers shall further be designed and located to
minimize impact on open space and green acres properties.
(3) Equipment buildings and equipment compounds shall comply with
§ 217-57A(2) and (3).
165. Editor's Note: See Ch. 3, Administration of Government, Art. XXII.
§ 217-57 WATER § 217-58
213:833
A. The purpose of this section is to permit and regulate the location, size
and design of historic country inns in the Historic Preservation Overlay
Zone. This Zone includes properties which represent a unique attribute
to the Township, and which merit special planning consideration to
maintain their viability. The use of these properties for historic inns can
make a positive contribution to the use and enjoyment of the Township's
natural and cultural resources, provided that the historic inns are
compatible with existing historic buildings on the property, as well as
the historic context in which they are located, and do not substantially
impact the use and enjoyment of adjoining properties.
B. Historic inns are a permitted use in the Historic Preservation Overlay
Zone, except for that portion of the Zone which lies in the R-20 District,
subject to the receipt of a certificate of appropriateness from the
Historic Preservation Commission and the following supplemental
development standards:
(1) The lot on which the historic inn is proposed shall meet the
required minimum lot size, lot frontage and lot width for the zoning
district in which it is located, except that in no case shall the lot be
less than three acres. The lot shall front on a paved collector or
arterial road.
(2) The lot on which the historic inn is proposed shall have an historic
building. The historic inn shall be situated in the historic building
or buildings on the site, or the historic building or buildings shall be
incorporated into the historic inn in a manner deemed to be
appropriate by the Historic Preservation Commission. Subject to
the foregoing, additions to the historic building shall be permitted,
but no such addition shall be situated forward of the front facade of
the historic building. The proposed historic inn development shall
be subject to all applicable yard requirements for the zoning
district in which the historic inn is situated. The maximum
improved lot coverage for historic inns shall be 22%, regardless of
the improved lot coverage standards for the zone district in
question.
(3) The floor area of any additions to the historic building necessary for
construction of the historic inn, shall not exceed 100% of the
original floor area of the historic building, except that in no case
shall the historic inn include more than 6,000 square feet of heated
area, exclusive of porches, decks and accessory structures.
(4) The historic inn may have no more than 12 bedrooms, and the
maximum length of stay for any guest shall be 30 days, within any
ninety-day period.
(5) The historic inn shall have a resident manager who maintains a
residence on the property, which shall not be counted as one of the
12 permitted bedrooms.
§ 217-58 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-58
213:834
§ 217-59. Restricted activities in Carbonate Area District Overlay
Zone.
In the Carbonate Area District Overlay Zone:
(6) Public dining room facilities are not permitted in historic inns
located in residential zone districts; however, this section shall not
prohibit such historic inns from providing breakfast for registered
guests pursuant to § 217-75J. For historic inns located in
nonresidential zones, public dining room facilities may be provided,
at a ratio of three seats per guest bedroom, not to exceed 36 seats,
subject to applicable state and local regulations. No alcoholic
beverages shall be sold.
(7) Site planning and stormwater management planning shall consider
innovative design techniques so that the historic character of the
property is not negatively impacted by the proposed building
addition.
(8) Where the proposed historic inn abuts a property in residential use,
a minimum landscaped buffer of 50 feet shall be maintained
between the proposed structure or parking lot and any side or rear
lot line and all dining facilities shall be located at least 500 feet
from any residence located on another lot.
(9) Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of one space for each
guest bedroom, plus one space for every three seats in the dining
room, provided that there is a public dining room, plus four spaces
for use of the owner and/or employees.
(10)Off-street parking spaces shall be permitted only in the side or rear
yard areas of the property. No parking is permitted in the front yard
area.
(11) Each application shall be accompanied by a certification from the
Washington Township Municipal Utilities Authority or the
Hackettstown Municipal Utilities Authority that water and sewer
facilities are available with capacity, or a certification from the
Board of Health that the existing or proposed septic system and
water supply are adequate for the proposed use.
(12) No cooking shall be permitted in any guest room.
(13) Historic inns shall be registered with pertinent governmental
authorities, and shall be subject to applicable state and local
regulations.
A. No underground storage tanks for petroleum products shall be
permitted in residential developments. All replacement tanks at
residences shall be located above-ground or in basements.
§ 217-58 WATER § 217-59
213:835
§ 217-59.1. Houses of worship. [Added 6-18-2001 by Ord. No.
14-01]
B. No commercial business, except for service stations, shall be permitted
underground storage tanks, unless public safety requires such
underground installation. Commercial establishments which require
underground tanks for safety according to state regulations shall install
and monitor leak detection devices, and shall report the monitoring
results to the Health Department on a quarterly basis.
C. No hazardous, toxic, chemical or petroleum waste shall be accepted for
disposal at any site, except for the authorized acceptance of recycled
vehicular oil.
A. General. Houses of worship shall be permitted in all zones when located
on arterial or collector roads. In reviewing site plans for houses of
worship, the Planning Board shall make particular note of ancillary uses
such as social events, recreational activities, convocations and similar
activities. Reasonable requirements shall be established to minimize
any adverse impact on surrounding areas.
B. Schedule of area, bulk and buffer requirements for houses of worship.
The following area, bulk and buffer requirements shall apply to houses
of worship in all zones.
(1) Lot circle:1 450 feet.
(2) Lot area: five acres.2
(3) Lot frontage: 450 feet.
(4) Lot width: 450 feet.
(5) Lot depth: 500 feet.
(6) Front yard: 100 feet.3,4
(7) Side yard (each): 75 feet.3
(8) Rear yard: 200 feet.3
(9) Distance between buildings: 25 feet.3
(10) Maximum lot coverage: 40%.5
(11) Minimum landscaped buffer from parcel boundaries: 75 feet.6,7,8
§ 217-59 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-59.1
213:836
NOTES:
1 Lot circle is the diameter of the largest circle which can be
inscribed within the lot lines.
2 Measured within 600 feet of the street right-of way line.
3 Yard requirements shall apply to all principal and accessory
buildings. Setbacks for other features shall be as follows:
(a) Stormwater basins: 50 feet.
(b) Recreational fields, playgrounds and parking in side and rear
yards only: 75 feet. Lighted recreation fields are not
permitted.
4 Or three times building height, whichever is greater. Building
height shall be measured to the roof peak or top of roofline and
does not include the height of the steeple.
5 For lots exceeding five acres, the permitted lot coverage shall
be reduced by 1/2% per acre, except that no lot shall be required
to have less than 22.5% lot coverage in accordance with the
following schedule.
Lot Coverage Permitted for Houses of Worship
Lot Area
Up to
and
Including
(Acres)
% of Lot
Coverage
Permitted
Lot Area
Up to
and
Including
(Acres)
% of Lot
Coverage
Permitted
Lot Area
Up to
and
Including
(Acres)
% of Lot
Coverage
Permitted
5 40 17 34 29 28
6 39.5 18 33.5 30 27.5
7 39 19 33 31 27
8 38.5 20 32.5 32 26.5
9 38 21 32 33 26
10 37.5 22 31.5 34 25.5
11 37 23 31 35 25
12 36.5 24 30.5 36 24.5
13 36 25 30 37 24
14 35.5 26 29.5 38 23.5
15 35 27 29 39 23
16 34.5 28 28.5 Above 39 22.5
§ 217-59.1 WATER § 217-59.1
213:837
§ 217-59.2. Schools. [Added 6-18-2001 by Ord. No. 14-01]
6 A minimum landscaped buffer of 75 feet in width shall be
provided in all residential zones and along any common property
line with a residential zone or use, in accordance with § 159-31D.
The minimum landscaped buffer may be reduced to 30 feet in
nonresidential zones except where a property line adjoins a
residential zone or residential use, in which case the required
minimum landscaped buffer shall be 75 feet.
7 The minimum landscaped buffer shall be provided between
parcel boundaries and all areas utilized by buildings, parking,
driveways and other improved areas of the site, including outdoor
recreation and activity areas.
8 The minimum landscaped buffer may be reduced to 50 feet
between stormwater basins and parcel boundaries.
A. General. Public and private schools are herein defined as schools which
meet the State of New Jersey's requirements for primary and secondary
compulsory education. Schools shall be permitted in all zones when
located on arterial and collector roads and shall contain sufficient land
to meet the standards set forth in this section.
B. In evaluating the site plan for any proposed school, the reviewing board
shall consider the impact on surrounding existing and future
development of social and athletic events, traffic generation and noise,
light and other nuisance characteristics. Appropriate safeguards shall
be imposed to minimize these influences.
C. Schedule of area, bulk and buffer requirements for schools. The
following area, bulk and buffer requirements shall apply to schools in
all zones.
(1) Lot circle: 800 feet.
(2) Lot area: See Note2.
(3) Lot frontage: 500 feet.
(4) Lot width: 500 feet.
(5) Lot depth: 1,000 feet.
(6) Front yard: 200 feet.3,4
(7) Side yard (each): 125 feet.3
(8) Rear yard: 200 feet.3
(9) Distance between buildings: 50 feet.3
§ 217-59.1 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-59.2
213:838
§ 217-59.3. Large scale retail uses. [Added 10-21-2002 by Ord. No.
37-02]
(10) Maximum lot coverage: 25%.
(11) Minimum landscaped buffer from parcel boundaries: 75 feet.6,7,8
NOTES:
1 Lot circle is the diameter of the largest circle which can be
inscribed within the lot lines.
2 Lot area:
(a) Elementary school: 30 acres.
(b) Middle school: 50 acres.
(c) High school: 75 acres.
(d) Colleges: 100 acres.
3 Yard requirements shall apply to all principal and accessory
buildings. Setbacks for other features shall be as follows:
(a) Stormwater basins: 100 feet.
(b) Recreational fields, playgrounds and parking in side and rear
yard areas only: 150 feet. Lighted recreation fields are not
permitted.
4 Or three times building height, whichever is greater.
5 Schools shall be permitted uses in all zones when located on
arterial or collector roads only (not local roads).
6 A minimum landscaped buffer of 75 feet in width shall be
provided in all residential zones and along any common property
boundary line with a residential zone or use, in accordance with
§ 159-31D. The minimum landscaped buffer may be reduced to 30
feet in nonresidential zones except where a property line adjoins
a residential zone or residential use, in which case the required
minimum landscaped buffer shall be 75 feet.
7 The required minimum landscaped buffer shall be provided
between all areas utilized by buildings, parking, driveways and
other improved areas of the site including outdoor recreation and
activity areas.
8 The minimum landscaped buffer may be reduced to 50 feet
between stormwater basins and parcel boundaries.
A. In the C-2 Highway Business Zone where large scale retail uses are
proposed, the following bulk regulations shall apply:
(1) Minimum lot area: 15 acres.
§ 217-59.2 WATER § 217-59.3
213:839
(2) Maximum floor area ratio: 25%.
(3) Maximum lot coverage: 60%.
(4) Minimum lot width: 300 feet.
(5) Minimum lot frontage: 300 feet.
(6) Minimum lot depth: 400 feet.
(7) Minimum front lot: 100 feet.
(8) Minimum rear yard: 95 feet.
(9) Minimum side yard: 50 feet each side.
(10) Maximum building height: 45 feet.
(11) Minimum parking setbacks.
(a) From building: 12 feet.
(b) From streets: 50 feet.
(c) From all property lines: 25 feet.
(d) From residential zone: 75 feet.
(e) From residential building: 125 feet.
B. Requirements for landscaped buffers/screens and berming.
(1) The minimum width of the landscaped buffer/screen shall be as
follows:
(a) Front yard: 50 feet.
(b) Nonresidential use to residential use or zone in rear or side: 75
feet.
(c) Nonresidential use to nonresidential use in rear or side: 25
feet.
(2) The front yard landscaped buffer shall consist of the following
minimum mix of canopy trees and shrubs for every 1,500 square
feet of buffer area: Two canopy trees (large deciduous trees); and
10 shrubs (evergreen and/or deciduous) with a mature height that
obscures vehicle headlights but does not obscure the view of
buildings.
(3) The landscaped buffer/screen between a nonresidential use and a
residential use or zone shall consist of the following minimum mix
of canopy trees, understory trees and shrubs for every 1,500
square feet of buffer area: Two canopy trees (large deciduous
trees); four understory trees (deciduous and/or evergreen trees
§ 217-59.3 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-59.3
213:840
that do not generally reach the mature height of the canopy trees);
and 15 shrubs (evergreen and/or deciduous).
(4) The landscaped buffer/screen between nonresidential uses shall
consist of the following minimum mix of canopy trees and
understory trees for every 1,500 square feet of buffer area: Two
canopy trees (large deciduous trees); and three understory trees
(deciduous or evergreen trees that do not generally reach the
mature height of the canopy trees).
(5) All portions of the landscaped buffer/screen not planted in canopy
trees, understory trees, or shrubs shall be maintained in lawn area
or ground cover.
(6) Where the rear or side of a nonresidential use abuts a residential
use or zone a berm shall also be provided. The berm shall be a
minimum of six feet in height, with a maximum side slope of 4:1 and
a minimum top width of four feet.
C. Minimum parking requirements: Five spaces per 1,000 square feet of
building floor area for large-scale retail sales uses.
D. General requirements.
(1) Buildings may contain up to 145,000 square feet of floor area and
the lot may include more than one building.
(2) Multiple buildings on a lot shall provide staggered front and side
setbacks with a minimum offset of 10 feet. The minimum distance
between buildings shall be at least 20 feet.
(3) Common driveways between lots shall be provided where feasible.
(4) Parking areas shall be designed to provide interconnections with
parking areas on adjoining lots.
(5) The finish treatment of walls shall be the same on all sides.
(6) Walls shall be extended to the highest point of rooftop mechanicals
so as to shield rooftop mechanicals from all sides. The walls shall
incorporate sound-proofing materials so as to mitigate the noise
generated by any rooftop mechanicals.
E. Design standards. All site plan applications which include a retail
component of 40,000 square feet or more must comply with the
following retail design standards. The following standards are to be
used by developers proposing retail developments of 40,000 square feet
or more, whether such retail space is freestanding or incorporated as
part of a larger mixed use development. These requirements are
intended to reduce the massive scale and uniform impersonal
appearance of large retail buildings.
§ 217-59.3 WATER § 217-59.3
213:841
(1) Facades and exterior walls. Facades should be articulated to
reduce the massive scale and the uniform, impersonal appearance
of large retail buildings and provide visual interest that will be
consistent with the community's identity, character and scale. All
building facades which are visible from adjoining properties and/or
public streets shall comply with the following requirements:
(a) Facades greater than 100 feet in length, measured horizontally,
shall incorporate wall plane projections or recesses having a
depth of at least 3% of the length of the facade and extending
at least 20% of the length of the facade. No uninterrupted
length of any facade shall exceed 100 horizontal feet.
(b) Ground floor facades that face public streets shall have
arcades, display windows, entry areas, awnings, or other such
features along no less than 60% of their horizontal length.
(c) Building facades must include a repeating pattern that shall
include no less than three of the elements listed below. At least
one of these elements shall repeat horizontally. All elements
shall repeat at intervals of no more than 30 feet, either
horizontally or vertically.
[1] Color change.
[2] Texture change.
[3] Material module change.
(d) Expression of an architectural or structural bay through a
change in plane no less than 24 inches in width, such as an
offset, reveal, or projecting rib.
(e) The minimum setback for any building facade shall be 35 feet
from the property line. Where the facade faces adjacent
residential uses, an earthen berm, no less than six feet in
height, containing, at a minimum, evergreen trees planted at
intervals of 20 feet on centers or in clusters or clumps shall be
provided.
(2) Roofs. Roof features should be used to complement the character of
adjoining neighborhoods. The following standards are intended to
create variations in roofline to add interest to, and reduce the
massive scale of large buildings. Roofs shall have no less than two
of the following features:
(a) Parapets concealing flat roofs and rooftop equipment, such as
air-handling units, from public view. The average height of
such parapets shall not exceed 15% of the height of the
supporting wall and such parapets shall not at any point
exceed 1/3 of the height of the supporting wall. Such parapets
shall feature three-dimensional cornice treatment.
§ 217-59.3 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-59.3
213:842
(b) Overhanging eaves, extending no less than three feet past the
supporting walls. Sloping roofs that do not exceed the average
height of the supporting walls, with an average slope greater
than or equal to one foot of vertical rise for every three feet of
horizontal run and less than or equal to one foot of vertical rise
for every one foot of horizontal run.
(c) Three or more roof slope planes.
(3) Materials and colors. Exterior building materials shall be
aesthetically pleasing, compatible with materials and used in
adjoining neighborhoods. The following standards are intended to
ensure that exterior building materials compose a significant part
of the visual impact of a building.
(a) Predominant exterior building materials shall be high quality
materials. These include, without limitation:
[1] Wood.
[2] Sandstone.
[3] Exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS).
[4] Native stone.
[5] Tinted, textured, concrete masonry units.
(b) Facade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle, neutral or earth
tone colors. The use of high intensity colors, metallic colors,
black or fluorescent colors is prohibited.
(c) Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter colors,
including primary colors, but neon tubing shall not be an
acceptable feature for building trim or accent areas.
(d) Predominant exterior building materials should not include the
following:
[1] Smooth-faced concrete block.
[2] Tilt-up concrete panels.
[3] Prefabricated steel panels.
(4) Customer entrances. Entryway design elements and variations
should give orientation and aesthetically pleasing character to the
building. Large retail buildings should feature multiple entrances.
Multiple building entrances reduce walking distances from cars,
facilitate pedestrian and bicycle access from public sidewalks, and
provide convenience where certain entrances offer access to
individual stores, or identified departments of a store. Multiple
entrances also mitigate the effect of unbroken walls and neglected
§ 217-59.3 WATER § 217-59.3
213:843
areas that often characterize building facades that face bordering
land uses.
(a) Each principal building on a site shall have clearly defined,
highly visible customer entrances featuring no less than three
of the following:
[1] Canopies or porticos.
[2] Overhangs.
[3] Recess/projections.
[4] Arcades.
[5] Raised corniced parapets over the door.
[6] Peaked roof forms.
[7] Arches.
[8] Outdoor patios.
[9] Display windows.
[10] Architectural details such as tile work and moldings which
are integrated into the building.
[11] Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate
landscaped areas and/or places for sitting.
(b) Where additional stores will be located in the principal
building, each such store shall have at least one exterior
customer entrance which shall conform to the above
requirements.
(c) All sides of a principal building that directly face a public street
that abuts the site shall feature at least one customer entrance.
Where a principal building directly faces more than two public
streets abutting the site, this requirement shall apply to two
sides of the building, including the side of the building facing
the primary street, and another side of the building facing a
second street.
(5) Parking lots.
(a) Parking areas should provide safe, convenient and efficient
access. They should be distributed around large buildings in
order to shorten the distance to other buildings and public
sidewalks, and to reduce the overall scale of the paved surface.
Landscaping is an important element in parking lot design.
Landscaping can be used to define parking areas, primary
vehicular drives and pedestrian areas in an aesthetically and
environmentally pleasing manner.
§ 217-59.3 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-59.3
213:844
(b) No more than 50% of the off-street parking area for the entire
property shall be located between the front facade of the
principal building(s) and the primary abutting street.
(6) Outdoor storage, trash collection and loading areas. Loading areas
and outdoor storage areas exert visual and noise impacts on
surrounding neighborhoods. These areas, when visible from
adjoining properties and/or public streets, should be screened,
recessed or enclosed. While screens and recesses can effectively
mitigate these impacts, the selection of inappropriate screening
materials can exacerbate the problem. Appropriate locations for
loading and outdoor storage areas include areas between
buildings, where more than one building is located on a site and
such buildings are not more than 40 feet apart, or on those sides of
buildings that do not have customer entrances.
(a) Areas for outdoor storage, truck parking, trash collection or
compaction loading, or other such uses shall not be visible
from abutting streets.
(b) No areas for outdoor storage, trash collection or compaction,
loading, or other such uses shall be located within 20 feet of
any public street, public sidewalk, or internal public
pedestrianway.
(c) Loading docks, truck parking, outdoor storage, utility meters,
HVAC equipment, trash collection, trash compaction, and other
service functions shall be incorporated into the overall design
of the building and the landscaping so that the visual and
acoustic impact of these functions are fully contained and out
of view from adjacent properties and public streets, and no
attention attracted to the functions by the use of screening
materials that are different from or inferior to the principal
materials of the building and landscape.
(d) Nonenclosed areas for the storage and sale of seasonal
inventory shall be permanently defined and screened with
walls and/or fences. Materials, colors, and design of screening
walls and/or fences and the cover shall conform to those used
as predominant materials and colors on the building. If such
areas are to be covered, then the covering shall conform to
those used as predominant materials and colors on the
building.
(7) Pedestrian flows. Pedestrian accessibility opens autooriented
development to the neighborhood, thereby reducing traffic impacts
and enabling the development to project a friendlier, more inviting
image. This section sets forth standards for public sidewalk and
internal pedestrian circulation systems that can provide userfriendly
pedestrian access as well as pedestrian safety, shelter, and
convenience within the center grounds.
§ 217-59.3 WATER § 217-59.3
213:845
(a) Sidewalks at least eight feet in width shall be provided along
all sides of the lot that abut a public street.
(b) Continuous internal pedestrian walkways, no less than eight
feet in width, shall be provided from the public sidewalk or
right-of-way to the principal customer entrance of all principal
buildings on the site. At a minimum, walkways shall connect
focal points of pedestrian activity such as, but not limited to,
transit stops, street crossings, building and store entry points,
and shall feature adjoining landscaped areas that includes
trees, shrubs, benches, flower beds, ground covers, or other
such materials for no less than 50% of its length.
(c) Sidewalks, no less than eight feet in width, shall be provided
along the full length of the building along any facade featuring
a customer entrance, and along any facade abutting public
parking areas. Such sidewalks shall be located at least six feet
from the facade of the building to provide planting beds for
foundation landscaping, except where features such as arcades
or entryways are part of the facade.
(d) Internal pedestrian walkways provided in conformance with
Subsection E(7)(b) above shall provide weather-protection
features such as awnings or arcades within 30 feet of all
customer entrances.
(e) All pedestrian walkways internal to the site shall be
distinguished from driving surfaces through the use of durable,
low maintenance surface materials such as pavers, bricks, or
scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety and comfort, as
well as the attractiveness of the walkways.
(8) Central features and community spaces. Buildings should offer
attractive and inviting pedestrian scale features, spaces and
amenities. Entrances and parking lots should be configured to be
functional and inviting with walkways conveniently tied to logical
destinations. Pedestrianways should be anchored by special design
features such as towers, arcades, porticos, pedestrian light
fixtures, bollards, planter walls, and other architectural elements
that define circulation ways and outdoor spaces. Examples of
outdoor spaces are plazas, patios, courtyards, and windowshopping
areas. The features and spaces should enhance the
building and the center as integral parts of the community fabric.
(a) Each retail establishment subject to these standards shall
contribute to the establishment or enhancement of community
and public spaces by providing at least two of the following.
Any such areas shall have direct access to the public sidewalk
network and such features shall not be constructed of
materials that are inferior to the principal materials of the
building and landscape.
§ 217-59.3 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-59.3
213:846
§ 217-59.4. (Reserved)166
[1] Patio/seating area;
[2] Pedestrian plaza with benches;
[3] Transportation center;
[4] Window-shopping walkway;
[5] Outdoor playground area;
[6] Kiosk arm;
[7] Water feature;
[8] Tower; or
[9] Other such deliberately shaped area and/or focal feature
or amenity that, in the judgment of the Planning and/or
Zoning Board, adequately enhances such community and
public spaces.
(9) Delivery/loading operations.
(a) Delivery and loading operations should not disturb adjoining
residential neighborhoods, or other uses.
(b) No delivery, loading, trash removal or compaction, or other
such operations shall be permitted between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless the applicant submits evidence that
sound barriers between all areas for such operations
effectively reduce noise emissions to a level of 45 dB or less, as
measured at the lot line of any adjoining property.
(10) Aesthetic character. Where principal buildings contain additional,
separately owned stores which occupy less than 25,000 square feet
of gross floor area, with separate, exterior customer entrances:
(a) The street level facade of such stores shall be transparent
between the height of three feet and eight feet above the
walkway grade for no less than 60% of the horizontal length of
the building facade of such additional stores.
(b) Windows shall be recessed and should include visually
prominent sills, shutters or other such forms of framing.
(11) Required drawings. A minimum of two transverse sections through
the entire site are required in addition to plans and drawings
normally required. The sections should be drawn to the same scale
as the site plan. Sections should be selected to show the height and
relationships of structures on the site as well as important
topographical features, and structures on any abutting property
within 100 feet of the site.
§ 217-59.3 WATER § 217-59.5
213:847
§ 217-59.5. Municipally-sponsored multifamily affordable rental
housing. [Added 7-17-2006 by Ord. No. 14-06]
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to identify standards for the
development of municipally sponsored multifamily rental housing in the
OR Office Research Zone.
B. Municipally sponsored multifamily affordable rental housing shall be
permitted in the OR Office Research Zone in accordance with the
following requirements:
(1) The developer of multifamily affordable rental housing shall submit
to the Planning Board a written agreement between the Township
of Washington and the developer to construct affordable rental
housing. The developer may provide a letter of intent issued by the
Township Committee or a memorandum of agreement between the
developer and the Township Committee to construct multifamily
affordable rental housing.
(2) The lot upon which multifamily affordable rental housing is to be
constructed shall be served by public water and sewer service.
(3) More than one principal building containing affordable rental
dwellings shall be permitted per lot.
(4) There shall be a maximum of four dwelling units per building.
(5) Multifamily affordable rental buildings should, to the extent
possible, be designed using materials that are similar and arranged
to be architecturally consistent with residential dwellings in the
neighborhood in which the multifamily housing is to be
constructed. The Board shall give consideration to architectural
style, building height, and exterior appearance to determine
consistency with the residential neighborhood.
(6) The multifamily affordable rental development shall conform to the
following area and yard requirements:
Minimum lot area 30,000 square feet
Lot frontage 75 feet
Lot width
Interior lot 150 feet
Corner lot 175 feet
Principal building
Front yard 25 feet1
166. Editor's Note: Former § 217-59.4, Cluster and lot averaging subdivisions, added
11-15-2004 by Ord. No. 26-04, was repealed 5-16-2005 by Ord. No. 18-05, which ordinance
also provided: "except that this repeal shall not apply to any subdivision application filed
prior to May 1, 2005, and the provisions of this section, as in effect prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, shall be applicable to those applications."
§ 217-59.5 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-59.5
213:848
Side yard
One 15 feet
Both 30 feet
Rear yard 20 feet
Accessory building2
Side yard 10 feet
Rear yard 10 feet
Distance between buildings 10 feet
Maximum percentage improved lot
coverage
70%
1Where an existing residence adjoins the subject parcel, the
setback may be reduced to less than 25 feet on the subject parcel,
but not less than the setback of the adjoining residence.
2Accessory buildings and parking may not be constructed any
closer to a public road than the minimum required front yard
setback. Parking may be set back not less than the accessory
building setback along interior property boundaries and
otherwise shall conform to the requirements of § 159-39, Site
plan design details.
(7) All first floor affordable dwelling units shall meet barrier-free code
and applicable accessibility code requirements, including
adaptability requirements of the Fair Housing Act.
(8) All affordable dwelling units shall conform to minimum square
footage requirements in accordance with the New Jersey Council
on Affordable Housing rules and regulations and applicable codes.
(9) One third of the required parking shall be provided in garages,
which shall include a roof and at least three walls.
(10) A perimeter landscaped buffer not less than 10 feet in width shall
be provided along all interior property lines. A landscaped hedge
shall be provided along property lines adjoining public roads. The
ten-foot landscaped buffer may be reduced in width where, in the
opinion of the Planning Board, an alternative width will establish a
continuous landscaped screen along interior property lines. An
even mix of deciduous and coniferous trees shall be provided. At
the time of planting, deciduous trees within the landscaped buffer
shall be not less than 11 feet to 13 feet in height; and coniferous
trees shall be not less than eight feet in height. Shrubs shall be 18
inches to 24 inches in height at the time of planting. In addition to
the plantings required, the Planning Board may require the
installation of a fence, such as a stockade fence, within the
landscaped buffer. The Planning Board may require off-site
plantings along property boundaries in connection with the
§ 217-59.5 WATER § 217-59.5
213:849
required buffer. Along property lines adjoining public roads, the
Planning Board may require the installation of a fence, such as a
post and rail fence, adjacent to the landscaped hedge.
§ 217-59.5 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-59.5
213:850
ARTICLE VII
Conditional Uses
§ 217-60. General requirements.
§ 217-61. Planned Unit Development (PUD).
A. A conditional use is one listed as a conditional use in the particular
zoning district. All such uses shall meet the provisions of Chapter 159,
Site Plan Review, in addition to the specific conditions and standards
set forth in this chapter. Reduction of area, yard, floor area and building
requirements of one or more lots may be allowed by the Planning Board
upon proof by the developer meeting the conditions of Chapter 111,
Land Use Procedures, § 111-24C. [Amended 12-19-1983 by Ord. No.
36-83]
B. Prior to approval of planned developments, the Planning Board shall
find the following facts and conclusions:
(1) That departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to
this chapter and site plan standards.
(2) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common open space are practical and that the amount, location
and purpose of the common open space are adequate.
(3) That provision through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic and the amenities of light and air, recreation and
visual enjoyment are adequate.
(4) That the proposed planned development will not have an
unreasonable adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed
to be established.
(5) In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents,
occupants and owners of the proposed development in the total
completion of the development are adequate.
A. Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to provide areas where
mixed uses and mixed housing types can be designed as a single entity
according to a plan. Flexibility in staging and design options are
intended to provide the opportunity to build housing as required by the
New Jersey Supreme Court's decision in Mount Laurel II, as well as
least-cost housing, while maintaining a balance of services and design
standards meeting the health, safety and welfare of the community. For
developments not meeting the PUD criteria, the standards of the R-1/
R-2 District shall apply. [Amended 10-17-1983 by Ord. No. 24-83;
6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 22-02]
§ 217-60 WATER § 217-61
213:851
B. Criteria for PUD development. [Amended 10-17-1983 by Ord. No.
24-83]
(1) Size. Minimum tract size: 100 acres.
(2) Utilities required. All such developments shall be served by
municipal sewers and municipal water.
(3) Access. Principal access shall be from a collector road or higher
use (wider) road.
(4) Housing need compliance. Within the residential section of the
PUD there shall be housing provided for the indigenous poor of
Washington Township, as required by the Mount Laurel II decision.
The minimum number of these types of units shall not be less than
10% of the maximum number of housing units being applied for in
the PUD project. For example, if the PUD project proposes 500
housing units, the amount of housing required to meet the housing
needs of the indigenous poor is 50 units.
C. Administration and approvals.
(1) Timing.
(a) As part of preliminary site plan approval of the PUD, the
Planning Board shall consider and establish a timing and
staging schedule including the number and type of dwelling
units to be constructed annually; timing of the construction
and installation of improvements; and when recreation,
commercial and service uses shall be completed.
(b) The Planning Board shall consider, in its approval of the timing
and staging schedule, the ability of the applicant to complete
the work within the schedule, adequacy of municipal and
private facilities needed to accommodate the residents of the
PUD and adequacy of the design of each stage to stand
independent of other phases at any time.
(c) Approvals may stipulate that, before construction permits are
issued for any subsequent stages of a PUD, previously
approved phases shall be completed to the extent set forth in
the approval.
(2) Approvals. Granting of preliminary approval shall convey to the
applicant all rights set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49. The applicant
shall be required to submit each stage to the Planning Board for
final approval.
(3) Improvements. The Planning Board shall approve any improvement
plan in the same manner as set forth in the Chapter 175,
Subdivision of Land, § 175-22H.
§ 217-61 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-61
213:852
(4) Construction permit. The construction permit shall be issued in
accordance with Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land, and Chapter
159, Site Plan Review, requirements.
D. PUD Regulations.
(1) Maximum density. A PUD shall be developed in such a manner so as
to limit the maximum density to four dwelling units per acre except
as noted below:
(a) Land with grades with 15% or greater shall be calculated for
density purposes as set forth in § 217-38.
(b) Land in floodways shall not be considered for density purposes.
(2) Design. A PUD shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 175,
Subdivision of Land, and for other than single-family detached
housing shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 159, Site
Plan Review.
(3) Housing type. Low- or moderate-income housing is permitted and
encouraged in the PUD District.
(4) Maximum height. No structure shall exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet,
measured from mean ground level on the side of the structure of
greatest exposure.
(5) Maximum number of units in a vertical plane. There shall be a
maximum of two dwelling units or household units in any vertical
plane.
(6) Residential dwelling unit mix. No more than 40% of all dwelling
units shall be in any one of the following four housing groups:
(a) Apartments.
(b) Townhouse, duplex, quadplex or other form of attached
housing.
(c) Detached single-family homes on lots no less than 10,000
square feet.
(d) Zero lot line or patio home.
(7) Light industrial/office research facilities/professional offices. No
more than 25% of the gross tract area may be developed for the
following uses:
(a) Light industrial facilities.
(b) Office research facilities.
(c) Professional offices.
§ 217-61 WATER § 217-61
213:853
(8) Common open space. Ownership and maintenance of common open
space shall be regulated by § 175-62E of this chapter.
(9) Open space and recreation. At least 25% of the tract shall be
dedicated to open space and recreation area as specified in
§ 217-62E. In addition, the following conditions shall be met:
(a) Any lands offered to the Township shall be at least five acres,
be at least 300 feet wide in any direction, be graded and
improved for the intended purpose, and be approved by the
governing body. If acceptable to the Township, such lands shall
be conveyed at the time of final plat approval.
(b) Any lands to be dedicated to a homeowners association shall be
graded and improved for the intended purpose; be conveyed at
the time of final plat approval to a homeowners association
created in accordance with § 175-62E and the Municipal Land
Use Law167; be of sufficient dimension to serve the purpose
intended plus allowance for perimeter buffer areas, spectator
areas, bicycle parking, etc.; and be located as an integral part
of the development with regard to vehicular and pedestrian
access, convenience to homes, usability of the site due to
physical characteristics and proper buffer planting, lighting,
setbacks, maintenance vehicle access and similar operating
considerations.
(c) Formal recreation activities, such as swimming pools, court
games, playgrounds and/or ballfields, shall be installed on a
minimum of 10% of the gross tract area.
(d) Where natural or historic features exist on the tract, such
areas shall be retained and designed as an integral part of the
plan by providing open access to the areas and orienting
housing and locating street access in a way which uses these
areas as focal points within the development.
(e) Floodplains, wooded areas and areas with slopes exceeding
25% shall be included as natural features to be evaluated as
part of the open space design. However, due to their limited
utility, floodplains, swamps and slopes exceeding 25% shall
count as 1/2 credit in determining compliance with the
required amount of open space dedication.
(10) Recreation facilities. The design of the recreational facility plan
shall be reviewed by the Washington Township Recreation
Commission.
(a) Bikeways: six to eight feet in width; hard surface; maximum
10% grade, but lesser grades for sustained distances; and curb
ramps installed at street crossings.
167. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 217-61 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-61
213:854
(b) Playlots: 2,000 square feet for toddlers and up to 5,000 square
feet for older preschool children. Facilities to include
sandboxes, swings, slides and low climbing devices. Benches
for parents should be included.
(11) Each PUD shall prepare an overall circulation system including
streets (specifying whether they are public or private),
pedestrianways and bikeways.
(a) In locations to which the public is attracted, e.g. shopping,
jobs, recreation, etc., the plan shall incorporate a pedestrian/
bikeway system to encourage the use of nonmotorized
vehicles. This pedestrian/bikeway system need not be along
the street system.
(b) If necessary, a condition of approval will be the necessary
widening, realignment, drainage, signalization and paving to
bring the street up to current collector street specifications.
(12) Utilities.
(a) All utilities shall be installed underground.
(b) Any electric transformers that may be required aboveground
shall be outside any driveway or street sight triangle and may
be required to be landscaped depending upon its size and
location. If necessary to preserve proper sight distance, said
facilities shall be located outside the street right-of-way but
may be counted as part of the area of the lot on which they are
located.
(c) Adequate provision for garbage collection/storage facilities.
(13) Buffering. The purpose of the buffer shall be to soften the major
visual impact of the development. To meet this objective, the buffer
may vary in width and /or planting intensity and plant material
depending on existing topography and other conditions. In the
absence of an alternate design approved by the Board for an
effective buffer, a buffer at least 100 feet wide shall be established
along all existing arterial and collector roads. This buffer area shall
be planted with a mixture of deciduous and evergreen trees and
shrubs in a manner approved by the Planning Board to provide an
effective visual screen.
(14) Energy conservation requirements. The design of the PUD shall
conform to all applicable local, county, state and federal energy
conservation requirements.
E. Residential design standards.
(1) The placement of individual structures and the design of
neighborhoods and housing types shall be done in a manner using
existing topographic and vegetative characteristics, or man-made
§ 217-61 WATER § 217-61
213:855
contours and planting, to minimize the visual impact of a large
development and to use such features to separate neighborhoods,
screen major areas of improvements and soften the visual impact
of buildings and paved areas.
(2) Individual segments of the residential portion of the PUD may have
design densities greater than the maximum density established for
the entire tract, provided that sufficient open spaces are dedicated
so the average density for the entire project is not exceeded and
recreation areas are not reduced. The maximum design densities as
outlined below shall be calculated on the area designated for each
housing type, including the area for driveways, parking, building
locations and yards, but excluding open space dedications.
(a) Apartments: eight units per acre for two stories; 10 units per
acre for 2 1/2 stories; except in each instance where a project
is restricted to occupants aged 62 and over, these densities
may be increased by 50%.
(b) Townhouses, quadplexes, duplexes and other forms of attached
units: six units per acre.
(3) Apartments, townhouses, quadplexes and other forms of attached
units shall have site plan approval. The configuration of apartments
and structures may be at any alignment that meets the yard
requirements and the following maximum overall or component
building lengths: 160 feet on one plane; 240 feet on any angle. The
approval authority may approve plans with the length deviating
from these standards if adequate provisions are made for firevehicle
access between structures, convenient vehicular access
within the project, structural breaks, topographic and vegetative
conditions to prevent the appearance of excessive structural
lengths, maximizing vistas and views and an overall aesthetic
appeal. The Planning Board will require Police and Fire
Department and rescue squad approval relative to proposed
deviations. Townhouse structures shall have not less than three nor
more than six units in one townhouse building group. Accessory
uses to apartments, townhouses, quadplexes and other forms of
attached units shall not be permitted. Accessory uses shall only be
permitted on detached single-family-house lots. [Amended
12-17-1984 by Ord. No. 35-84]
(4) Apartments.
(a) Maximum lot coverage (building and paving): 30%.
(b) Maximum floor area ratio: not applicable.
(c) Minimum lot area: three acres.
(d) Minimum lot width: 300 feet.
§ 217-61 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-61
213:856
(e) Minimum lot depth: 300 feet.
(f) Minimum lot perimeter setback: three times the building
height.
(g) Minimum front yard: two times the building height.
(h) Minimum side yard: same as building height.
(i) Minimum rear yard: same as building height.
(j) Maximum design density: eight units per acre.
(k) Minimum distance between buildings: two times the building
height.
(5) Townhouses.
Portion of Total
Tract Used for
Townhouses Per Townhouse Lot
Maximum coverage* 30% 60%
Minimum area 4 acres 2,400 square feet
Minimum width 300 feet 24 feet
Minimum depth 300 feet 50 feet
Minimum perimeter
setback
3 times building
height
Minimum front yard Not applicable 30 feet
Minimum side yard Not applicable 0 feet for interior
units, same as
building height for nd
units
Minimum rear yard Not applicable Same as building
height
Maximum design
density
Not applicable 6 units per acre
Maximum unit size 3 bedrooms
Minimum distance
between buildings
Twice side yard
NOTES:
*Building and paving.
(6) Duplex/quadplex housing.
§ 217-61 WATER § 217-61
213:857
Duplex Quadplex
Maximum lot
coverage*
45% 45%
Minimum lot area See Note 1 See Note 1
Minimum lot width See Note 2 See Note 2
Minimum lot depth 100 square feet 100 square feet
Minimum front yard 25 feet 25 feet
Minimum side yard See Note 3 See Note 3
Minimum rear yard 25 feet 25 feet
Maximum design
density
6 units per acre 6 units per acre
Maximum size unit 3 bedrooms 3 bedrooms
NOTES:
* Building and paving.
Note 1: Each unit in a duplex or quadplex shall have 4,000 square
feet of land area. For a duplex this shall be either in the form of
one lot of 8,000 square feet for both units or two abutting lots of
4,000 square feet. For a quadplex, there shall be one contiguous
area of at least 16,000 square feet, which can be subdivided into
smaller lots for individual units.
Note 2: Each duplex shall have a lot width of at least 70 feet and
each quadplex 140 feet. The lot width per unit may vary
depending on the ability of the design to handle resident and
guest parking and maintaining setback requirements.
Note 3: Side yards for duplexes and quadplexes shall be zero feet
on attached sides, but not less than the equivalent of 0.75 times
the building height on the outside wall, provided that a side yard
of at least 15 feet is maintained where a driveway is located
between the building and the side yard.
(7) Patio home; zero lot line home.
(a) Maximum lot coverage (building and paving): 40%.
(b) Minimum lot area: four acres.
(c) Minimum lot width: lot area divided by 100.
(d) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(e) Minimum front yard: 30 feet.
(f) Minimum side yard: zero on one side; equal to 0.75 times the
building height on the other side, with a minimum of 15 feet if
the driveway passes between the building and the side lot line.
§ 217-61 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-61
213:858
(g) Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
(h) Maximum design density: five units per acre.
(i) Maximum size unit: three bedrooms.
(8) Detached single-family house.
(a) Maximum lot coverage (building and paving): 30%.
(b) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet. Corner lots shall have a
minimum lot area of 12,000 square feet.
(c) Minimum lot width: 80 feet.
(d) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. For lots 15,000 square feet and
larger, the lot width shall be not less than half the lot depth.
(e) Minimum front yard: 40 feet.
(f) Minimum side yard: 15 feet. One side yard may be reduced by
no more than five feet to accommodate a one-story garage or
other one-story addition to that side of the building, except
where the driveway passes between the building and the side
lot line, the side yard shall remain 15 feet.
(g) Minimum rear yard: 40 feet.
(h) Maximum size unit: four bedrooms.
(i) Accessory uses, as enumerated in § 217-43, shall be permitted
on detached single-family-house lots. The minimum yard
requirements for accessory uses shall not be less than 15 feet.
[Added 12-17-1984 by Ord. No. 35-84]
(9) Circulation and off-street parking.
(a) The minimum number of parking spaces shall be determined as
follows:
[1] Basis of calculation.
[a] Unassigned spaces: full value.
[b] Garages and assigned spaces: 75% of value.
[2] Requirements per type of housing.
[a] Patio houses : 2.4 spaces per unit.
[b] Other: 2.0 spaces per unit.
[3] For multifamily projects designed and restricted to
occupants aged 62 and over, the number of parking spaces
may be reduced to 50% of the above.
§ 217-61 WATER § 217-61
213:859
(b) In apartment, townhouse, quadplex, duplex and other forms of
attached and multifamily housing, if there are assigned spaces
to each unit, (e.g., a garage, numbered spaces, driveways to
each unit or some other design that restricts or tends to
restrict parking spaces to particular units), unassigned spaces
shall be dispersed throughout the project in groups of five or
more spaces located convenient to those units having the
assigned spaces.
(c) Separate parking areas shall be designed within the PUD to
accommodate boats, campers and other recreational vehicles.
On lots for single family detached units of 15,000 square feet
and larger, said vehicles shall be parked in either the side or
rear yards.
(d) A single width driveway to a garage shall be counted as one
space.
(e) Single-family dwellings shall have driveway width of at least 10
feet wide.
(f) Within a PUD project, commuter parking areas and bus/and
commuter van stops shall be considered in the overall
circulation and parking design. Such features, if determined
necessary and/or advisable, shall be located within the project
and, by way of illustration but not of limitation, could be an
enlarged parking area in the industrial park or shopping center
or one or more special parking areas. Bus and commuter van
stops shall be designated at these special parking areas as well
as other key locations.
(g) All applications shall comply with the minimum standards set
forth in Chapter 159, Site Plan Review § 159-39A(3).
F. Nonresidential design standards.
(1) The placement of individual structures and their design shall be
done in a manner using existing topographic and vegetative
characteristics, or man-made contours and planting, to minimize
the visual impact of a large structure and development and to use
such features to separate uses, screen major areas of
improvements and soften the visual impact of buildings and paved
areas.
(2) Light industrial, office and office research/laboratory or retail.
(a) Minimum of two acres.
(b) Maximum building coverage: 25%.
(c) Maximum building and paved surface: 60%.
(d) Minimum lot width and depth: 250 feet.
§ 217-61 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-61
213:860
§ 217-62. Veteran's micro housing unit.168 [Added 9-17-2018 by Ord.
No. 14-18]
(e) Minimum front and rear yard: 80 feet.
(f) Minimum side yard: 50 feet.
(g) Required access from collector or arterial street.
(3) Development of the nonresidential sector of the PUD shall comply
with the requirements of Chapter 159, Site Plan Review.
A. The veteran's micro housing unit shall be subject to conditional use
review and approval by the Planning Board.
(1) Notice of an application for conditional use approval of a veteran's
micro housing unit shall be given to the owners of all real property
as shown on the current tax duplicates, located in the state and
within 200 feet in all directions of the property which is the subject
of the conditional use application.
(2) The conditional use application fee shall be waived for a bona fide
501(c)(3) organization dedicated to the provision of micro housing
for a United States veteran. Such evidence shall be provided to the
Planning Board at the time of application.
(3) A maximum of five veteran's micro housing units shall be permitted
in Washington Township.
B. The applicant shall provide a plan for the proposed veteran's micro
housing unit, which provides sufficient information for the Planning
Board to determine that all ordinance requirements for the veteran's
micro housing unit will be met.
(1) The application for a veteran's micro housing unit shall be jointly
filed by the property owner and a qualified 501(c)(3) organization
as co-applicants.
C. The housing unit shall not exceed 300 square feet in area and 13.5 feet
in height and it shall be constructed or sponsored by a 501(c)(3)
organization dedicated to the provision of micro housing units for
United States veterans.
D. The veteran's micro housing unit shall be installed only on a commercial
farm as that term is defined in N.J.S.A. 4:1C-3.
E. The commercial farm, which may be a lot or combination of lots
comprising the commercial farm, upon which the veteran's micro
housing unit is installed, shall include an occupied single-family
detached dwelling.
168. Editor's Note: Former § 217-62, Cluster and lot averaging subdivisions, as amended, was
repealed 11-15-2004 by Ord. No. 26-04. For current provisions, see § 217-59.4.
§ 217-61 WATER § 217-62
213:861
F. There shall be not more than one veteran's micro housing unit
permitted per lot.
G. The veteran's micro housing unit and its installation shall conform to all
applicable building and fire code requirements, including the National
Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards for manufactured
housing.
H. Occupancy of the unit shall be limited to one person who shall be a
veteran of the United States Armed Forces.
I. The veteran's micro housing unit shall be located out of public view
such as behind an existing building (in which case it shall conform to
the principal building setback requirements for the zone in which it is
located).
(1) There shall be no substantial change to the appearance of the lot as
viewed from off site. The Planning Board may require landscaping
or some other form of screening to limit visibility of the unit from
off site.
J. The veteran's micro housing unit shall be set back at least 100 feet from
a public road or right-of-way and shielded from public view.
K. The property owner and the qualified 501(c)(3) organization as sponsor
of the veteran's micro housing unit shall certify annually to the
Township Administrator by January 15 of each year that the unit
remains occupied by a United States veteran. When the unit is no
longer occupied by a United States veteran for a period of three
consecutive months, at the direction of the Township Administrator the
veteran's micro housing unit shall be removed from the property on
which it is located, which removal shall be documented, in writing, to
the Township Administrator. The Township Administrator may order
removal of the unit from the property if the annual certification is not
submitted to the Township Administrator.
L. Prior to a change in occupancy of the unit by a qualified veteran, the
property owner and the qualified 501(c)(3) organization shall recertify
as per the above that the unit shall remain occupied by a qualified
United States veteran.
M. When a veteran's micro housing unit has been removed from a site that
has previously received conditional use approval, and a unit is proposed
to be returned to the same site or lot or property, a new conditional use
application shall be submitted to the Planning Board for approval in
accordance with the provisions of this section prior to reinstalling the
veteran's micro housing unit on the site.
N. The veterans' micro housing unit shall be provided with adequate
potable water and wastewater disposal, which shall be demonstrated by
obtaining Board of Health approval prior to installation or occupancy of
the unit.
§ 217-62 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-62
213:862
§ 217-63. Essential services.
§ 217-64. (Reserved).169
§ 217-65. (Reserved).170
§ 217-66. (Reserved).171
§ 217-67. Animal hospitals and kennels.
Animal hospitals and kennels shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Subject to Board of Health approval, the veteran's micro housing
unit may utilize a composting toilet.
O. Evidence that the veteran's micro housing unit will be provided with
adequate utilities shall be submitted, which shall be installed in
accordance with applicable codes.
(1) A veteran's micro housing unit may be powered by a solar
photovoltaic energy system, which shall be wholly installed on and
within the housing unit, and shall be subject to approval by the
Electrical Subcode Official.
P. At least one off-street parking space shall be provided in addition to
parking otherwise required.
A. Essential services, as defined in § 217-3, shall be permitted in all zones.
Because of the wide range of uses which constitute essential services,
no specific regulations are contained in this chapter. Each use shall be
evaluated by the Planning Board and standards imposed based on the
following:
(1) Degree and intensity of nuisance characteristics.
(2) Probable traffic impact.
(3) Character of surrounding existing and future development.
B. The Planning Board may require alternate siting arrangements and
provisions for parking and loading spaces and for screening, fencing,
buffers and lighting.
A. Such uses shall be on minimum lots of five acres.
169. Editor's Note: Former § 217-64, Schools, was repealed 6-18-2001 by Ord. No. 14-01. For
current provisions, see § 217-59.2.
170. Editor's Note: Former § 217-65, County clubs, swimming clubs, tennis clubs and outdoor
recreational facilities, was repealed 3-20-2000 by Ord. No. 2-00.
171. Editor's Note: Former § 217-66, Houses of worship, as amended 3-20-1989 by Ord. No.
4-89, was repealed 6-18-2001 by Ord. No. 14-01. For current provisions, see § 217-59.1.
§ 217-62 WATER § 217-67
213:863
§ 217-68. New car, farm machinery, construction equipment and
recreational vehicle sales.
§ 217-69. Planned developments.
B. Structures housing animals and exercise areas for animals shall be at
least 200 feet from any residence on adjacent or abutting lots and/or
200 feet from any required front, side or rear yard setback lines of
adjacent or abutting lots when these lots are vacant.
C. Minimum front and side yards shall be at least 100 feet each except if
abutting a residence or a residential zone. Then the Planning Board
may require additional setbacks to provide adequate buffers and to
protect adjacent uses from nuisance characteristics.
D. The maximum height of such uses shall be two stories or 25 feet.
A. Such uses shall have a minimum lot area of five acres.
B. Used cars, machinery, equipment or vehicles shall not be sold except as
an accessory use to a new car, machinery or equipment dealer.
C. There shall be at least one building in conjunction with the use which
shall contain not less than 10,000 square feet of usable floor area.
D. The area devoted to outside display of new and used cars, machinery,
equipment or vehicles shall not exceed the area of the building or 25%
of the total lot area, whichever is greater. All outdoor display and
service areas including driveways and parking facilities shall be paved.
Vehicles, machinery and construction equipment shall be kept at least
25 feet from the rights-of-way and property lines and be neatly
arranged on the lot.
E. Display lighting shall be shielded and shall be so located and
maintained as not to constitute a hazard or nuisance to the traveling
public or to neighbors. In particular, so-called "string lights" shall not
be permitted.
F. The Planning Board may impose other reasonable restrictions on these
uses as part of site plan review.
A. General. The standard provisions of this chapter require a separate
ground area, referred to in this chapter as a lot, which must be
designated, provided and continuously maintained for each structure or
use. Pursuant to the procedure hereinafter set forth, two or more such
structures may be erected and maintained on the same lot as part of a
planned development group. The procedure is intended to permit
diversification in the location of structures and to improve circulation
facilities and other site qualities while ensuing adequate standards
relating to public health, safety, welfare and convenience in the use and
occupancy of buildings and facilities in development groups.
§ 217-67 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-69
213:864
§ 217-70. Multiple dwellings; R-MDU uses.
Multiple dwelling uses shall be considered conditional uses in all R-MDU
Zones and shall meet the following criteria:
B. Where permitted. Planned developments shall be permitted in the I
Zone.
C. Uses allowed. Only those uses listed as principal permitted uses,
permitted accessory uses, or conditional uses in the I Zone shall be
permitted in the proposed planned development.
D. Minimum area required.
(1) Total tract: as required for the I Zone.
(2) Parcels within tract: two acres.
E. Minimum yards.
(1) Total tract: as required for the I Zone.
(2) Parcels within tract: to be determined by the Planning Board as
part of site plan review.
F. Maximum coverage. The aggregate coverage of all structures and
building shall not exceed that required for the I Zone.
G. Design considerations. In approving any planned development, the
Planning Board shall give careful consideration to circulation, parking,
utilities, signs, aesthetics, lighting, landscaping and buffers.
H. Required agreements. Applicants shall submit documentation to the
Planning Board to ensure that all common facilities such as parking,
signs, roads, drainage structures, utilities, lights and similar facilities
shall be maintained and operated in accordance with the approved site
plan.
A. Uses permitted.
(1) Single-family attached, garden apartments, two- or four-family
units and patio or zero line dwellings, provided that no one type of
housing unit shall exceed 60% of the total number dwelling units.
(2) At least 5% minimum or a maximum of 10% of the gross tract area
must be developed with retail and service uses designed primarily
to serve the residents of the multiple dwelling unit. Specifically
excluded uses include bars, fraternal organizations, funeral homes,
printing and publishing and gasoline service stations.
B. Minimum tract size. Not less than five acres.
C. Utilities required. All such developments shall be served by public
sewers and water.
§ 217-69 WATER § 217-70
213:865
§ 217-71. Riding stables.
D. Maximum density. Not more than six dwelling units per gross acre
except as noted below:
(1) Lands with grades of 15% or greater shall be calculated for density
purposes as set forth in § 217-38.
(2) Land in floodways shall not be considered for density purposes.
(3) Existing easements shall not be considered for density purposes.
(4) Land used for retail and service uses shall not be considered for
density purposes.
E. Access. Principal access shall be from a collector road or higher use
(wider) road.
F. Design. The standards and principles for design set forth in Chapter
159, Site Plan Review, shall be used in the design of multiple dwelling
uses.
G. Maximum height. No structure shall exceed 35 feet or 2 1/2 stories,
measured on side of greatest exposure from mean ground level.
H. Common open space. At least 35% of the gross area shall be reserved as
common open space and shall be regulated by § 217-61J of this chapter.
I. Improvements. As part of its approval of an MDU, the Planning Board
shall approve an improvement plan in the same manner and method as
set forth in Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land. No building permits shall
be issued until all improvements have been installed or bonded. The
Township Committee may waive final landscaping, sidewalks, shade
trees, monuments and the final seal coat of roads for a stated period of
time for certificates of occupancy.
A. Definition. A riding stable is a building or group of buildings that houses
equestrian animals used for instruction and/or that are either boarded,
rented or leased for a specific time period.
B. Design details.
(1) Such uses shall be located on a tract of land not less than 25 acres.
(2) All principal and accessory buildings, including riding rings, shall
be set back a minimum of 200 feet from all property lines.
(3) All outdoor lighting shall be shielded and arranged in such a
manner that the direct source of light shall not be visible from any
adjoining property.
(4) Adequate off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with
the Chapter 159, Site Plan Review.
§ 217-70 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-71
213:866
§ 217-72. (Reserved)172
§ 217-73. Residences as part of businesses.173
As part of any business establishment in a C-1 Zone, two dwelling units
may be constructed in the same structure in accordance with the following
requirements:
§ 217-74. Golf courses approved prior to Jaunary 1, 2000. [Added
6-17-1996 by Ord. No. 18-96175; amended 3-20-2000 by Ord. No.
2-00]
(5) Landscaping shall be provided as approved by the Planning Board.
(6) Such use shall be approved by the Township Board of Health.
(7) All other provisions of this section as well as other applicable local
and state requirements shall be complied with.
A. There shall be minimum of 600 square feet for each dwelling unit.
B. The dwelling unit shall not be on the same floor as the business use.
C. There shall be separate means of ingress and egress to each
dwelling.174
A. The golf course shall be a minimum of 100 contiguous acres.
B. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 159,
Site Plan Review, § 159-39, and shall be located at least 100 feet from
any lot line. It will be screened from view by suitable landscaping and/
or fencing, to be determined by the Planning Board at the time of plan
review.
C. No device shall be used so as to create noise beyond any lot line.
D. Any structure shall be set back 100 feet from a lot line and screened
from view by landscaping and/or fencing, to be determined by the
Planning Board at the time of plan review.
E. One indirectly illuminated sign at the entrance driveway is permitted.
Such sign shall be set back at least 25 feet from any lot line and shall
not exceed 16 square feet in area.
172. Editor's Note: Former § 217-72, Large-scale office and research uses, was repealed
4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 5-99.
173. Editor's Note: Former Subsection 17-8.14, Trailer Courts or Mobile Home Parks, amended
10-17-1983 by Ord. No. 24-83, which immediately preceded this section, was repealed
3-30-1989 by Ord. No. 4-89.
174. Editor's Note: Former Section 17-8.16, Single-Family Detached housing, added 12-19-1983
by Ord. No. 32-84; amended 7-16-1984 by Ord. No. 19-84; 12-17-1984 by Ord. No. 35-84;
6-21-1993 by Ord. No. 17-93 was repealed 5-18-1998 by Ord. No. 16-98.
175. Editor's Note: Former Subsection 17-8.17, Golf Course, added 4-16-1990 by Ord. No.
12-90, was repealed 4-15-1996 by Ord. No. 13-96. This ordinance provided for its
reinstatement.
§ 217-71 WATER § 217-74
213:867
§ 217-74.1. Golf courses approved on or after January 1, 2000.
[Added 3-20-2000 by Ord. No. 2-00]
§ 217-75. Bed-and-breakfast inn. [Added 11-18-1991 by Ord. No.
30-91]
A bed-and-breakfast inn is permitted as a conditional use in the Historic
Preservation Overlay Zone in accordance with the following standards and
criteria:
F. Entrance to the golf course shall be directly from a collector, primary
collector or arterial classified road.
G. Fairways and paths shall be located at least 50 feet from any lot line.
This fifty-foot buffer area will be suitable and attractively landscaped.
H. Lights or illumination shall be located and/or shielded to prevent glare
or illumination beyond any lot line.
I. Reasonable requirements shall be established to minimize any adverse
impact on surrounding areas.
A. The tract on which the golf course is to be constructed shall comprise at
least 150 acres for the first 18 holes and an additional 75 acres for each
additional nine holes.
B. The length of the golf course shall be not less than 6,500 yards.
C. The golf course shall be the sole principal use of the tract and no
residential development shall be constructed on the same tract with the
golf course.
D. There shall be direct driveway access from a collector or arterial road
as shown on the Circulation Plan Element of the Washington Township
Master Plan.
E. Dining facilities may include restaurant and banquet facilities and a bar
and grill as accessory uses to the golf course, provided that the total
seating does not exceed 300. The floor area of the dining area(s), bar,
kitchen and related facilities shall not exceed 10,000 square feet. Up to
10% of the permitted seating may be outdoors, provided that such
outdoor dining area is only utilized from dawn to dusk. Up to 10% of
permitted seating may be used for bar seating, and bar seating shall be
limited to 10% of facilities.
A. The principal use of the premises shall be a single-family residence. A
bed-and-breakfast inn shall be operated only by the residents of the
premises who have their principal domicile at the premises and shall be
considered to be an accessory or subordinate use to the single-family
residence.
B. No bed-and-breakfast inn shall be operated on a lot which fails to meet
the minimum lot size for the zoning district in which it is located.
§ 217-74 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-75
213:868
C. Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: two off-street parking
spaces for the principal domiciled resident household of the dwelling,
plus one additional space for each room approved for use for guests.
D. Off-street parking spaces for a bed-and-breakfast inn shall be permitted
only in the side or rear areas of the property. No parking is allowed in
the front yard area.
E. Off-street parking may be provided on a proximate property within 200
feet of the bed-and-breakfast inn property, provided that there is
conformance with all requirements herein.
F. Proposed off-street parking shall be properly buffered and landscaped
according to Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, § 159-31, and any
requirements of the Planning Board.
G. There shall be no visible indication of the bed-and-breakfast inn use
from the road or adjacent properties with the exception of one twosided
four-square-foot sign.
H. Each application shall be accompanied by a certification from the Board
of Health that the current septic system and water supply are adequate
for the proposed use as a bed-and-breakfast inn, and a certification
from the Construction Official that the building is in compliance with
the provisions of Chapter 56, Building Construction, all other applicable
Township ordinances, the Uniform Fire Safety Act176 and the Uniform
Construction Code Act177 and such other state statutes and regulations
as may be applicable.
I. No more than five rooms shall be used as guest rooms for bed-andbreakfast
transients, nor shall more than 12 persons be registered as
guests of the bed-and-breakfast inn at any one time. Guest occupancy
shall be limited to 21 consecutive days or not more than 21 days in any
period of 24 consecutive days.
J. Bed-and-breakfast inns shall provide breakfast for registered guests in
the forenoon of each day, and no alcoholic beverages may be sold and
no other meals may be served or sold to registered guests. No food or
beverages of any kind shall be served or sold to the general public on
the premises.
K. No cooking facility shall be allowed in any guest room.
L. No smoking shall be allowed in any guest room.
M. Bed-and-breakfast inns shall be registered with the Bureau of Housing
Inspection in the Division of Housing and Development in the
Department of Community Affairs.
N. All applicants shall be required to obtain a food handler's license.
176. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
177. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 217-75 WATER § 217-75
213:869
§ 217-76. Conditional use standards for location of wireless
telecommunications towers. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
amended 4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 12-98; amended 3-15-1999 by Ord.
No. 4-99178; 11-19-2001 by Ord. No. 35-01; 6-15-2009 by Ord. No.
14-09]
O. No premises shall commence to be used as a bed-and-breakfast inn
until after the issuance of a conditional use permit by the Planning
Board and review by the Historic Preservation Commission, who shall
make a recommendation to the Planning Board that the proposed use
furthers the goals and objectives of the Historic Preservation Overlay
Zone.
P. There shall be a finding by the Planning Board that the bed-andbreakfast
inn use furthers the goals and objectives of the Historic
Preservation Overlay Zone and is generally compatible with
surrounding uses.
A. Location priority. If needed in accordance with an overall
Comprehensive Plan for the provision of full wireless
telecommunications service within the Township of Washington area,
wireless telecommunications towers, where permitted as a conditional
use, shall be in accordance with the following prioritized locations:
(1) The first priority location shall be co-location on existing wireless
telecommunications towers (or existing water tanks) or other
appropriate structures, such as high tension towers, provided that
the new installation does not increase the height by more than
10%; and
(2) The second priority location shall be on such locations as the
applicant proves are essential to provide required service to the
Township of Washington area.
B. Government agencies. Communications towers or antennas owned,
operated or used by the Township of Washington or located on property
owned by the Township of Washington and used for public purposes
shall be exempt from the requirements of this section, provided that a
178. Editor's Note: Section 5 of this ordinance provided for the following: "Wireless
telecommunications towers in existence on the date of the adoption of this ordinance
(nonconforming wireless telecommunication towers) are subject to the following
provisions:" "1. Nonconforming wireless telecommunications towers may continue in use
for the purpose now used, but may not be expanded without complying with this
ordinance." "2. Nonconforming wireless telecommunications towers which are partially
damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause may be replaced and restored to their
former use, location and physical dimensions subject to obtaining a building permit
therefor, but without otherwise complying with this ordinance. If this destruction is
greater than partial, then repair or restoration will require compliance with this
ordinance." "3. The owner of any nonconforming wireless telecommunications tower may
repair, rebuild and/or upgrade but not expand such wireless telecommunications tower or
increase its height or reduce its setbacks in order to improve the structural integrity of
the facility, to allow the facility to accommodate collocated antennas or facilities or to
upgrade the facilities to current engineering, technological or communications standards
without having to conform to the provisions of this ordinance."
§ 217-75 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-76
213:870
license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower on land owned
by the Township has been approved by the Township Committee and
further provided that the Township affords the public a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on the project. As a condition of any such
license or lease, the Township Committee may require site plan
approval or may exempt the applicant from site plan approval. The
decision to extend such license or lease to an applicant shall be vested
solely with the Township Committee and shall not be governed by this
section. The Township, in its absolute discretion, reserves the express
right to deny all use of its property for antennas or towers. Preexisting
towers and antennas are exempt from this section.
C. Specific conditions.
(1) An applicant to construct a wireless telecommunications tower
shall present documentary evidence regarding the need for cellular
antennas at the proposed location. This information shall identify
the wireless network layout and coverage areas to demonstrate the
need for such equipment at a specific location within the Township.
(2) An applicant proposing to erect a new wireless telecommunications
tower shall provide documentary evidence that a good faith and
thorough attempt has been made to locate the antennas on existing
buildings, structures or towers that have existing wireless
communications antennas within the applicant's coverage area.
Such evidence shall include a radio frequency engineering analysis
of the potential suitability of existing buildings or structures or
existing towers in the search areas for such antennas. Efforts to
secure such locations shall be documented though correspondence
between the wireless telecommunications provider and the
property owner(s) of the existing buildings or structures or tower
sites. The Township reserves the right to engage a professional
radio frequency engineer to review such documentation. This
requirement includes co-location on buildings, structures and
towers currently being developed and those subject to pending
applications before the Township approving authorities.
(3) Applicants proposing to construct new wireless
telecommunications towers shall document the locations of all
existing telecommunications towers within the Township of
Washington and surrounding areas with coverage in the Township
and any changes proposed within the following twelve-month
period, including plans for new locations and the discontinuance or
relocation of existing facilities. Applicants shall provide competent
testimony by a radio frequency engineer regarding the suitability of
potential locations in light of the design of the wireless
telecommunications network. When a suitable location on an
existing tower is found to exist, but an applicant is unable to secure
an agreement to co-locate its equipment on such tower, the
applicant shall provide written evidence of correspondence with
the owner of such tower verifying that suitable space is not
§ 217-76 WATER § 217-76
213:871
available on the existing tower(s). Where an applicant to construct
a new tower is not a wireless service provider, the applicant shall
prove that adequate wireless telecommunications services,
sufficient to meet the requirements of the Telecommunications Act
of 1996, cannot be provided without the proposed tower.
(4) Site location alternative analysis. Each applicant shall include a
site location alternative analysis describing the location of other
sites considered, the availability of those sites, the extent to which
other sites do or do not meet the provider's service or engineering
needs and the reason why the subject site was not chosen. The
analysis shall include the following issues:
(a) How the proposed location of the wireless telecommunications
tower relates to the objective of providing full wireless
communications services within the Township of Washington
area.
(b) How the proposed location of the proposed wireless
telecommunications tower relates to the location of any
existing antennas within and near the Township of Washington
area.
(c) How the proposed location of the wireless telecommunications
tower relates to the anticipated need for additional antennas
within and near the Township of Washington area by the
applicant and by other providers of wireless communications
services within the Township of Washington area.
(d) How the proposed location of the wireless telecommunications
tower relates to the objective of co-locating the antennas of
many different providers of wireless communications services
on the same wireless telecommunications tower.
(e) How its plan specifically relates to and is coordinated with the
needs of all other providers of wireless communications
services within the Township of Washington area.
(f) The Planning Board or Zoning Board, as is appropriate, may
retain technical consultants as it deems necessary to provide
assistance in the review of the site location alternative
analysis. The service provider shall bear the reasonable costs
associated with such consultation.
D. Bulk requirements. When an applicant to construct a wireless
telecommunications tower demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
reviewing agency that suitable locations on existing buildings or
structures either do not exist or are not available, the applicant may
erect a new telecommunications tower according to the following
requirements:
§ 217-76 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-76
213:872
(1) Minimum setback of tower and equipment compound from any
adjoining lot line and all nonappurtenant structures: 200 feet or
200% of the height of tower, whichever is greater, provided that
distance is not closer than the building setback applicable to the
zone district, and further provided that no tower shall be
constructed within a required wetlands buffer or conservation
easement area.
(2) Maximum tower height (exclusive of lightning rod):
(a) Multiple vendors: 120 feet.
(b) Single vendor: 100 feet.
(3) An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a greater height,
but not to exceed the maximum tower height set forth above.
E. Separation requirements. No wireless telecommunications tower shall
be erected within 500 feet or 300% of the height of the tower,
whichever is greater, of any of the following:
(1) Any residence not located on the subject property.
(2) Public buildings, such as public and private schools, libraries,
senior citizen centers, public parks and playgrounds and houses of
worship.
(3) Historic district or any historic site listed or designated as eligible
for listing on the National and/or State Register of Historic Places.
F. Antenna modifications and tower certification. Wireless
telecommunications towers must be constructed and used in
accordance with the Electronic Industries Association/
Telecommunications Industries Association (EIA/TIA) Revision F
Standard entitled "Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and
Antenna Supporting Structures" (or equivalent), as it may be updated
or amended, and in accordance with standards of the FAA, FCC and any
other agency of the state or federal government with authority to
regulate towers and antennas, including the Building Officials and Code
Administrators (BOCA) International, Inc. Code. Operators of wireless
telecommunications towers shall provide to the Township of
Washington an annual report from a licensed professional engineer
certifying the structural integrity of the tower, together with all
antennas mounted thereon, and that they meet applicable current
minimum safety requirements. Such report shall also be provided
whenever antenna arrays are modified and shall include a detailed
listing of all antennas and equipment so certified. Vendors shall also be
required to notify the Township of Washington when the use of such
antennas and equipment is discontinued. If the annual report discloses
that the condition of any tower presents an imminent hazard to the
public health, safety and welfare, the Township Engineer shall order the
owner of the tower to take appropriate corrective action, including, if
§ 217-76 WATER § 217-76
213:873
necessary, the removal of the tower to protect the public health, safety
and welfare. Wireless telecommunications towers shall be maintained
to assure the continued structural integrity. The owner of the tower
shall also perform such other maintenance of the structure and of the
site as to assure that it does not create a visual nuisance.
G. Abandonment and removal. Wireless telecommunications towers and
equipment which are not operated for wireless telecommunications
purposes for a continuous period of six months shall be considered
abandoned and shall be removed by the facility owner at its cost. This
removal shall occur within 90 days of receipt of notice from the
Township of such abandonment. If such wireless telecommunications
tower is not removed within said 90 days, the municipality may remove
such tower at the owner's expense. If the facility is to be retained, the
owner shall provide proof that the facility will be reused within one year
of such discontinuance. If a facility is not reused within one year, a
demolition permit shall be obtained and the facility removed. Upon
removal, the site shall be cleaned, restored and revegetated to blend
with the existing surrounding vegetation at time of abandonment. The
facility owner shall post a bond at the time that a construction permit is
issued in an amount not less than 120% of the cost to remove the tower
and restore the property, as determined by the Township Engineer, to
cover the costs of tower removal and site restoration. The amount of the
bond shall have taken into consideration cost escalations.
H. Co-location required.
(1) Authorization for the construction of a new wireless
telecommunications tower shall be conditioned on agreement by
the tower owner that other cellular service providers will be
permitted to co-locate on the proposed tower within the limits of
structural and radio frequency engineering requirements and at
rates which reflect the fair market price for such service. As part of
the application for tower approval, the applicant shall document
the extent to which additional equipment could be mounted on the
tower and the types of equipment which could be accommodated.
(2) Ordinance limitations on the number of structures on a lot shall not
apply when wireless telecommunications towers and equipment
are located on a lot with buildings or structures already on it.
I. Monopole and stealth construction. Monopole or stealth tower
construction shall be utilized in all cases unless it can be conclusively
demonstrated that monopole or stealth construction is not suitable for a
specific location or application or that a different type pole is necessary
for the co-location of additional antennas on the tower.
J. Fencing and/or other safety devices. Wireless telecommunications
towers and equipment buildings and compounds shall be surrounded by
a security feature such as a fence in accordance with § 217-57. All
towers shall be designed with anticlimbing devices in order to prevent
§ 217-76 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-76
213:874
unauthorized access. Additional safety devices shall be permitted or
required, as needed, and as approved by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board as may be necessary.
K. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided along the perimeter of the
security fence to provide a visual screen or buffer for adjoining private
properties and the public right-of-way. Required front yard setbacks
shall be landscaped. All equipment, buildings and compounds shall be
screened in accordance with § 217-57.
L. Signs. Signs shall not be permitted except for signs displaying owner
contact information, warnings, equipment information and safety
instructions. Such signs shall not exceed two square feet in area. No
commercial advertising shall be permitted on any wireless
telecommunications tower or equipment building.
M. Color. Wireless telecommunications towers shall be of a color
appropriate to the tower's locational context and to make it as
unobtrusive as possible, unless otherwise required by the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA). Wireless telecommunications towers
and antennas shall also comply with the provisions of § 217-57.
N. Activity and access. All equipment shall be designed and automated to
the greatest extent possible in order to reduce the need for on-site
maintenance and thereby to minimize the need for vehicular trips to
and from the site. Access rate shall be from established site access
points whenever possible. Minimal off-street parking shall be permitted
as needed and as approved by the Planning Board.
O. Dish antennas. Dish antennas shall be colored, camouflaged or
screened to make them as unobtrusive as possible, and in no case shall
the diameter of a dish antenna exceed six feet.
P. Lighting. No lighting is permitted except as follows:
(1) Equipment, buildings and compounds may have security and safety
lighting at the entrance, provided that the light is attached to the
facility, is focused downward and is on timing devices and/or
sensors so that the light is turned off when not needed for safety or
security purposes; and
(2) No lighting is permitted on a wireless telecommunications tower
except lighting that specifically is required by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), and any such required lighting shall be
focused and shielded to the greatest extent possible so as to not
project towards adjacent and nearby properties.
Q. Noise. No equipment shall be operated so as to produce noise in excess
of the limits set by the local noise ordinance,179 except in emergency
situations requiring the use of a backup generator.
179. Editor's Note: See Ch. 125, Noise.
§ 217-76 WATER § 217-76
213:875
§ 217-76.1. Automobile repair and service stations. [Added
8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 21-09]
In the C-1 Zone, the following conditional use standards shall apply to
automobile repair and service stations:
R. Radio frequency emissions. The FTA gives the FCC sole jurisdiction of
the field of regulation of radio frequency (RF) emission, and wireless
telecommunications towers which meet the FCC standards shall not be
conditioned or denied on the basis of RF impacts. Applicants shall
provide current FCC information concerning wireless
telecommunications towers and radio frequency emission standards.
Applicants for wireless telecommunications towers shall be required to
provide information on the projected power density of the proposed
facility and how this meets FCC standards.
S. Franchises. Owners and operators of towers or antennas shall certify
that all franchises required by law for the construction and operation of
a wireless communications system in the Township of Washington have
been obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises with the
Clerk of the Township, and shall a copy with its application submitted to
the approving authority.
A. Automobile repair and service stations shall have been in existence as
of May 1, 2009.
B. All major automobile repairs shall be conducted indoors within
automobile repair garages.
§ 217-76 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-76.1
213:876
ARTICLE VIII
Affordable Housing
[Added 7-16-2018 by Ord. No. 11-18180]
§ 217-77. Affordable Housing Ordinance.
The Washington Planning Board has adopted a Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law at N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1,
et seq. The Housing Element and Fair Share Plan has been endorsed by
the Mayor and Committee. This article shall be known as the Affordable
Housing Ordinance and it implements and incorporates the adopted and
endorsed Housing Element and Fair Share Plan and addresses the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-1, et seq., as amended and supplemented,181
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, et seq., as amended and supplemented, and the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act of 1985.
§ 217-78. Monitoring and reporting requirements.
The Township of Washington shall comply with the following monitoring and
reporting requirements regarding the status of the implementation of its
Court-approved Housing Element and Fair Share Plan:
A. Beginning on a date one year from the Court's approval of the
Township's 2018 spending plan, and on every anniversary of that date
through January 6, 2025, the Township agrees to provide annual
reporting of its Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity to the New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Council on Affordable
Housing, or Local Government Services, or other entity designated by
the State of New Jersey, with a copy provided to Fair Share Housing
Center (FSHC) and posted on the municipal website, using forms
developed for this purpose by the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs (NJDCA), Council on Affordable Housing (COAH), or
Local Government Services (NJLGS). The reporting shall include an
accounting of all Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity, including the
source and amount of funds collected and the amount and purpose for
which any funds have been expended.
B. Beginning on January 6, 2019, and on every anniversary of that date
through January 6, 2025, the Township agrees to provide annual
reporting of the status of all affordable housing activity within the
municipality through posting on the municipal website with a copy of
such posting provided to Fair Share Housing Center, using forms
previously developed for this purpose by COAH or any other forms
endorsed by the Special Master and FSHC.
C. By July 1, 2020, as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, the
Township will post on its municipal website, with a copy provided to
180. Editor's Note: This article also repealed former Article VIII, Fair Share Ordinance, as
amended.
181. Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 217-77 WATER § 217-78
213:877
§ 217-79. Definitions.
The following terms when used in this article shall have the meanings given
in this section:
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301
et seq.).
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity designated by the Township to
administer affordable units in accordance with this article, N.J.A.C. 5:93,182
and UHAC (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26).
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median income
at which new restricted units in an affordable housing development are
affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent level that is within the means of a
low- or moderate-income household as defined within N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4, and,
in the case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms
to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and
supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may be
amended and supplemented.
FSHC, a status report as to its implementation of its Plan and an
analysis of whether any unbuilt sites or unfulfilled mechanisms
continue to present a realistic opportunity and whether any
mechanisms to meet unmet need should be revised or supplemented.
Such posting shall invite any interested party to submit comments to
the municipality, with a copy to FSHC, regarding whether any sites
no longer present a realistic opportunity and should be replaced and
whether any mechanisms to meet unmet need should be revised or
supplemented. Any interested party may by motion request a hearing
before the Court regarding these issues.
D. By January 6, 2020, and every third year thereafter, as required by
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1, the Township will post on its municipal website,
with a copy provided to FSHC, a status report as to its satisfaction of its
very-low-income requirements, including its family very-low-income
requirements. Such posting shall invite any interested party to submit
comments to the municipality and FSHC on the issue of whether the
municipality has complied with its very-low-income and family very-lowincome
housing obligations.
182. Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 217-78 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-79
213:878
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in
or approved pursuant to the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan or
otherwise intended to address the Township's fair share obligation, and
includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal
construction project or a one-hundred-percent-affordable housing
development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a municipal
Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a municipality's fair
share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act and approved for crediting by the Court and/or funded through an
affordable housing trust fund.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
population such that: all the residents of the development wherein the unit
is situated are 62 years of age or older; or at least 80% of the units are
occupied by one person who is 55 years of age or older; or the development
has been designated by the Secretary of the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development as "housing for older persons" as defined
in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3607.
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1, et seq.).
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENT — A structure in which households
live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing facilities, central
heat and common areas. Alternative living arrangements include, but are
not limited to: transitional facilities for the homeless; Class A, B, C, D and
E boarding homes as regulated by the State of New Jersey Department
of Community Affairs; residential health care facilities as regulated by the
New Jersey Department of Health; group homes for the developmentally
disabled and mentally ill as licensed and/or regulated by the New Jersey
Department of Human Services; and congregate living arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility that is licensed by the New
Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services
are available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to the
proprietor and that offers units containing, at a minimum, one unfurnished
room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit
entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
administrative agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, as established by the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301, et seq.).
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
§ 217-79 WATER § 217-79
213:879
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety code
violations that requires the repair or replacement of a major system. A
major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells),
heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint
abatement and/or load-bearing structural systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
land included in a proposed development, including the holder of an option
to contract to purchase or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of any building
or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1, et seq.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market-rate units. This term includes, but is not limited
to: new construction, the conversion of a nonresidential structure to
residential use and the creation of new affordable units through the gut
rehabilitation or reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the regional median household
income by household size.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a low-income
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include, but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic
systems), lead paint abatement and load-bearing structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable housing region, as adopted annually by COAH or a successor
entity approved by the Court.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the regional
median household income by household size.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
NON-EXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than the
transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of ownership
§ 217-79 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-79
213:880
between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial decree of divorce
or judicial separation, but not including sales to third parties; the transfer of
ownership between family members as a result of inheritance; the transfer
of ownership through an executor's deed to a class A beneficiary and the
transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently incomeeligible
households are selected for placement in affordable housing units
such that no preference is given to one applicant over another except for
purposes of matching household income and size with an appropriately
priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each housing
region affordable to a four-person household with an income at 80% of
the regional median as defined by duly adopted regional income limits
published annually by COAH or a successor entity.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or reconstruction of
any building or structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including the
rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid utilities
computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for its Section 8
program. In assisted living residences, "rent" does not include charges for
food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or an
ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as amended and supplemented, but does not include a marketrate
unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:80-26-1, et seq.
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 30% or less of the regional median household
income by household size.
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a verylow-
income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and crawl
space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm windows,
replacement storm doors, replacement windows and replacement doors,
and is considered a major system for purposes of a rehabilitation program.
§ 217-80. Applicability.
A. The provisions of this article shall apply to all affordable housing
developments and affordable housing units that currently exist and that
are proposed to be created within the Township of Washington pursuant
to the Township's 2018 Third Round Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan.
§ 217-79 WATER § 217-80
213:881
§ 217-81. Alternative living arrangements.
B. Moreover, the provisions of this article shall apply to all developments
that contain very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing units,
including any currently unanticipated future developments that will
provide very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing units, and also
including projects that may be funded with low-income housing tax
credit financing, which shall comply with the income and bedroom
distribution requirements of this article.
C. Any property in the Township of Washington that is currently zoned for
nonresidential uses and subsequently receives a zoning change or use
variance or approval of a redevelopment plan to permit multifamily
residential development, or that is currently zoned for residential uses
and receives a zoning change or density variance or approval of a
redevelopment plan to permit multifamily residential development,
which multifamily residential development will be constructed at a
density of six or more units per acre and yielding five or more new
dwelling units, shall provide an affordable housing set-aside of 15% if
the affordable units will be for rent and 20% if the affordable units will
be for sale. This provision does not affect residential development on
sites that are zoned for inclusionary residential development as part of
the Township's Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, which are subject
to the affordable housing set-aside requirements set forth in the
applicable zoning, nor does it affect residential development in the
downtown rehabilitation area, which shall be subject to the affordable
housing set-aside requirements of the rehabilitation plan or any sitespecific
redevelopment plan. This requirement does not give any
developer the right to any such rezoning, variance or other relief, or
establish any obligation on the part of the Township of Washington to
grant such rezoning, variance or other relief. A property shall not be
permitted to be subdivided so as to avoid compliance with this
requirement. All affordable units created pursuant to this subsection
shall be governed by the provisions of this article.
A. The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.8 and UHAC, with the following
exceptions:
(1) Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15); provided, however,
that the units or bedrooms may be affirmatively marketed by the
provider in accordance with an alternative plan approved by the
Court;
(2) Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3).
B. With the exception of units established with capital funding through a
twenty-year operating contract with the Department of Human
Services, Division of Developmental Disabilities, alternative living
arrangements shall have at least thirty-year controls on affordability in
§ 217-80 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-81
213:882
§ 217-82. Phasing schedule for inclusionary zoning.
In inclusionary developments the following schedule shall be followed:
Maximum Percentage of Market-
Rate Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25 0
25+1 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
§ 217-83. New construction.
accordance with UHAC, unless an alternative commitment is approved
by the Court.
C. The service provider for the alternative living arrangement shall act as
the administrative agent for the purposes of administering the
affirmative marketing and affordability requirements for the alternative
living arrangement.
A. Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing
units.
(1) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between very-low-
, low- or moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd
number of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a lowincome
unit. At least 13% of all restricted rental units shall be verylow-
income units (affordable to a household earning 30% or less of
regional median income by household size). The very-low-income
units shall be counted as part of the required number of low-income
units within the development.
(2) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units
within each bedroom distribution shall be very-low- or low-income
units.
(3) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
(a) The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total very-low-, low- or
moderate-income units;
(b) At least 30% of all very-low-, low- or moderate-income units
shall be two-bedroom units;
§ 217-81 WATER § 217-83
213:883
(c) At least 20% of all very-low-, low- or moderate-income units
shall be three-bedroom units; and
(d) The remaining units may be allocated among two- and threebedroom
units at the discretion of the developer.
(4) Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be structured
such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of agerestricted
very-low-, low- or moderate-income units within the
inclusionary development. This standard may be met by having all
one-bedroom units or by having a two-bedroom unit for each
efficiency unit.
B. Accessibility requirements.
(1) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be subject to
the technical design standards of the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and the following:
(2) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in
other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit is
attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the following
features:
(a) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor; and
(b) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor; and
(c) An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor; and
(d) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door
or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor;
and
(e) If not all of the foregoing requirements in Subsection B(2)(a)
through (d) can be satisfied, then an interior accessible route
of travel must be provided between stories within an individual
unit, but if all of the terms of Subsection B(2)(a) through (d)
above have been satisfied, then an interior accessible route of
travel shall not be required between stories within an
individual unit; and
(f) An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a, et seq.) and the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, or evidence that Washington has collected
funds from the developer sufficient to make 10% of the
adaptable entrances in the development accessible:
[1] Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who is
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
§ 217-83 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-83
213:884
[2] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the Township of Washington's Affordable
Housing Trust Fund sufficient to install accessible
entrances in 10% of the affordable units that have been
constructed with adaptable entrances.
[3] The funds deposited under Subsection B(2)(f)[2] above
shall be used by the Township of Washington for the sole
purpose of making the adaptable entrance of an affordable
unit accessible when requested to do so by a person with a
disability who occupies or intends to occupy the unit and
requires an accessible entrance.
[4] The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design
plan and cost estimate to the Construction Official of the
Township of Washington for the conversion of adaptable to
accessible entrances.
[5] Once the Construction Official has determined that the
design plan to convert the unit entrances from adaptable
to accessible meet the requirements of the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and that the cost estimate of
such conversion is reasonable, payment shall be made to
the Township's Affordable Housing Trust Fund in care of
the Township Treasurer who shall ensure that the funds
are deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund and
appropriately earmarked.
(g) Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is "site
impracticable" to meet the requirements. Determinations of
site impracticability shall be in compliance with the Barrier
Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
C. Design.
(1) In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, very-low-,
low- or moderate-income units shall be integrated with the market
units.
(2) In inclusionary developments, very-low-, low- or moderate-income
units shall have access to all of the same common elements and
facilities as the market units.
D. Maximum rents and sales prices:
(1) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units,
the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set forth in
UHAC, utilizing the most recently published regional weighted
average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits published by HUD
and the calculation procedures set forth in the Consent Order
entered on December 16, 2016, by the Honorable Douglas K.
§ 217-83 WATER § 217-83
213:885
Wolfson, JSC, in In the Matter of the Township of East Brunswick
for a Judgment of Compliance of its Third Round Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, Docket No.: MID-L-004013-15.
(2) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 60% of median income, and the average rent for
restricted rental units shall be affordable to households earning no
more than 52% of median income.
(3) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units
shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both lowincome
and moderate-income units, provided that at least 13% of
all low- and moderate-income rental units shall be affordable to
very-low-income households, which very-low-income units shall be
part of the low-income requirement.
(4) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 70% of median income, and each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55% for
restricted ownership units; in achieving this affordability average,
moderate-income ownership units must be available for at least
three different sales prices for each bedroom type, and low-income
ownership units must be available for at least two different sales
prices for each bedroom type.
(5) In determining the initial sales prices and rent levels for
compliance with the affordability average requirements for
restricted units other than assisted living facilities and agerestricted
developments, the following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-halfperson
household;
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
(d) A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four-and-one-halfperson
household; and
(e) A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(6) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with
the affordability average requirements for restricted units in
assisted living facilities and age-restricted developments, the
following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
§ 217-83 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-83
213:886
§ 217-84. Utilities.
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-halfperson
household; and
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(7) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be
calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the unit, including
principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of
the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest),
taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance and
condominium or homeowner association fees do not exceed 28% of
the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size household as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the price shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(8) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as
not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate
size household, including an allowance for tenant-paid utilities, as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(9) The price of owner-occupied very-low-, low- or moderate-income
units may increase annually based on the percentage increase in
the regional median income limit for each housing region. In no
event shall the maximum resale price established by the
administrative agent be lower than the last recorded purchase
price.
(10) The rents of very-low-, low- or moderate-income units may be
increased annually based on the permitted percentage increase in
the Housing Consumer Price Index for the Northeast Urban Area.
This increase shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rent increases
for units constructed pursuant to low-income housing tax credit
regulations shall be indexed pursuant to the regulations governing
low-income housing tax credits.
A. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source as market
units within an inclusionary development.
B. Tenant-paid utilities included in the utility allowance shall be set forth
in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility allowance approved
by HUD for the Section 8 program.
§ 217-83 WATER § 217-85
213:887
§ 217-85. Occupancy standards.
In referring certified households to specific restricted units, the
administrative agent shall, to the extent feasible and without causing an
undue delay in the occupancy of a unit, strive to:
§ 217-86. Control periods for restricted ownership units and
enforcement mechanisms.
A. Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
B. Provide children of different sexes with separate bedrooms;
C. Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
D. Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
A. Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and supplemented, and
each restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the requirements
of this article for a period of at least 30 years, until Washington takes
action to release the unit from such requirements; prior to such action,
a restricted ownership unit must remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to the
unit.
C. Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the administrative agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine the
nonrestricted, fair-market value of the unit based on either an appraisal
or the unit's equalized assessed value without the restrictions in place.
D. At the time of the initial sale of the unit, the initial purchaser shall
execute and deliver to the administrative agent a recapture note
obligating the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs, successors
and assigns) to repay, upon the first nonexempt sale after the unit's
release from the restrictions set forth in this article, an amount equal to
the difference between the unit's nonrestricted fair market value and its
restricted price, and the recapture note shall be secured by a recapture
lien evidenced by a duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
E. The affordability controls set forth in this article shall remain in effect
despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure with
respect to restricted ownership units.
F. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the Construction
Official stating that the unit meets all Code standards upon the first
§ 217-85 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-86
213:888
§ 217-87. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units,
homeowner association fees and resale prices.
Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, including:
§ 217-88. Buyer income eligibility.
transfer of title following the removal of the restrictions provided under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended and supplemented.
A. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the administrative agent.
B. The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing and
in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the foregoing
standards.
C. The master deeds of inclusionary developments shall provide no
distinction between the condominium or homeowner association fees
and special assessments paid by low- and moderate-income purchasers
and those paid by market purchasers.
D. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of anticipated capital improvements. Eligible capital
improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable for a larger
household or the addition of a bathroom. See § 217-88.
A. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be reserved
for households with a gross household income less than or equal to 50%
of median income and moderate-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than 80%
of median income.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the administrative agent may, upon
approval by the Township Committee, and subject to the Court's
approval, permit a moderate-income purchaser to buy a low-income
unit if and only if the administrative agent can demonstrate that there is
an insufficient number of eligible low-income purchasers in the housing
region to permit prompt occupancy of the unit and all other reasonable
efforts to attract a low-income purchaser, including pricing and
financing incentives, have failed. Any such low-income unit that is sold
to a moderate-income household shall retain the required pricing and
pricing restrictions for a low-income unit.
C. A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit must
occupy it as the certified household's principal residence and shall not
lease the unit; provided, however, that the administrative agent may
permit the owner of a restricted ownership unit, upon application and a
§ 217-86 WATER § 217-88
213:889
§ 217-89. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership unit;
subordination.
§ 217-90. Capital improvements to ownership units.
showing of hardship, to lease the restricted unit to another certified
household for a period not to exceed one year. Violations of this
provision shall be subject to the applicable enforcement provisions of
§ 217-95 of this article.
D. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit,
and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees, as
applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's eligible monthly
income.
A. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the owner shall apply to the administrative agent for a
determination in writing that the proposed indebtedness complies with
the provisions of this section, and the administrative agent shall issue
such determination prior to the owner incurring such indebtedness.
B. With the exception of first purchase money mortgages, neither an
owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or permit the total
indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to exceed 95% of
the maximum allowable resale price of the unit, as such price is
determined by the administrative agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.6(b).
A. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of capital improvements made since the purchase of the
unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render the unit
suitable for a larger household or that add an additional bathroom. In
no event shall the maximum sales price of an improved housing unit
exceed the limits of affordability for the larger household.
B. Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of property that
are permanently affixed to the unit or were included when the unit was
initially restricted (for example, refrigerator, range, washer, dryer,
dishwasher, wall-to-wall carpeting) shall be included in the maximum
allowable resale price. Other items may be sold to the purchaser at a
reasonable price that has been approved by the administrative agent at
the time of the signing of the agreement to purchase. The purchase of
central air conditioning installed subsequent to the initial sale of the
unit and not included in the base price may be made a condition of the
unit resale provided the price, which shall be subject to ten-year,
straight-line depreciation, has been approved by the administrative
§ 217-88 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-90
213:890
§ 217-91. Control periods for restricted rental units.
§ 217-92. Rent restrictions for rental units; leases.
agent. Unless otherwise approved by the administrative agent, the
purchase of any property other than central air conditioning shall not
be made a condition of the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser
must personally certify at the time of closing that no unapproved
transfer of funds for the purpose of selling and receiving property has
taken place at the time of or as a condition of resale.
A. Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented, and each
restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the requirements of this
article for a period of at least 30 years, until Washington takes action to
release the unit from such requirements. Prior to such action, a
restricted rental unit must remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed restriction
shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records office of the
County of Morris. A copy of the filed document shall be provided to the
administrative agent within 30 days of the receipt of a certificate of
occupancy.
C. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability controls
of this article despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
(1) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(2) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit; or
(3) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure on the
property containing the unit.
A. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units and
tenants shall be responsible for security deposits and the full amount of
the rent as stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each
restricted rental unit shall be provided to the administrative agent.
B. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover the
customary charges for food and services) without the express written
approval of the administrative agent.
C. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not
exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit and shall
be payable to the administrative agent to be applied to the costs of
administering the controls applicable to the unit as set forth in this
article.
§ 217-90 WATER § 217-92
213:891
§ 217-93. Tenant income eligibility.
D. No rent-control ordinance or other pricing restriction shall be
applicable to either the market units or the affordable units in any
development in which at least 15% of the total number of dwelling units
are restricted rental units in compliance with this article.
A. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(1) Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of the regional
median household income by household size.
(2) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income less than or equal to 50% of the regional
median household income by household size.
(3) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than 80% of the regional median
household income by household size.
B. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very-low-income
household, low-income household or a moderate-income household, as
applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not
exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of the household's eligible
monthly income as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may
be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may
be exceeded if one or more of the following circumstances exists:
(1) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for households
eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross household income for
rent, and the proposed rent will reduce its housing costs;
(2) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(3) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living
conditions;
(4) The household documents the existence of assets with which the
household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
(5) The household documents reliable anticipated third-party
assistance from an outside source such as a family member in a
form acceptable to the administrative agent and the owner of the
unit.
§ 217-92 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-93
213:892
§ 217-94. Municipal Housing Liaison.
C. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in Subsections A and B above with the
administrative agent, who shall counsel the household on budgeting.
A. The Township of Washington shall appoint a specific municipal
employee to serve as a Municipal Housing Liaison responsible for
overseeing the Township's affordable housing program, including
overseeing the administration of affordability controls on the affordable
units and the affirmative marketing of available affordable units in
accordance with the Township's affirmative marketing plan; fulfilling
monitoring and reporting requirements; and supervising administrative
agent(s). Washington shall adopt an ordinance creating the position of
Municipal Housing Liaison and a resolution appointing the person to
fulfill the position of Municipal Housing Liaison. The Municipal Housing
Liaison shall be appointed by the governing body and may be a full- or
part-time municipal employee. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be
approved by the Court and shall be duly qualified through a training
program sponsored by Affordable Housing Professionals of New Jersey
before assuming the duties of Municipal Housing Liaison.
B. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for Washington,
including the following responsibilities which may not be contracted
out to the administrative agent:
(1) Serving as Washington's primary point of contact for all inquiries
from the state, affordable housing providers, administrative agents
and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Washington's Fair
Share Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, submitting and posting all monitoring reports
as required by the Court and by this article;
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as needed; and
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing at least
annually and more often as needed.
C. Subject to the approval of the Court, the Township of Washington shall
designate one or more administrative agent(s) to administer and to
affirmatively market the affordable units constructed in the Township in
accordance with UHAC and this article. An operating manual for each
affordable housing program shall be provided by the administrative
agent(s) to be adopted by resolution of the governing body and subject
to approval of the Court. The operating manual(s) shall be available for
public inspection in the office of the Township Clerk, in the office of the
§ 217-93 WATER § 217-94
213:893
§ 217-95. Administrative agent.
An administrative agent shall be an independent entity serving under
contract to and reporting to the municipality. The fees of the administrative
agent shall be paid by the owners of the affordable units for which the
services of the administrative agent are required. The administrative agent
shall perform the duties and responsibilities of an administrative agent as
set forth in UHAC, including those set forth in Sections 5:80-26.14, 16 and
18 thereof, which includes:
Municipal Housing Liaison, and in the office(s) of the administrative
agent(s). The Municipal Housing Liaison shall supervise the work of the
administrative agent(s).
A. Affirmative marketing:
(1) Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively market affordable
housing units in accordance with the affirmative marketing plan of
the Township of Washington and the provisions of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15; and
(2) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling services
to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as
budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease
requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
B. Household certification:
(1) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on interviews
with interested households;
(2) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation of
gross income and assets upon which to base a determination of
income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(3) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(4) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units execute a
certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of either the
ownership or rental certificates set forth in Appendices J and K of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(5) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region where the
units are located;
(6) Employing a random selection process as provided in the
affirmative marketing plan of the Township of Washington when
referring households for certification to affordable units; and
§ 217-94 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-95
213:894
(7) Notifying the following entities of the availability of affordable
housing units in the Township of Washington: Fair Share Housing
Center, the New Jersey State Conference of the NAACP, the Latino
Action Network, Morris County NAACP, Newark NAACP, East
Orange NAACP, Housing Partnership for Morris County,
Community Access Unlimited, Inc., Northwest New Jersey
Community Action Program, Inc. (NORWESCAP), Homeless
Solutions of Morristown, and the Supportive Housing Association.
C. Affordability controls:
(1) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed restrictions
and mortgages for recording at the time of conveyance of title of
each restricted unit;
(2) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(3) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and cancellation
of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly filed with the
Morris County Register of Deeds or Morris County Clerk's office
after the termination of the affordability controls for each
restricted unit;
(4) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(5) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy or
certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
D. Resales and rerentals:
(1) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information between owners and the administrative agent
regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or rerental;
and
(2) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information to low- (or very-low-) and moderate-income households
regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or rerental.
E. Processing requests from unit owners:
(1) Reviewing and approving requests for determination from owners
of restricted units who wish to take out home equity loans or
refinance during the term of their ownership that the amount of
indebtedness to be incurred will not violate the terms of this
article;
(2) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices from
owners of restricted units who wish to make capital improvements
to the units that would affect the selling price, such authorizations
to be limited to those improvements resulting in additional
§ 217-95 WATER § 217-95
213:895
bedrooms or bathrooms and the depreciated cost of central airconditioning
systems;
(3) Notifying the municipality of an owner's intent to sell a restricted
unit; and
(4) Making determinations on requests by owners of restricted units
for hardship waivers.
F. Enforcement:
(1) Securing annually from the municipality a list of all affordable
housing units for which tax bills are mailed to absentee owners,
and notifying all such owners that they must either move back to
their unit or sell it;
(2) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units, at
the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project or
development, written acknowledgement of the requirement that no
restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way committed, to
any person, other than a household duly certified to the unit by the
administrative agent;
(3) Posting annually, in all rental properties (including two-family
homes), a notice as to the maximum permitted rent together with
the telephone number of the administrative agent where
complaints of excess rent or other charges can be made;
(4) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling units,
reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(5) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to the
municipality's Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
(6) Creating and publishing a written operating manual for each
affordable housing program administered by the administrative
agent, to be approved by the Township Committee and the Court,
setting forth procedures for administering the affordability
controls.
G. Additional responsibilities:
(1) The administrative agent shall have the authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
(2) The administrative agent shall prepare monitoring reports for
submission to the Municipal Housing Liaison in time to meet the
Court-approved monitoring and reporting requirements in
accordance with the deadlines set forth in this article.
§ 217-95 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-95
213:896
§ 217-96. Affirmative marketing requirements.
(3) The administrative agent shall attend continuing education
sessions on affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and
affirmative marketing at least annually and more often as needed.
A. The Township of Washington shall adopt by resolution an affirmative
marketing plan, subject to approval of the Court, that is compliant with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority
groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation,
disability, age or number of children to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of affordable housing. The
affirmative marketing plan is intended to target those potentially
eligible persons who are least likely to apply for affordable units in that
region. It is a continuing program that directs marketing activities
toward Housing Region 2 and is required to be followed throughout the
period of restriction.
C. The affirmative marketing plan shall provide a regional preference for
all households that live and/or work in Housing Region 2, comprised of
Morris, Essex, Union and Warren Counties.
D. The municipality has the ultimate responsibility for adopting the
affirmative marketing plan and for the proper administration of the
affirmative marketing program, including initial sales and rentals and
resales and rerentals. The administrative agent designated by the
Township of Washington shall implement the affirmative marketing plan
to assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable units.
E. In implementing the affirmative marketing plan, the administrative
agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and moderateincome
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant
law.
F. The affirmative marketing plan shall describe the media to be used in
advertising and publicizing the availability of housing. In implementing
the affirmative marketing plan, the administrative agent shall consider
the use of language translations where appropriate.
G. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall
begin at least four months (120 days) prior to the expected date of
occupancy.
H. Applications for affordable housing shall be available in several
locations, including, at a minimum, the county administration building
and/or the county library for each county within the housing region; the
municipal administration building and the municipal library in the
§ 217-95 WATER § 217-96
213:897
§ 217-96.1. Enforcement of affordable housing regulations.
municipality in which the units are located; and the developer's rental
office. Applications shall be mailed to prospective applicants upon
request.
I. In addition to other affirmative marketing strategies, the administrative
agent shall provide specific notice of the availability of affordable
housing units in Washington, and copies of the application forms, to the
following entities: Fair Share Housing Center, the New Jersey State
Conference of the NAACP, the Latino Action Network, Morris County
NAACP, Newark NAACP, East Orange NAACP, Housing Partnership for
Morris County, Community Access Unlimited, Inc., Northwest New
Jersey Community Action Program, Inc. (NORWESCAP), Homeless
Solutions of Morristown, and the Supportive Housing Association.
J. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner.
A. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing an
affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant, the municipality shall
have all remedies provided at law or equity, including but not limited to
foreclosure, tenant eviction, a requirement for household
recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a mortgage,
recuperation of any funds from a sale in violation of the regulations,
injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the regulations, entry on
the premises, and specific performance.
B. After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer or
tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the municipality
may take the following action(s) against the owner, developer or tenant
for any violation that remains uncured for a period of 60 days after
service of the written notice:
(1) The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation or violations of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer or
tenant is adjudged by the Court to have violated any provision of
the regulations governing affordable housing units, the owner,
developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the following
penalties, at the discretion of the Court:
(a) A fine of not more than $500 per day or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or both, provided that each and
every day that the violation continues or exists shall be
considered a separate and specific violation of these provisions
and not a continuation of the initial offense;
(b) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
§ 217-96 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-96.1
213:898
housing units, payment into the Township of Washington
Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the gross amount of rent
illegally collected;
(c) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's reasonable
relocation costs, as determined by the Court.
(2) The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment that would result in the termination of the
owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a
mortgage foreclosure. Any such judgment shall be enforceable as if
the same were a judgment of default of the first purchase money
mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low- or moderateincome
unit.
(a) The judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
municipality, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at
which time the very-low-, low- or moderate-income unit of the
violating owner shall be sold at a sale price which is not less
than the amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off any first
purchase money mortgage, any prior liens held by the
municipality, and the costs of the enforcement proceedings
incurred by the municipality, including attorney's fees, as long
as that amount is not more than the maximum allowable
restricted sales price at the time of foreclosure pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, et seq. The violating owner shall have his
right to possession terminated as well as his title conveyed
pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
(b) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to
satisfy the first purchase money mortgage lien and any prior
liens upon the very-low-, low- or moderate-income unit. The
excess, if any, shall be applied to reimburse the municipality
for any and all costs and expenses incurred in connection with
either the court action resulting in the judgment of violation or
the Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the
Sheriff's sale are insufficient to reimburse the municipality in
full as aforesaid, the violating owner shall be personally
responsible for the full extent of such deficiency, in addition to
any and all costs incurred by the municipality in connection
with collecting such deficiency. In the event that a surplus
remains after satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any,
shall be placed in escrow by the municipality for the owner and
shall be held in such escrow for a maximum period of two years
or until such earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with
the municipality for such. Failure of the owner to claim such
balance within the two-year period shall automatically result in
a forfeiture of such balance to the municipality. Any interest
accrued or earned on such balance while being held in escrow
§ 217-96.1 WATER § 217-96.1
213:899
§ 217-96.2. Appeals.
Appeals from all decisions of an administrative agent appointed pursuant to
this article shall be filed in writing with the Court.
shall belong to and shall be paid to the municipality, whether
such balance shall be paid to the owner or forfeited to the
municipality.
(c) Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the
regulations governing affordable housing units shall not
extinguish the restrictions of the regulations governing
affordable housing units as the same apply to the very-low-,
low- or moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the
purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and
provisions of the regulations governing the affordable housing
unit. An owner determined to be in violation of the provisions
of this plan and from whom title and possession were taken by
means of the Sheriff's sale shall not be entitled to any right of
redemption.
(d) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the first purchase money mortgage
and any prior liens, the municipality may acquire title to the
very-low-, low- or moderate-income unit by satisfying the first
purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and crediting
the violating owner with an amount equal to the difference
between the first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens
and costs of the enforcement proceedings, including legal fees
and the maximum resale price for which the very-low-, low- or
moderate-income unit could have been sold under the terms of
the regulations governing affordable housing units. This excess
shall be treated in the same manner as the excess which would
have been realized from an actual sale as previously described.
(e) Failure of the very-low-, low- or moderate-income unit to be
either sold at the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality
shall obligate the owner to accept an offer to purchase from
any qualified purchaser which may be referred to the owner by
the municipality, with such offer to purchase being equal to the
maximum resale price of the very-low-, low- or moderateincome
unit as permitted by the regulations governing
affordable housing units.
(f) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable
for complying with the terms and restrictions of governing
affordable housing units until such time as title is conveyed
from the owner.
§ 217-96.1 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-96.2
213:900
ARTICLE IX
Performance Standards
§ 217-97. General application.
§ 217-98. Temporary certificate of occupancy.
§ 217-99. Regulation of nuisance elements.
A. As a condition of approval and the continuance of any use, occupancy of
any structure and operation of any process or equipment, the applicant
shall certify that the use of such specific types of machinery, equipment,
devices, procedures or methods are required in order to assure
compliance with the applicable performance standards. Permits and
certificates required by other government agencies shall be submitted
to the Planning Board as proof of compliance with applicable codes.
B. For use variances which are required to meet those performance
standards, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall not issue a permit for
any use, structure, process or equipment until it receives a report or
recommendation from the Planning Board regarding compliance with
the performance standards established herein.
C. The regulations contained in this section shall not apply to single-family
detached dwellings.
A. In the event that a determination cannot be made at the time of
application that a proposed use, process or unit of equipment will meet
the standards established in this section, the Planning Board may
recommend issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy. The
temporary certificate of occupancy shall be based on submission of
evidence that the proposed use, process or equipment will meet the
standards established herein after completion of installation and
operation.
B. Within 60 days after a temporary certificate of occupancy is granted, a
final certificate of occupancy shall be applied for and satisfactory
evidence submitted that all standards established by this section have
been met.
A. Definition of nuisance elements. A nuisance element is any noise,
radioactivity, vibration, glare, smoke, air pollution and dust, which
exceed the performance standards established under this section.
B. Locations where determinations are to be made for enforcement of
performance standards. The determination of the existence of nuisance
elements shall be made at the following locations:
§ 217-97 WATER § 217-99
213:901
§ 217-100. Standards to be enforced.
Characteristic All R Zones
All Nonresidential
Zones
Smoke Vent or stack Vent or stack
Liquid wastes Building wall Building wall
Radiation Vent or stack Vent or stack
Noise Setback lines Property line
Vibration Building wall Property line
Glare Building wall Property line
Heat* Vent or stack
Building wall
Vent or stack
Property line
* For heat, measurement shall be made at the vent or smokestack for
heated air, and at the property line for heated liquid or solid
discharge.
C. Continued compliance. Continued compliance with the performance
standards stated herein shall be a requirement for the continued
occupancy of any structure or the operation of any process or
equipment.
A. Air pollution. No substance shall be emitted into the atmosphere in
quantities which are injurious to human, plant or animal life or to
property or which will interfere unreasonably with the comfortable
enjoyment of life and property in the Township of Washington. All
provisions of the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code, as amended, or
the regulations contained in this section, whichever shall be the more
stringent, shall be complied with.
B. Smoke. In any nonresidential zone, no smoke, the shade or appearance
of which is darker than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, shall be
emitted into the open air from any fuel-burning equipment; provided,
however, that smoke emitted during the clearing of a fire box or the
building of a new fire, the shade or appearance of which is not darker
than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, may be permitted for a
period or periods aggregating no more than three minutes in any 15
consecutive minutes.
C. Wastes.
(1) Liquid wastes. No liquid waste shall be discharged into the public
sewage collection and disposal system unless the appropriate
municipal or authority officials shall have first investigated the
character and volume of such waste and shall have certified that it
will accept the discharge of such waste material into the system.
The applicant shall comply with any requirements of said officials,
including the pretreating of such wastes, the installation of
§ 217-99 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-100
213:902
processing methods, separation or screening of wastes, control of
pH and other methods of improving such wastes prior to discharge,
as a condition of approval of such facilities.
D. Radiation. All use of materials, equipment or facilities which are or may
be sources of radiation shall comply with all controls, standards and
requirements of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, and any
codes, rules or regulations, promulgated under such act, as well as the
Radiation Protection Act, Chapter 116, of the Laws of 1958,183 as
amended, whichever shall be more stringent.
E. Noise.
(1) The purpose of this subsection is to ensure that the environmental
character of the area surrounding the proposed use with respect to
noise shall not be altered. The standards established herein shall
be interpreted in any specific case with this objective in mind.
(2) Measurements, if required under this section, shall be made at the
location noted in § 217-99. Measurements where required shall be
made by a competent acoustical engineer using equipment meeting
the United States of America Standards Institute Standard S
1.4-1961 or the latest revision thereof and S 2.22 or the latest
revision. All measurements shall be made in at least eight
frequency bands.
(3) Ambient noise levels shall be made between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 11:00 p.m. for periods of at least one hour on three separate
occasions.
(4) The permitted noise level of the proposed use, measured at the
measuring line, shall not exceed the ambient noise levels in each
frequency band.
(5) In addition, noise control shall be subject to standards established
by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. Where
standards are established and are more restrictive than contained
in this chapter, the more restrictive standards shall be applicable.
F. Vibration. In any zone, no vibrations discernible without instruments at
the measuring point shall be permitted.
G. Outdoor lighting and glare. It is the intent of these performance
standards to ensure that both direct and indirect glare, to the extent
possible, is eliminated or activities producing such glare are carried on
within a structure. Necessary outdoor lighting and glare producing
devices such as roadway and walkway lighting shall be designed,
constructed and maintained in such a manner as not to be a nuisance to
surrounding single-family detached dwellings and residential uses in
183. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:2D-1 et seq.
§ 217-100 WATER § 217-100
213:903
accordance with § 159-41A. [Amended 8-19-2002 by Ord. No.
32-02]
(1) The lighting standards in this section apply to all nonresidential
land uses and multifamily dwellings in the Township of Washington
and, in addition, to all one- and two-family dwellings constructed in
the Township after the effective date of this subsection. Residential
developers shall be required to notify purchasers of residential
dwellings that compliance with these standards is required by local
ordinance.
(2) All outdoor light fixtures that serve one- and two-family dwellings
and that have initial light outputs greater than 1,500 lumens shall
be outdoor, enclosed light fixtures. Light fixtures with initial light
outputs less than 1,500 lumens such as decorative porch lights,
wall sconces, post top lanterns and walkway fixtures may contain
lamps and glass/plastic diffusing devices that extend beyond the
opaque fixture enclosure. All outdoor light fixtures shall comply
with the requirements as specified below:
(a) Light distributions generated by light fixtures shall be confined
to the property on which they are installed.
(b) Outdoor light fixtures properly installed and maintained shall
be directed so that there will not be any direct glare source
visible from any adjacent residential property.
(c) Light fixtures installed within any setback area, including
front, rear or side yard setbacks, shall contain shielding
devices to prevent light spill and glare upward and onto
adjacent properties.
H. Heat. Heat is thermal energy of a radiative, conductive or convective
nature, in any zone, any use or process shall not produce a temperature
rise discernible at the measuring point or discharge water into any
watercourse which shall produce a temperature increase of greater
than three degrees in that watercourse measured at a point 10 feet
from the point of discharge.
I. Fire and explosion hazards. If it appears that any proposed use,
structure, process or resulting product or material may constitute a fire
or explosion hazard, the Planning Board may require the applicant to
supply proof of:
(1) Approval of the use, structure, process or resulting product or
material from the State Department of Labor and Industry
indicating that adequate safeguards against fire and explosion have
been taken or installed.
(2) Approval from the Township of Washington Fire Inspector that the
applicant has complied with all applicable Township fire prevention
regulations.
§ 217-100 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-100
213:904
ARTICLE X
Nonconforming Uses and Structures
§ 217-101. Continuation of use.
A use, building or structure, lawfully in existence on the effective date of
this chapter, which shall be made nonconforming at the passage of this
chapter, or any applicable amendment thereto, may be continued except as
otherwise provided in this section.
§ 217-102. Changes.
No existing building or premises devoted to a nonconforming use shall
be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, substituted or structurally altered
except when changed to a conforming use, or when required to do so by
law, or as allowed in §§ 217-104 and 217-108.
§ 217-103. Partial destruction. [Amended 6-19-2006 by Ord. No.
11-06]
Any nonconforming use or structure partially damaged by fire, casualty or
act of God may be repaired, restored, reconstructed or used as before,
provided that the area of such use, building or structure shall not exceed the
area which existed prior to such damage. All repairs shall be commenced
within two years of such date or such use shall not be rebuilt except
as a conforming use. In the event that total destruction occurs, then the
provisions of § 217-104 shall apply. A farm building on a farmland preserved
lot, or an exception area on such lot, made nonconforming as a result of
the acquisition of land by the Township of Washington may be continued,
repaired, restored, reconstructed or enlarged, provided that any
enlargement of the building does not extend, or increase any
nonconforming condition existing as of the date the land was acquired by
the Township of Washington.
§ 217-104. Damage beyond repair.
When a nonconforming structure or use is destroyed or damaged by fire or
other casualty or an act of God beyond repair, the nonconforming structure
or use shall thereafter be terminated. Damage beyond repair, for purposes
of this section, shall occur when the cost of repair exceeds 50% of the
replacement cost of the structure immediately prior to the damage.
§ 217-105. Normal repairs.
Normal maintenance and repair of a nonconforming structure or use is
permitted, provided that it does not extend or expand the nonconformance.
§ 217-106. Termination.
A nonconforming use not used for two consecutive years and/or the change
of use to a more restricted or conforming use for any period of time
§ 217-101 WATER § 217-106
213:905
shall be considered a termination of the nonconforming use, and such
nonconforming use shall not thereafter be revived.
§ 217-107. Nonconforming building lawfully under construction.
Any nonconforming structure or use lawfully under construction on the
effective date of this chapter, pursuant to plans filed with the Construction
Official and approved by him and all other municipal boards and agencies
as required under law, may be completed and may be used for the
nonconforming use for which it was designed, to the same extent as if such
building has been completed and was in use on the effective date of this
chapter.
§ 217-108. Expansion of residential uses.
A nonconforming residential use or structure may be expanded to provide
additional living space provided that the expansion does not infringe further
upon any nonconformance and further provided that the number of units
does not exceed the number allowed in the zone.
§ 217-108.1. Nonconforming lots. [Added 10-15-2001 by Ord. No.
32-01; amended 10-21-2002 by Ord. No. 40-02; 5-19-2003 by Ord.
No. 17-03; 12-21-2009 by Ord. No. 29-09; 2-15-2010 by Ord. No.
01-10; 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 03-11]
Where an existing lot, conforming to zoning as of October 15, 2001, has
been made nonconforming as a result of an amendment to this chapter,
including the lots rezoned to the R-5 Conservation Zone by Section 1.b and
1.c. of Ordinance No. RO-01-10,184 a new dwelling unit or addition(s) to
existing dwelling units or accessory buildings may be constructed on such
lot, without an appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, according to the
following schedule.
184. Editor's Note: A complete copy of the ordinance is on file in the Township offices.
§ 217-106 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-108.1
213:906
Existing Lot Size
Up to
20,000
square
feet
20,000
square
feet or
more but
less than
40,000
square
feet
40,000
square feet
or more
but less
than
80,000
square feet
80,000
square feet
or more
but less
than
120,000
square feet
120,000
square feet
or more
but less
than
200,000
square feet
Principal
Building
Minimum
lot
frontage
(feet)
75 75 75 75 75
Minimum
yards:
Side yard
(feet)
15 25 25 25 30
Front
yard
(feet)
35 50 75 75 75
Rear
yard
(feet)
50 50 100 100 100
Accessory
Building
Minimum
distance
to:
Side line
(feet)
15 20 25 25 25
Rear line
(feet)
10 20 25 25 25
Maximum
percentage
of
improved
lot
coverage
25% 25% 15% 15% 15%
§ 217-108.2. Farmland preserved lands with severable exceptions.
[Added 11-19-2001 by Ord. No. 36-01]
§ 217-108.1 WATER § 217-108.2
213:907
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure that the number of
residential dwelling units permitted in a Farmland Preservation
Program-approved "severable exception" may be constructed on the
nonrestricted portion of a farmland preserved parcel of land in
accordance with the approved severable exception, without appeal to
the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. Where, in the case of a farmland preserved parcel of land, a severable
exception of the parcel is made nonconforming as a result of an
amendment to this ordinance, a new dwelling unit or units may be
constructed in accordance with the severable exception approved by
the Farmland Preservation Program, without appeal to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, according to the schedule provided in § 217-108.1
of this chapter.
§ 217-108.2 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-108.2
213:908
ARTICLE XI
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 217-109. Establishment; appointment; organization. [Amended
10-20-1980 by Ord. No. 43-80]
The Washington Township Zoning Board of Adjustment, heretofore
established as provided in Chapter 111, Land Use Procedures, Article II, as
amended, is hereby continued.
§ 217-110. General powers and duties; rules of procedure.
A. The Board shall adopt such rules of procedure not inconsistent with the
provisions of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey and local ordinances,
as it may deem necessary to the proper performance of its duties and
the proper exercise of its powers.
B. Powers.
(1) The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:
(a) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant
that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or
refusal made by an administrative officer based on or made in
the enforcement of this chapter.
(b) Hear and decide in accordance with the provisions of any such
ordinance, requests for interpretation of this chapter or the
Zoning Map or for decisions upon other special questions upon
which such Board is authorized to pass by any Zoning or
Official Map Ordinance in accordance with this chapter.
(c) Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or
shape of a specific piece of property, or by reason of
exceptional topographic conditions, or by reason of other
extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such
piece of property, the strict application of any regulation of this
chapter would result in peculiar and exceptional practical
difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardship upon the
developer of such property, grant, upon an application or an
appeal relating to such property, a variance from such strict
application of such regulation so as to relieve such difficulties
or hardship; provided however, that no variance shall be
granted under this section to allow a structure or use in a
district restricted against such structure or use, and provided
further that the proposed development does not require
approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision, a site plan or
conditional use in conjunction with which the Planning Board
shall review a request for a variance pursuant to § 217-129 of
this chapter.
§ 217-109 WATER § 217-110
213:909
§ 217-111. Other powers.
The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:
§ 217-112. Employees.
The Board of Adjustment may employ, or contract for, and fix the
compensation for legal counsel other than the Township Attorney and
experts and other staff and services, as it shall deem necessary, not
exceeding, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the
governing body for its use.
§ 217-113. Meetings; votes necessary for decisions; minutes.
(d) Grant a variance to allow a structure or use in a district
restricted against such structure or use in particular cases and
for special reasons, but only by affirmative vote of at least 2/3
of the full authorized membership of the Board.
(2) No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and zoning
ordinance. An application under this section may be referred to any
appropriate person or agency, including the Planning Board for its
report, provided that such reference shall not extend the period of
time within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
A. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:50-54 for a building
or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public drainageway, flood
control basin or public area reserved on the Official Map;
B. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a building
or structure not related to a street; or
C. Grant, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the
Planning Board, subdivision, site plan or conditional use approval
whenever the Board of Adjustment is reviewing an application for
approval of a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall, by its rules, fix the time and place for
holding its regular meetings for business authorized to be conducted by
the Board. Regular meetings shall be scheduled unless canceled for
lack of applications for development to process. The Board may provide
for special meetings, at the call of the Chairman, or on the request of
any two of its members, which shall be held on notice to its members
and the public in accordance with Township regulations. No action shall
be taken at any meeting without a quorum being present. All actions
shall be taken by a majority vote of a quorum present except as follows:
§ 217-110 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-113
213:910
§ 217-114. Appeals and applications.
§ 217-115. Stay of proceedings by appeal; exception.
An appeal to the Board of Adjustment shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed from
was made unless the officer from whose action the appeal is taken certifies
to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed
with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings
shall not be stayed other than by an order of the Superior Court upon notice
to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
§ 217-116. Hearing on appeals or application; notice of hearing and
service.
(1) Permit for buildings or structures in the bed of any street, public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area shown on the
Official Map: four affirmative votes.
(2) Grant a variance to allow a structure or use in a district restricted
against such structure or use: five affirmative votes.
B. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with
Township regulations.
C. Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall
include the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board
and of the persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the
Board, the findings, if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes
shall thereafter be made available for public inspection during normal
business hours at the office of the Board. Any interested party shall
have the right to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence
in any legal proceedings concerning the subject matter of such minutes.
Such interested party may be charged a reasonable fee for
reproduction of the minutes for his use.
A. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested
party affected by any decision of an administrative officer of the
Township based on or made in the enforcement of this chapter or
Official Map. Such appeal shall be taken within 65 days of the decision
of the administrative officer by filing a notice of appeal with the officer
from whom the appeal is taken specifying the grounds of such appeal.
The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to
the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.
B. A developer may file an application for development with the Board of
Adjustment for action under any of its powers without prior application
to an administrative officer.
§ 217-113 WATER § 217-116
213:911
A. Upon the filing of any appeal as hereinafter provided, or other
application in any matter of proceeding over which the Board of
Adjustment shall have jurisdiction by law or ordinance, the Board shall
hold a hearing on such appeal or application.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall cause notice of the time and place of the
hearing to be given to the appellant or applicant and a similar notice
stating the purpose of the hearing to be published in the official
newspaper of the Township at least 10 days prior to the hearing. All
maps and documents pertaining to the hearing shall be on file and
available for inspection at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing
at the offices of the Board during normal business hours.
C. Notice of a hearing shall be given to the owner of all real property, as
shown on the current tax duplicate, located within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing. Notice
shall be given by serving a copy thereof on the property owner as shown
on said current tax duplicate or his agent in charge of the property or
by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property owner at his
address as shown on said current tax duplicate. Notice to a partnership
owner may be made by service upon any partner. Notice to a corporate
owner may be made by service upon its president, a vice president,
secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by law to
accept service on behalf of the corporation.
D. Upon the written request of an applicant, the Tax Assessor shall, within
seven days, make and certify a list from said current tax duplicates of
names and addresses of owners to whom the applicant is required to
give notice. The applicant shall be entitled to rely upon the information
contained in such list, and failure to give notice to any owner not on the
list shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding. The sum of $10 shall
be charged for such list.
E. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such
municipality.
F. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application adjacent to an existing
county road or proposed road shown on the Official County Map or on
the County Master Plan, adjoining other county land or situated within
200 feet of a municipal boundary.
G. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application adjacent
to a state highway.
H. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning of a hearing on
an application which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling units. Such
§ 217-116 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-116
213:912
§ 217-117. Effect of mailing notice.
Any notice made by certified mail shall be deemed complete upon mailing.
§ 217-118. Fees for appeal or application; cost of taking testimony.
[Amended 7-15-1985 by Ord. No. 27-85; 7-20-1992 by Ord. No.
12-92; 2-19-1996 by Ord. No. 4-96]
notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents required to be on
file with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to Subsection B of this section.
I. The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the Board at
the time of the hearing.
A. Upon the filing of any application to the Zoning Board of Adjustment by
any person other than an officer, department, board or agency of the
Township, the applicant shall pay the following fees and review
deposits: [Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 23-02; 4-18-2011 by
Ord. No. 03-11]
(1) Fees covering administration and overhead:
Type of Application Fee
Appeals (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a) $100
Interpretations (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b) $100
Bulk variances (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c)
Residential $250
Nonresidential $500
Use variances (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d) $750
Permit (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 and 40:55D-35) $150
Extension of time for variance, per lot $100
(2) Review deposits covering the cost of engineering, legal,
professional planning and other expert review and documentation
and disbursements: [Amended 9-21-2015 by Ord. No. 09-15]
Type of Application Fee
Appeals (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a) $1,000 per lot
Interpretations (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b) $1,000 per lot
Bulk variances (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c)
Residential $2,000 per lot
Nonresidential $3,000 per lot
Use variances (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d)
Residential $2,000 per lot
Nonresidential $10,000 per lot
§ 217-116 WATER § 217-118
213:913
Type of Application Fee
Permit (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 and 40:55D-35) $1,500 per lot
Extension of time for variance $100 per lot
B. The fees and review deposits established herein shall be charged in
addition to any fees and review deposits otherwise required pursuant to
Chapter 175, Subdivision of Land, Chapter 159, Site Plan Review, or
any other section of this chapter.
C. Tabulation and appeal of review fees.
(1) The Chief Financial Officer shall tabulate the costs of the Engineer,
planner and attorneys, their staffs and any outside consultants
required when an application is of a nature beyond the scope of the
expertise of the professionals normally utilized by the Township, for
a proper review and documentation pursuant to vouchers
submitted by the professionals identifying the personnel
performing the service, and stating the date the services were
performed, the hours spent to one-fourth-hour increments, the
hourly rate and the expenses incurred. All charges and fees shall be
established by resolution of the governing body. Expenses shall be
actual out-of-pocket expenses of any such professionals or
consultants, including normal and typical expenses incurred in
processing applications. Vouchers shall be submitted monthly to
the Chief Financial Officer with a copy to the developer. These costs
shall be deducted from the engineering/planning/legal review fee
escrow deposit and paid to the professionals by the Chief Financial
Officer. Where the reasonable and necessary review costs exceed
or are anticipated to exceed the review fee deposit, the developer
shall pay the additional amount prior to the signing of any plat.
Failure to remit the additional required deposit within 15 days of
the request shall render the application incomplete, and no further
proceedings or action shall be taken by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment until after compliance.
(2) The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare and send to the developer
a statement which shall include an accounting of funds listing all
deposits, interest earnings, disbursements and the cumulative
balance of the escrow account. This statement shall be provided
quarterly, if monthly charges are $1,000 or less, or monthly, if
monthly charges exceed $1,000.
(3) After the final plat has been signed, the developer shall send
written notice, by certified mail, to the Chief Financial Officer, the
Zoning Board of Adjustment, the Township Engineer and other
relevant professional that the application is completed. After
receipt of such notice, the Engineer and/or other professional shall
submit a final voucher to the Chief Financial Officer within 30 days
with a copy to the developer. The Chief Financial Officer shall
render a written final accounting to the developer on the status of
§ 217-118 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-118
213:914
§ 217-119. Time limit for decision.
§ 217-120. Modification on appeal.
The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or
may modify the action, order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination appealed from and to that end have all the powers of the
administrative officer from whom the appeal is taken.
§ 217-121. Temporary permits.
Temporary permits may be authorized by the Board of Adjustment after
a hearing for a period not to exceed one year for nonconforming uses
incidental to construction projects on the same premises and including such
the escrow within 45 days of receipt of the final bill, together
with any balance remaining in the account, including interest in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1.
(4) Within 15 days of the tabulation of review costs and notification of
the developer by the Chief Financial Officer, the developer shall
have the right to appeal said tabulation by so notifying the
Township Committee, in writing, with copies to the Chief Financial
Officer, the Zoning Board of Adjustment and any relevant
professional, provided that any additional fees or amounts required
by the Zoning Board of Adjustment to be paid prior to the signing of
any plat or certificate of occupancy must be paid by the developer
prior to the bringing of any such appeal. Upon receipt of any such
appeal, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall review the same and
make a recommendation thereon to the Township Committee
within 45 days. The Township Committee shall then decide the
proper review fee to be charged, based upon information provided
by both the developer and the Zoning Board of Adjustment. If the
matter is not resolved to the satisfaction of the developer, the
developer may appeal to the County Construction Board of
Appeals, established under P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127),
any charge to an escrow account or a deposit by any municipal
professional or consultant pursuant to the procedure set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2.
D. The Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the proceedings
by electronic means. A transcript, or duplicate recording in lieu thereof,
shall be furnished, on request, to any interested party, at his expense.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall render a decision not later than 120 days
after the date an appeal is taken from the decision of an administrative
officer or the submission of a complete application for a use variance.
B. Failure of the Board to render a decision within such one-hundredtwenty-
day period or within such further time as may be consented to
by the applicant shall constitute a decision favorable to the applicant.
§ 217-118 WATER § 217-121
213:915
uses as storage of building supplies and machinery and the assembly of
building materials. The temporary certificate of occupancy issued under this
section shall be for not longer than a one-year period. However, such permit
may be renewed by the Board of Adjustment annually after a hearing.
§ 217-122. Expiration of variances and time limits for further
action. [Amended 7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 23-03; 4-18-2011 by Ord.
No. 03-11]
A. A "c" variance granted by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c) (but excepting any approval for a "c" variance
which also involves "d" variance relief) permitting the erection or
alteration of any structure or structures shall expire five years from the
date of the publication of the notice of the determination of the Board of
Adjustment unless such construction or alteration shall have been
actually commenced and completed on each and every structure
permitted by said variance. For good cause, the Board of Adjustment
may, upon application, in writing, stating the reasons therefore, extend
the five-year period.
B. A "d" variance granted by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d) permitting a specified use of any premises shall
expire three years from the date of the publication of the notice of the
determination of the Board of Adjustment unless such permitted use
has actually been commenced and completed. For good cause, the
Board of Adjustment may, upon application, in writing, stating the
reasons therefore, extend the three-year period.
C. If any design exceptions have been granted in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-51 in connection with either a "c" or a "d" variance, such design
exceptions shall expire with the expiration of the variance.
D. The running of the periods of limitation provided above shall be tolled
from the date of filing an appeal from the decision of the Board of
Adjustment to the governing body, or to a court of competent
jurisdiction, until the termination in any manner of such appeal or
proceeding.
E. Except for permits issued pursuant to a "c" or "d" variance, if the
issuance of a permit is finally approved or other action by the appellant
or applicant is authorized, the necessary permit shall be secured and
the authorized action of construction begun within one year after the
date when the other action by the appellant or applicant is authorized,
and the structure, building or alteration, as the case may be, shall be
completed within three years of said date. For good cause, the Board of
Adjustment may, upon application, in writing, stating the reasons
therefor, extend the one-year or the three-year period.
F. Should the appellant or applicant fail to obtain the necessary permit or
permits within such periods prescribed in Subsections A through E
above, or having obtained the same should he fail to commence or
§ 217-121 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-122
213:916
complete work thereunder within such periods prescribed in
Subsections A through E above, or within such periods as may be
extended by the Board of Adjustment, it shall be conclusively presumed
that the appellant or applicant has waived, withdrawn and abandoned
his appeal or his application, and all permissions, permits and variances
granted to him shall be deemed automatically rescinded by the Board
of Adjustment.
§ 217-122 WATER § 217-122
213:917

ARTICLE XII
Administration and Enforcement
[Amended 10-15-1984 by Ord. No. 25-84; 4-16-2007 by Ord. No.
9-07; 8-18-2008 by Ord. No. 13-08]
§ 217-123. Zoning Officer. [Amended 12-21-2009 by Ord. No. 30-09;
2-15-2010 by Ord. No. 02-10]
§ 217-124. Zoning permits.
A. The Zoning Officer is hereby given the duty, power and authority to
enforce the provisions of this chapter. He/she shall be responsible for
the examination of all applications for permits and the issuance of
zoning permits for the commencement of a use, and the construction,
reconstruction, alteration, conversion, installation of or addition to any
structure or building, including accessory structures, pillars, gates and
signs, which are in accordance with the requirements of this chapter
and all nonconforming uses existing at the time of passage of this
chapter.
B. The Construction Officer shall be responsible for recording and filing all
applications for permits with accompanying plans and documents, and
the Zoning Officerl and the Construction Official shall make such
reports to the Board of Adjustment, the Planning Board, and the
governing body as may be required.
A. Purpose. To ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, no
person shall commence or change a use or construct, reconstruct, alter
or convert any structure or building or part thereof, including pillars,
gates and signs, or alter the use of any land, and the Construction
Official shall not issue a construction permit nor issue a certificate of
occupancy for any such use, change in use or construction, until a
proper permit has been issued by the Zoning Officer. [Amended
12-21-2009 by Ord. No. 30-09; 2-15-2010 by Ord. No. 02-10]
B. Application for permits. All such applications shall be made in writing
on forms provided by the Township of Washington.
C. Issuance of permits. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to issue a
zoning permit, provided that he/she is satisfied that the structure,
building, sign, pillar, gate, proposed use and other requirements are in
compliance with this chapter and that all other reviews and actions, if
any, called for in this chapter have been complied with and all
necessary approvals secured therefor. [Amended 12-21-2009 by Ord.
No. 30-09; 2-15-2010 by Ord. No. 02-10]
D. For new uses. [Amended 12-21-2009 by Ord. No. 30-09; 2-15-2010
by Ord. No. 02-10]
(1) A zoning permit shall be issued upon application by the owner,
prospective occupant or purchaser only after the Zoning Officer
§ 217-123 WATER § 217-124
213:919
determines that the facts represented on the application are
correct and that the building, structure or use is in conformance
with all of the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Said permit shall be issued by the Zoning Officer to the owner or
his agent within 10 days after written application, if all conditions
under this section are complied with.
E. For existing uses. [Amended 12-21-2009 by Ord. No. 30-09;
2-15-2010 by Ord. No. 02-10]
(1) Upon written request from the owner, tenant, occupant or
purchaser under contract, the Zoning Officer, after inspection, shall
issue a zoning permit for a use legally existing at the time this
chapter is made effective, certifying the extent and kind of use and
whether any such existing use conforms with the provisions of this
chapter.
(2) No change or extension of use and no alterations shall be made in a
nonconforming use or premises without a zoning permit having
first been issued by the Zoning Officer stating that such change,
extension or alteration is in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter or that the same has been permitted by action of the Board
of Adjustment.
F. Change of use. No owner, tenant or other person shall use or occupy
any building or structure, the use of which shall be changed after the
passage of this chapter, without first procuring a zoning permit,
provided that a zoning permit, once granted, shall continue in effect so
long as there is no change of use or change of occupancy in a
nonconforming use.
G. Zoning permit records. A record of all zoning permits shall be kept on
file in the office of the Construction Official and/or the Zoning Officer as
applicable. [Amended 12-21-2009 by Ord. No. 30-09; 2-15-2010 by
Ord. No. 02-10]
H. Denial of permits. When the Zoning Officer is not satisfied that the
applicant's proposed development will meet the requirements of this
chapter, he/she shall refuse to issue a zoning permit and shall so notify
the applicant, in writing, giving the reasons for denial. [Amended
12-21-2009 by Ord. No. 30-09; 2-15-2010 by Ord. No. 02-10]
I. Revocation of permits. If it shall appear at any time to the Zoning
Officer that the application or accompanying plan is in any respect false
or misleading or that work is being done upon the premises differing
from that called for in the application filed with him/her under existing
laws or ordinances, he/she may forthwith revoke the zoning permit,
whereupon it shall be the duty of the person holding the same to
surrender it and all copies thereof to said Zoning Officer. After the
zoning permit has been revoked, the Zoning Officer may, in his/her
discretion, before issuing the new zoning permit, require the applicant
§ 217-124 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-124
213:920
§ 217-125. Complaints; abatement of violations. [Amended
12-21-2009 by Ord. No. 30-09; 2-15-2010 by Ord. No. 02-10]
§ 217-126. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be subject, upon conviction, to the penalties provided in § 1-3 of this Code.
Each day that a violation occurs or is committed shall constitute a separate
offense.
to file an indemnity bond in favor of the Township of Washington with
sufficient surety conditioned for compliance with this chapter and all
laws and ordinances then in force and in a sum sufficient to cover
the cost of removing the building or structure if it does not comply.
[Amended 12-21-2009 by Ord. No. 30-09; 2-15-2010 by Ord. No.
02-10]
A. Complaints of violations. Any person may file a complaint if there is any
reason to believe a violation of this chapter exists. All such complaints
must be in writing and shall be filed with the Zoning Officer, who shall
properly record such complaint and investigate. Any complaint not
submitted in writing or submitted anonymously will be investigated in
the discretion of the Zoning Officer.
B. Procedure for abatement of violations.
(1) In case any building or structure, including pillars, gates, signs and
accessory structures, is constructed, reconstructed, altered,
converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used,
in violation of this chapter or of any ordinance or regulation made
under authority conferred hereby, the governing body or, with its
approval, the Zoning Officer or other proper official, in addition to
other remedies, may institute any appropriate legal action or
proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use,
to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the
occupancy of said building, structure or land or to prevent any
illegal act, conduct, business or use about such premises. Nothing
herein shall require the Zoning Officer to obtain prior consent of
the governing body to issue a summons for a violation of the terms
of this chapter.
(2) A violation of any of the terms of this chapter shall be abated within
a reasonable time, as may be determined by the Zoning Officer,
after written notice has been served either by mail or personal
service.
§ 217-124 WATER § 217-127
213:921
§ 217-127. Fees.
Fees are required for each zoning permit application, review, inspection and
administration and shall be paid in cash, certified check or money order
made payable to the Township of Washington as follows:
§ 217-128. Planning Board action.
The Planning Board, when reviewing applications for approval of
subdivision plats, site plans or conditional uses, shall have the power to
grant, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Board
of Adjustment:
A. Zoning Officer fees. [Amended 12-21-2009 by Ord. No. 30-09;
2-15-2010 by Ord. No. 02-10]
(1) Zoning Officer fees as set forth below shall be paid at the office of
the Zoning Officer upon filing of an application for a zoning permit
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(a) Commencement of a use, new home construction, additions to
residential structures, and accessory structures: $50.
(b) Driveway entrance pillars and gates: $15.
(c) Interior conversions, including but not limited to, basement
finishing, in-law suites etc.: $15.
(d) A new or a change of an existing sign: $25.
(e) Review of a nonresidential construction application or an
affidavit in support of request for waiver of site plan pursuant
to § 159-5: $50.
(f) A home occupation: $25.
(2) Charitable, philanthropic, fraternal and religious nonprofit
organizations holding a tax exempt status under the Federal
Internal Revenue Code of 1954 [26 U.S.C. § 501(c) or (d)] are
exempt from the payment of any fee under this Subsection A.
B. Board of Adjustment application fees. Board of Adjustment application
fees shall be paid to the Clerk of the Board of Adjustment in accordance
with the fee schedule set forth in § 111-30 and/or § 217-118.
A. Variances, pursuant to § 217-110B(1)(c), from lot area, lot dimensions,
setback and yard requirements, provided that relief pursuant to this
section from lot area requirements shall not be granted for more than
one lot.
B. Direction, pursuant to § 217-111A, for issuance of a permit for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved pursuant to
§ 217-111A.
§ 217-127 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-128
213:922
§ 217-129. (Reserved)
C. Direction, pursuant to § 217-111B, for issuance of a permit for a
building or structure not related to a street. Whenever relief is
requested pursuant to this section, notice of the hearing on the
application for development shall include reference to the request for a
variance or direction for issuance of a permit, as the case may be.
§ 217-128 WATER § 217-129
213:923

ARTICLE XIII
Historic Preservation Overlay Zone
[Added 12-15-1986 by Ord. No. 46-86]
§ 217-130. Statutory authority.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-107 et
seq., as amended, delegated to the governing bodies of municipalities the
authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the protection of certain
architecturally, historically and archaeologically significant structures, sites
or districts for the general welfare of their citizenry and to establish an
Historic Reservation Commission.
§ 217-131. Purpose and objectives.
Washington Township recognizes that it has areas, places and structures of
historic, archaeological and architectural significance. It is in the interest
of the general welfare to preserve these areas, places and structures and
to ensure that new development is compatible and relevant with these
areas, places and structures. This section will achieve these purposes and
objectives, will promote the preservation of the environment, will promote
a desirable visual environment through creative development techniques
and good civic design and arrangements, will prevent the degradation of
the environment through improper use of land, and will promote the most
appropriate use of land in the Township.
§ 217-132. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings. Unless specifically defined herein, words or phrases
used in this section shall be interpreted in accordance with common usage
and so as to give this section its most reasonable application.
ADDITION — The construction of a new improvement as a part of an
existing improvement when such new improvement changes the exterior
appearance of any designated landmark.
ALTERATION — Any work done on any improvement which:
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — A document that is issued by the
Historic Preservation Commission, following a prescribed series of hearings
and review procedures, certifying that the proposed development actions by
an applicant are found to be acceptable in terms of design criteria relating
to the individual site, structure or building or the historic district as a whole.
DEMOLITION — The razing of any improvement or the obliteration of any
natural feature of a designated landmark.
A. Is not an addition to the improvement.
Changes the appearance of the exterior surface of any improvement,
excluding paint. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 30-90]
B.
§ 217-130 WATER § 217-132
213:925
HISTORIC DISTRICT — One or more historic sites and intervening or
surrounding property significantly affecting or affected by the quality and
character of the historic site or sites.
HISTORIC SITE — Any real property, man-made structure, natural object
or configuration or any portion or group of the foregoing which has been
formally designated in the Master Plan as being of historical,
archaeological, cultural, scenic or architectural significance.
IMPROVEMENT — Any structure or part thereof constructed or installed
upon real property by human endeavor and intended to be kept at the
location of such construction or installation for a period of not less than 60
continuous days.
LANDMARK DESIGNATION — The official recognition of any site, building,
structure or area that has been documented to have or contain
architecturally, historically or archaeologically significant features or
elements and that adheres to the criteria as established by the National
Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended.
OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER — The official newspaper of the Township of
Washington.
REPAIR — Any work done on any improvement which:
REPLACEMENT — Repairs, when a building permit is required for the
same.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
§ 217-133. Historic Preservation Commission.
A. Is not an addition to the improvement.
Does not change the appearance of the exterior surface of any
improvement.
B.
A. Establishment of an Historic Preservation Commission. There is hereby
created and established an Historic Preservation Commission of the
Township of Washington to serve as a direct link between the process of
approving new development, renovations and alterations and the
process of preserving historic districts, sites and landmarks of the
Township of Washington.
B. Composition of the Historic Preservation Commission. The Historic
Preservation Commission shall consist of seven regular members, with
two alternates. Alternate members shall meet the qualifications of Class
C members, as defined below. Of the seven regular Commission
members:
(1) Three shall be either Class A or Class B members, as follows:
§ 217-132 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-133
213:926
(a) Class A: a person who is knowledgeable in building design and
construction or architectural history and who may reside
outside the municipality.
(b) Class B: a person who is knowledgeable or with a
demonstrated interest in local history and who may reside
outside the municipality.
(2) Four shall be Class C members, who shall be citizens of the
municipality who shall hold no other municipal office, position or
employment except for membership on the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment.
(3) To the extent available from within the Township of Washington,
the Mayor shall appoint, with regard to Class A or Class B
members, professional individuals from the discipline of
architecture, history, architectural history, prehistoric archaeology,
and historic archaeology who meet the requirements as set forth in
the 1980 amendments of the National Historic Preservation Act.
Should such individuals not be available from within the
municipality, the Mayor shall have the authority to appoint such
individuals who reside outside of the Township.
(4) At the time of appointment, the regular members shall be
designated by class and the alternate members as "Alternate No. 1"
and "Alternate No. 2."
C. Terms of members. The terms of the members first appointed shall
expire as follows:
(1) Two Class A and Class B members shall serve initial terms of four
years.
(2) One Class A or Class B member shall serve an initial term of three
years.
(3) One Class C member shall serve an initial term of three years, two
Class C members shall serve an initial term of two years, and one
Class C member shall serve an initial term of one year.
(4) One alternate member shall serve an initial term of two years, and
one alternate member shall serve an initial term of one year.
(5) Upon expiration of the initial term of office, regular members
thereafter appointed shall serve for four-year terms, except that
Municipal Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment members
shall serve during their incumbency in such municipal office. Upon
expiration of the initial term of office, alternate members thereafter
appointed shall serve for two-year terms, except that Municipal
Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment members shall
serve during their incumbency in office.
§ 217-133 WATER § 217-133
213:927
(6) Vacancies occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be
filled for the unexpired term only. Such vacancies shall be filled by
appointment of the Mayor within 60 days.
D. Organization of the Historic Preservation Commission.
(1) The Historic Preservation Commission shall elect from its
membership a Chairman and a Vice Chairman and shall select a
Secretary, who may or may not be a member of the Historic
Preservation Commission or a municipal employee.
(2) Establishment of rules and regulations. The Historic Preservation
Commission shall create rules and procedures for the transaction
of its business, subject to the following regulations:
(a) A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of four or
more members, including the Chairman or, in his absence, the
Vice Chairman, but not less than a majority of the full
authorized membership may grant or deny a certificate of
appropriateness.
(b) The Secretary shall keep minutes and records of all meetings
and proceedings, including voting records, attendance,
resolutions, findings, determinations and decisions. All such
material shall be public record.
(c) The Historic Preservation Commission shall prepare and adopt
rules of procedure, which will be made available to the public
and which shall include a specific section prohibiting any
member from acting on any matter in which he has, either
directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
(d) The members of the Historic Preservation Commission shall
serve without compensation.
(3) Retention of professional assistance. Within the limits of funds that
have been appropriated by the Township Committee for the
performance of its work, exclusive of grants or gifts, the Historic
Preservation Commission may employ, contract for and fix the
compensation of qualified professionals to direct, advise and assist
the Historic Preservation Commission. The Commission may obtain
the equipment, supplies and other materials necessary to its
effective operation. The Commission shall obtain its legal counsel
from the Municipal Attorney at the rate of compensation
determined by the Township Committee. Further, the Commission
is responsible for ensuring that when a specific discipline is not
represented on the Commission, and the Commission considers an
action which is normally evaluated by a professional in that
discipline, it shall obtain professional advice and assistance before
rendering a decision.
§ 217-133 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-133
213:928
(4) Powers and duties. The Historic Preservation Commission shall
have the following powers and duties:
(a) Within 12 months of its organization, the Historic Preservation
Commission shall complete a survey of historic sites and shall
prepare and adopt a landmark designation list and official map
of historic sites and landmarks, which shall then be referred to
the Planning Board for inclusion in the Master Plan pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28b and to the Committee of the Township of
Washington for inclusion in the Zoning Map as an Historic
Preservation Overlay Zone.
(b) To hear and decide applications for certificates of
appropriateness for historic sites, landmarks or historic
districts or designated in § 217-133D(4)(a).
(c) To amend from time to time and as circumstances warrant, the
landmark designation list and historic preservation map.
(d) To report at least annually to the Planning Board and the
Committee of the Township of Washington on the state of
historic preservation in the Township and to recommend
measures to improve the same.
(e) To collect and disseminate material on the importance of
historic preservation and specific techniques for achieving the
same.
(f) To advise all municipal agencies regarding goals and
techniques of historic preservation.
(g) To adopt and promulgate such regulations and procedures not
inconsistent herewith as are necessary and proper for the
effective and efficient performance of the duties herein
assigned.
(h) To review all proposed National Register nominations for
properties that come within the jurisdiction of the Commission,
as established by the criteria of the 1980 amendments of the
National Historic Preservation Act of 1966.
(5) Meetings.
(a) The Historic Preservation Commission shall meet on a regular
basis, at a minimum of four times a year. All meetings shall
comply with the Open Public Meetings Act (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et
seq.).
(b) In the event that there arises a need for an emergency meeting
of the Historic Preservation Commission, the Commission
Chairman shall convene a meeting of the Commission after
having given due and appropriate notice in accordance with
the State Open Public Meetings Act. The Commission
§ 217-133 WATER § 217-133
213:929
§ 217-134. Designation of historic districts, sites and landmarks.
Chairman shall instruct the Secretary to personally or
telephonically contact the Commission members to inform
them of the time, date, location and purpose of the emergency
meeting. Emergency meetings shall be convened under such
circumstances as may warrant the immediate action of the
Commission. By way of example, an emergency meeting would
be in order where there is pending a demolition permit on a
designated historic site.
A. Preparation of a survey. The Historic Preservation Commission shall
make a comprehensive survey of the Township of Washington for the
purpose of identifying historic districts, sites and landmarks which are
worthy of protection and preservation. Such survey shall be based upon
an identification process approved by the Historic Preservation Office,
Department of Environmental Protection, and shall be the basis for
inclusion of an Historic Preservation Overlay Zone in the Zoning Map of
the Township. [Amended 3-20-1995 by Ord. No. 10-95]
B. Documentation and notification. Based on the survey and
recommendations of concerned citizens, the Historic Preservation
Commission shall document the importance and historical significance
to the municipality, state and nation of each proposed historic site and
landmark in terms of the purpose and criteria set forth in this section.
Thereafter, the Historic Preservation Commission shall, by certified
mail:
(1) Notify each owner that his property has been tentatively
designated a historic landmark.
(2) Advise each owner of the significance and consequences of such
designation and advise him of his opportunities and rights to
challenge or contest such designation.
(3) Invite each owner to consent voluntarily to final designation
without the need for public hearing or other protection.
C. Public hearings.
(1) The Historic Preservation Commission shall, as soon as practicable,
make public a complete list and map of the proposed historic
districts, sites and landmarks, specifying the locations, boundaries
and popular names thereof. In designating any landmark or historic
district, the Historic Preservation Commission may determine and
specifically designate certain buildings or structures as not
contributing to the historic district.
(2) The tentative list and map shall thereafter be submitted at a public
hearing to the examination and criticism of the public. Interested
persons shall be entitled to present their opinions, suggestions and
objections at this public hearing. A list and map showing all
§ 217-133 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-134
213:930
§ 217-135. Criteria for designation of historic districts, sites and
landmarks.
proposed historic districts and landmarks shall be published,
together with a notice of the hearing on the same, in the official
newspaper not less than 10 days prior to such hearing.
D. Final decision by Commission. After full consideration of the evidence
brought forth at the public hearing, the Historic Preservation
Commission shall make its final decisions regarding the proposed
designations and shall issue its final report to the public, stating
reasons in support of its actions with respect to each site, landmark and
historic district designation.
E. Submission of list to Township Clerk and Planning Board. The final list
and map of sites, landmarks and historic districts shall be submitted
thereafter to the Secretary of the Township Planning Board and to the
Clerk of the Township of Washington. Prior to the adoption of an
ordinance including these designated sites, landmarks and districts as
the Historic Preservation Overlay Zone, the Township Committee shall
refer the same to the Planning Board for recommendations. The
Committee shall then determine whether to adopt the designation list
and map by ordinance as said overlay zone.
F. Distribution of designation list and map. Copies of the Landmarks
Designation List and Historic Preservation Map, as adopted, shall be
made public and distributed to all municipal agencies reviewing
development applications and all building and housing permits. A
certificate of designation shall be served by certified mail upon the
owner of each site included in the final list, and a true copy thereof shall
be filed with the County Clerk for recordation. [Amended 3-20-1995
by Ord. No. 10-95]
G. Placement of plaques. Each designated historic district, site and
landmark may be marked by an appropriate plaque in such form as the
Historic Preservation Commission shall promulgate by regulation.
A. In considering an individual site, building or structure or a district for
designation as historically, architecturally or archaeologically
significant, the Historic Preservation Commission shall give
consideration to the following criteria:
(1) That it is associated with events that have made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of our history;
(2) That it is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
(3) That it embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or
method of construction, or that it represents the work of a master,
or that it possesses high artistic values or that it represents a
significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack
individual distinction; or
§ 217-134 WATER § 217-135
213:931
§ 217-136. Certificate of appropriateness.
(4) That it has yielded or may be likely to yield information important
in prehistory or history.
B. Ordinarily, cemeteries, birthplaces or graves of historical figures,
properties owned by religious institutions or used for religious
purposes, structures that have been moved from their original
locations, reconstructed historic buildings, properties primarily
commemorative in nature and properties that have achieved
significance within the past 50 years shall not be considered eligible for
the National Register. However, such properties will qualify for
designation hereunder if they are integral parts of districts that do meet
the criteria or if they fall within the following categories:
(1) A religious property deriving primary significance from
architectural or artistic distinction or historical importance;
(2) A building or structure removed from its original location but which
is significant primarily for architectural value or which is the
surviving structure most importantly associated with an historic
person or event;
(3) A birthplace or grave of an historical figure of outstanding
importance if there is no other appropriate site or building directly
associated with his productive life;
(4) A cemetery that derives its primary significance from graves of
persons of transcendent importance, from age, from distinctive
design features or from association with historic events;
(5) A reconstructed building when accurately executed in a suitable
environment and presented in a dignified manner as part of a
restoration master plan and when no other building or structure
with the same association has survived;
(6) A property primarily commemorative in intent if design, age,
tradition or symbolic value has invested it with its own historical
significance; or
(7) A property achieving significance within the past 50 years if it is of
exceptional importance.
A. Actions requiring a certificate of appropriateness. A certificate of
appropriateness issued by the Historic Preservation Commission shall
be required before a permit is issued for any of the following or, in the
event that no other type of permit is required, before any work can
commence on any of the following activities involving any site or
landmark or within any historic district:
(1) Demolition of an historic site or landmark or of any improvement
within any historic district.
§ 217-135 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-136
213:932
§ 217-137. Applications for certificates of appropriateness.
(2) Relocation of any historic site or landmark or of any improvement
within any historic district.
(3) Change in the exterior appearance of any existing historic site or
landmark, excluding paint, or of any improvement within any
district by addition, alteration or replacement. [Amended
9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 30-90]
(4) Any new construction of a principal or accessory structure on any
historic site or in any historic district.
(5) Changes in or addition of new signs or exterior lighting, except that
no certificate of appropriateness shall be required for one unlit sign
per premises if the surface area of such sign does not exceed two
square feet.
B. Exceptions. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 30-90]
(1) A certificate of appropriateness shall not be required for any
painting, repair or exact replacement of any existing improvement.
In the event that the exterior surface material of the improvement
shall be changed as a result of repair or exact replacement, a
certificate of appropriateness shall not be required if the new
exterior surface is one that has been previously approved by
regulations duly promulgated by the Historic Preservation
Commission for similar improvement in that area or as to that
particular historic landmark. In the event that the repair or exact
replacement does not conform to said regulations, a certificate of
appropriateness shall be required.
(2) In terms of an exact replacement of finishes, materials or
architectural elements, it is understood that the Historic
Preservation Commission would prefer an applicant to maintain,
stabilize and repair the original or existing finishes, materials or
architectural elements before considering the replacement of the
same. However, should the original or existing finishes, materials
or architectural elements be of such a deteriorated condition as to
require replacement, the new finishes, materials or architectural
elements should be designed and installed to replicate the
material, size, contour, configuration and design of that which is
being replaced.
A. Application procedure. Application for a certificate of appropriateness
shall be made on forms available from either the Township Clerk or the
Secretary of the Historic Preservation Commission. Completed
applications shall be delivered to the Secretary of the Historic
Preservation Commission at the Washington Township Municipal
Building, 43 Schooley's Mountain Road, Long Valley, New Jersey.
§ 217-136 WATER § 217-137
213:933
B. Application information and supporting documents. Applications or a
certificate of appropriateness shall be filed in compliance with the
following requirements:
(1) The applicant shall file eight copies of the application and eight
copies of the plot plans, maps and other such appropriate
documents as required by the Historic Preservation Commission. In
the case of applications being made directly to the Commission
through referral by another Township board or official, the
applicant shall have the responsibility of providing an advisory
copy of the full application to the Township Planning Board,
Township Board of Adjustment, Township Health Department and
Township Construction Code Official. The filing of this advisory
copy to the above-noted Boards shall be made by the applicant
within three days of having filed the formal application with the
Historic Preservation Commission.
(2) The application shall include:
(a) An overall site plan layout, at a minimum scale of one inch
equals 20 feet, showing the location of all adjacent properties.
(b) Sufficient color photographs of all adjacent properties and
buildings within a minimum of 60 feet of the landmark
property lines. Each photograph shall be properly identified
and referenced on the site plan.
(c) Elevation drawings may be optional at the Commission's
requests. All building elevations required shall be at a
minimum scale of 1/8 inch equals one foot.
C. Hearing procedure.
(1) The applicant shall notify all property owners within 200 feet of the
lot line of the landmark property in question, by certified mail with
a return receipt requested, of the hearing on the application,
including a statement as to the work or activity involved, not less
than 10 days before it is to be heard. A list of such property owners
may be obtained from the Township Assessor.
(2) The applicant shall present a certification of service of such notice
at the hearing on the application.
(3) The applicant shall publish notice of the hearing and present proof
of publication in the official newspaper not less than 10 days before
it is to be heard.
D. Time frame of decision by Commission.
(1) The Historic Preservation Commission shall reach a decision on the
application within 45 days after the Secretary has declared an
application to be complete; otherwise the applicant shall be
deemed to have been approved. Nothing herein shall prohibit an
§ 217-137 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-137
213:934
§ 217-138. Standards of consideration.
In making its determinations and recommendations, the Historic
Preservation Commission shall take into consideration specific standards as
set forth below.
extension of time by mutual agreement of the applicant and the
Historic Preservation Commission. The Historic Preservation
Commission may advise the applicant and make recommendations
in regard to the appropriateness of proposed action and may grant
approval upon such conditions as it deems appropriate within the
intent and purpose of this section.
(2) If an application is approved, the Historic Preservation Commission
shall forthwith issue a certificate of appropriateness. If the Historic
Preservation Commission disapproves an application, the Historic
Preservation Commission shall state its reasons, in writing, in
resolution form within 10 days of such a decision. In case of
disapproval, the Historic Preservation Commission shall notify the
applicant, in writing, of such resolution of disapproval, and reasons
therefor, and provide the applicant with a certified copy thereof. A
summary of the Historic Preservation Commission's action shall be
published in the official newspaper within 10 days of such action.
E. Appeal to Commission of Hardship. In the event that the applicant
alleges that compliance with the requirements of this section would be
an unreasonable hardship and that the nature of his application is such
that the change sought neither justifies the time and expense of the
plenary proceeding nor will impact negatively on the public good nor
specifically on the historic qualities sought to be preserved; the Historic
Preservation Commission, by a two-thirds affirmative vote of its fully
authorized membership, may grant such relief from the requirements of
this section as it deems consistent with the public good and the
purposes of this section.
F. Request for certificate of appropriateness for alteration creating
negligible impact. An applicant may allege that a certificate of
appropriateness should be granted without his fulfilling all of the
application requirements set forth herein because the addition or
alteration contemplated will not be visible from any place to which the
public normally has access and, therefore, said addition or alteration
cannot adversely affect the public interest and cannot affect an
architecturally significant elevation. In that event, the Historic
Preservation Commission, by a majority vote of its full authorized
membership, upon a finding that the applicant's claim is accurate, may
forthwith grant a certificate of appropriateness on that basis.
A. Demolitions. With regard to an application to demolish an historic site,
landmark or any improvement within any historic district, the following
matters shall be considered:
§ 217-137 WATER § 217-138
213:935
(1) Its historic, architectural, archaeological and aesthetic
significance.
(2) Its use.
(3) Its importance to the municipality and the extent to which its
historical, architectural or archaeological value is such that its
removal would be detrimental to the public interest.
(4) The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon design,
craftsmanship, texture or material that it could not be reproduced
or could be reproduced only with great difficulty.
(5) The extent to which its retention would promote the general
welfare by maintaining and increasing real estate value, generating
business, creating new jobs, attracting tourists, students, writers,
historians, artists and artisans, attracting new residents,
encouraging study and interest in American history, stimulating
interest and study in architecture and design, educating citizens in
American culture and heritage or making the municipality a more
attractive and desirable place in which to live.
(6) If it is within an historic district, the probable impact of its removal
upon the ambience of said historic district.
B. Removals out of the municipality. With regard to an application to move
an historic landmark to a location outside of the municipality, the
following matters shall be considered:
(1) The historic loss to the site of the original location.
(2) The compelling reasons for not retaining the landmark or structure
at its present location.
(3) The proximity of the proposed new location to the municipality,
including the accessibility to the residents of the municipality and
other citizens.
(4) The probability of significant damage to the landmark or structure
itself as a result of the move.
(5) The applicable matters set forth in Subsection A.
C. Removals within the municipality. With regard to an application to move
an historic site or landmark or any structure in any historic district to a
new location within the municipality, the following matters shall be
considered in addition to the matters set forth in Subsection B:
(1) The compatibility, nature and character of the current and of the
proposed surrounding areas as they relate to the intent and
purposes of this section.
(2) If the proposed new location is within an historic district, the visual
compatibility factors as set forth in Subsection G.
§ 217-138 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-138
213:936
D. Visual compatibility considered for additions or removals. With regard
to an application to move a landmark or structure into or to construct a
new structure or to add to or alter an existing structure within an
historic district, the visual compatibility of the proposed structure with
the structures and surroundings to which it would be visually related
within that district shall be considered in terms of the visual
compatibility factors as set forth in Subsection G.
E. Considerations on other actions. In regard to an application for
approval any other proposed action, as set forth in § 217-136A, the
following matters shall be considered:
(1) If an historic landmark or a structure in the Historic Preservation
Overlay Zone is the subject of an application:
(a) The impact of the proposed change on its historic and
architectural character.
(b) Its importance to the municipality and the extent to which its
historic or architectural interest would be adversely affected to
the detriment of the public interest.
(c) The extent to which there would be involvement of textures
and materials that could not be reproduced or could be
reproduced only with great difficulty.
(2) The use of any structure involved.
(3) The extent to which the proposed action would adversely affect the
public's view of a landmark or structure within an historic district
from a public street.
(4) If the application deals with a structure within an historic district,
the impact the proposed change would have on the character and
ambience of the historic district and the structure's visual
compatibility with the buildings, places and structures to which it
would be visually related in terms of the visual compatibility factors
set forth in Subsection G.
F. Additional matters considered. In regard to all applications, additional
pertinent matters may be considered but in no instance shall interior
arrangement be considered.
G. Visual compatibility factors. The following factors shall be used in
determining the visual compatibility of a building, structure or
appurtenance thereof with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related and shall be known as "visual compatibility factors":
(1) Height. The height of the proposed building shall be visually
compatible with adjacent buildings.
(2) Proportion of the building's front facade. The relationship of the
width of the building to the height of the front elevation shall be
§ 217-138 WATER § 217-138
213:937
visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
(3) Proportion of openings within the facility. The relationship of the
width of the windows to the height of the windows in a building
shall be visually compatible with the buildings and places to which
it is visually related.
(4) Rhythm of solids to voids on front facade. The relationship of solids
to voids in the front facade of a building shall be visually
compatible with the buildings and places to which it is visually
related.
(5) Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. The relationship of the
building to the open space between it and the adjoining buildings
shall be visually compatible with the buildings and places to which
it is visually related.
(6) Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projections. The relationship of
the entrance or entrances and the porch projections to the street
shall be visually compatible with the buildings and places to which
it is visually related.
(7) Relationship of materials and texture. The relationship of materials
and texture of the facade and roof of a building shall be visually
compatible with the predominant materials used in the buildings to
which it is visually related. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No.
30-90]
(8) Roof shapes and roofing materials. The roof shapes of a building
shall be visually compatible with the buildings to which it is visually
related. Dimensional shingles are an acceptable material for
replacing a slate roof or cedar shakes. [Amended 9-17-1990 by
Ord. No. 30-90]
(9) Walls of continuity. Appurtenances of a building, such as walls,
open-type fencing and evergreen landscape masses, shall form
cohesive walls of enclosure along a street to the extent necessary
to maintain visual compatibility of the building with the buildings
and places to which it is visually related.
(10) Scale of building. The size of a building, the mass of a building in
relation to open spaces, the windows, door openings, porches and
balconies shall be visually compatible with the buildings and places
to which it is visually related.
(11) Directional expression of front facade. A building shall be visually
compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually related
in its directional character, whether this be vertical character,
horizontal character or nondirectional character.
§ 217-138 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-138
213:938
§ 217-139. Effect of a certificate of appropriateness approval;
denial; appeal.
(12) Siding. The siding of a building shall be visually compatible with
the buildings and places to which it is visually related. Alternative
siding shall be permitted as an exception to the requirements
herein, but only if all of the following conditions are met: [Added
9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 30-90]
(a) Where the requirements of historically accurate replacement
of installation of siding would cause an economic hardship on
the property owner and such hardship would justify the use of
alternative siding.
(b) The alternative siding shall replicate the original exterior
siding of the building, in all appearances, dimensions, contour,
configuration and design.
(c) Where siding is being repaired and replaced, the original
siding shall be retained under the new alternative siding, so
long as the original siding is in a condition that would merit its
retention.
H. In addition to the visual compatibility factors listed above, the Historic
Preservation Commission shall also give consideration to the latest
edition of the Secretary of the Interior's Standards and Guidelines for
Rehabilitation of Historic Buildings. [Added 3-20-1995 by Ord. No.
10-95]
I. All lighting within the Historic Preservation Overlay Zone shall be
designed and maintained in accordance with § 159-41A. [Added
8-19-2002 by Ord. No. 32-02]
(1) Notwithstanding the requirements of § 159-41A, the use of neon
lighting visible to the exterior of any building is prohibited within
the Historic Preservation Overlay Zone.
(2) Within the Historic Preservation Overlay Zone, all lighting within
retail and merchandise display areas shall not be visible to the
exterior of any building through display windows or doors. Interior
light fixtures shall be completely screened from view so as not to
produce any nuisance glare, on or off site, in accordance with
§ 159-41A.
A. Approved certificate of appropriateness deemed positive
recommendation.
(1) If a certificate of appropriateness has been issued for an
application that requires approval of the Planning Board or the
Zoning Board of Adjustment, the certificate of appropriateness
shall be deemed to be a positive recommendation to that body as to
the historic preservation aspects of the matter before that body.
§ 217-138 WATER § 217-139
213:939
§ 217-140. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall undertake any activity in relation to a landmark or
improvement within the Historic Preservation Overlay Zone without first
having obtained a certificate of appropriateness shall be deemed to be in
violation of this section.
(2) The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment may
nevertheless grant or deny the application based on the entire
record before it, notwithstanding the certificate of appropriateness
as to the historic preservation aspects.
B. Appeals relating to a certificate of appropriateness. An appeal of the
denial of a certificate of appropriateness may be had as follows: If the
Construction Code Official refuses to issue a permit based on denial of a
certificate of appropriateness, written appeal shall be made with the
Board of Adjustment within 10 days after such denial.
A. Service of notice of violation. Upon learning of the violation, the
Construction Code Official shall personally serve upon the owner of the
lot whereon the violation is occurring a notice describing the violation
in detail and giving the owner 10 days to abate the violation by
restoring the landmark or improvement to its status quo ante. If the
owner cannot be personally served within the municipality with said
notice, a copy of the same shall be posted on the site in question, and a
copy shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
owner at his last known address as its appears on the municipal tax
rolls.
B. Issuance of summons and complaint. In the event that the violation is
not abated within the specified ten-day period following service and/or
posting on the site in question, whichever is earlier, the Construction
Code Official shall cause to be issued a summons and complaint,
returnable in the municipal court, charging violation of this section.
Each separate day that the violation exists shall be deemed to be a new
and separate violation of this section.
C. Penalties. The penalty for violations shall be as follows:
(1) For each day of violation up to 10 days: not more than $25 per day.
(2) For each day of violation from 11 to 25 days: not more than $50 per
day.
(3) For each day of violation beyond 25 days: not more than $75 per
day.
D. Injunctive relief. In the event that any action which would permanently
and/or adversely change a landmark, historic site or historic district,
such as demolition or removal, is about to occur without a certificate of
appropriateness having been issued, the Construction Code Official is
hereby authorized to apply to the Superior Court of New Jersey for such
§ 217-139 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-140
213:940
§ 217-141. Preventive maintenance.
Recognizing the need for preventive maintenance to ensure the continued
useful life of landmarks and structures in historic districts, the Committee
of the Township of Washington hereby declares that code enforcement in
relation to landmarks and structures in historic districts is a high municipal
priority.
injunctive relief as is necessary to prevent the destruction of any
historic site, landmark or structure within an historic district.
A. Deterioration and service of notice of violation. In the event that any
landmark or improvement in the Historic Preservation Overlay Zone
deteriorates to the point that, in the best estimate of the Municipal
Construction Code Official, the cost of correcting the outstanding code
violations equals more than 50% of the cost of replacing the entire
improvement on which the violations occur, the Construction Code
Official shall serve personally or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a notice on the owner of the landmark or structure, listing
the violations, the estimate for their abatement and the replacement
cost of the improvement and stating that if the owner does not take all
necessary remedial action within 90 days, or such extensions of time as
the Construction Code Official shall for good cause grant, the
municipality may, at the expiration of the ninety-day period, institute
appropriate legal proceedings against the property owner to restrain,
correct or abate all violation.
B. Request for hearing by property owner.
(1) Upon receipt of such notice from the Municipal Construction Code
Official, the owner may, within 10 days after such receipt, notify the
Construction Code Official or his wish to have a hearing as to the
allegations and estimates set forth in the Construction Code
Official's notice. Such hearing shall be conducted by the Board of
Adjustment and shall, insofar as is possible, be a formal adversary
proceeding in which the Board shall decide whether the matters
alleged in the notice are established by a preponderance of the
evidence.
(2) If the owner does not request a hearing, the procedures set forth in
Subsection A shall apply. If a hearing is requested, the Construction
Code Official shall, within 10 days after the hearing, serve on the
owner an opinion of the Board, in writing, setting forth the
conclusions and the reasons for the decision set forth therein. Such
opinion shall be deemed to be a first notice pursuant to Subsection
A.
C. Violation abatement by municipality. Thereafter, if the owner of the
property in question does not comply with the terms of the notice, the
Construction Code Official, in addition to any other available remedies
likely to bring about compliance, may request the legal counsel of the
§ 217-140 WATER § 217-141
213:941
§ 217-142. Permit review.
It shall be the duty of all municipal officials reviewing all permit applications
involving real property or improvements thereon to determine whether
such application involves any activity or property which should also be
the subject of an application for a certificate of appropriateness, and if it
should, to inform, in writing, both the Secretary of the Commission and the
applicant in a timely fashion.
§ 217-143. Effective date.
This section shall take effect upon passage, publication and filing of a copy
with the appropriate state and county agencies as set forth and in the
manner prescribed by state law.
Township to institute the appropriate proceedings at law or in equity
against the owner of the property to restrain, correct or abate all
violations.
§ 217-141 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-143
213:942
ARTICLE XIV
Requirements for Developments Increasing the Township's Growth
Share Obligation for Affordable Housing
[Added 7-18-2005 by Ord. No. 26-05; amended 9-19-2005 by Ord.
No. 35-05]
Every development which increases the number of affordable housing
units that must be addressed by the Township's housing element and fair
share plan is subject to this article.
§ 217-144. Legislative intent.
The legislative intent and recitals set forth in the preamble to Ordinance
No. 35-05 (adopting this article) are hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference herein as if set forth herein at length.
§ 217-145. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to the following developments,
subject to the exemptions in § 217-146.
A. Any development which results in a net increase in the number of
market-rate dwelling units in the Township.
B. Any development which results in a net increase in the gross floor area
of any nonresidential building in the Township of the following use
groups, as defined by the International Building Code (IBC) [which has
been incorporated by reference into the Uniform Construction Code
(UCC)]:
Use Group Description*
B Office buildings. Places where business transactions of
all kinds occur. Includes banks, corporate offices,
government offices, professional offices, car showrooms
and outpatient clinics.
M Mercantile uses. Buildings used to display and sell
products. Includes retail stores, strip malls, shops and
gas stations.
F Factories where people make, process or assemble
products. Includes automobile manufacturers, electric
power plants, foundries, and incinerators. F use group
includes F1 and F2.
S Storage uses. Includes warehouses, parking garages,
lumberyards and aircraft hangers. S group includes S1
and S2.
H High hazard manufacturing, processing, generation and
storage uses. H group includes H1, H2, H3, H4 and H5.
A1 Assembly uses, including concert halls and TV studios.
§ 217-144 WATER § 217-145
213:943
§ 217-146. Exemptions.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 217-145 above, the following
developments shall be exempt from the provisions of this article:
Use Group Description*
A2 Assembly uses, including casinos, night clubs,
restaurants and taverns.
A3 Assembly uses, including libraries, lecture halls,
arcades, galleries, bowling alleys, funeral parlors,
gymnasiums and museums but excluding houses of
worship
A4 Assembly uses, including arenas, skating rinks and
pools.
E Schools K - 12.
I Institutional uses such as hospitals, nursing homes,
assisted living facilities and jails. I group includes I1, I2,
I3 and I4.
R1 Hotels and motels.
*Note: The descriptions in the above table are not intended to be
exhaustive, and additional uses are or may be included within the use
group; in all cases, the IBC definitions control. The inclusion of any
use in the above table is not to be construed to mean that such use
is permitted in the Township or in any particular zoning district; such
use shall only be permitted in accordance with the balance of the
provisions in the Land Use Ordinance.
A. Market rate dwelling units within developments that provide affordable
housing units in accordance with the housing element of the Township
Master Plan and the Township's fair share plan regulations, in
accordance with either the first- or second-round rules of the Council on
Affordable Housing and in accordance with the applicable affordable
housing requirements of the respective zone districts; provided,
however, that such exemption shall only apply to the number of market
rate dwelling units in the development that do not exceed a ratio of four
market rate units for every one affordable unit in the development.
B. Developments of federal, state, county and municipal governments, but
not including developments of school districts
C. Developments that received preliminary or final site plan approval from
the Planning Board and/or Board of Adjustment, as applicable, prior to
July 28, 2005. [Amended 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 17-06]
D. Developments that result in the construction of an apartment as
accessory to a single-family use for use by disabled individuals or
individuals age 55 or older who are related to the owners of the
property provided that the apartment is restricted by deed, in form
§ 217-145 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-146
213:944
§ 217-147. Developer's obligation.
Prior to or as a condition precedent to the grant of any approval of a
development application by the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment,
Zoning Officer or Construction Official, as applicable, the developer shall be
required to comply with the requirements of this article and to enter into
an agreement with the Township Committee, in order to address the effect
of the development upon the Township's affordable housing obligation, in
accordance with the following requirements:
satisfactory to the Township Attorney. Any such development shall
remain subject to the provisions of Chapter 111, Article VII,
Development Fees and Affordable Housing Contribution, of the Revised
General Ordinances of the Township of Washington. [Added
4-17-2006 by Ord. No. 04-06]
E. Agricultural developments that result in the construction of an
apartment as accessory to a single-family use as housing for farm
laborers as provided under § 217-40. Any such development shall
remain subject to the provisions of Chapter 111, Article VII,
Development Fees and Affordable Housing Contribution, of the Revised
General Ordinances of the Township of Washington. [Added
2-19-2007 by Ord. No. 7-07]
A. Residential development.
(1) A net increase (new construction less demolition) of every eight
market rate dwelling units, or fraction thereof, shall increase the
obligation of the Township by one affordable housing unit, or
fraction thereof.
(2) For every unit increase, or fraction thereof, in the Township's
affordable housing obligation resulting from the development, the
developer shall be required to increase the number of affordable
housing units in the Township by an equal number, as set forth in
Subsection A(3) and (4) below.
(3) For every whole unit of increase in the Township's obligation, one
affordable unit shall be developed on the site or tract being
developed, in accordance with the applicable zoning regulations.
(4) For every fractional unit of increase in the Township's obligation,
the developer shall have the option to:
(a) Develop an affordable unit on the site or tract being developed
or at another location in the Township in accordance with the
applicable zoning regulations, and to claim a credit for any
resulting fractional surplus; and/or
(b) Pay a fee to the Township in accordance with § 217-149.
§ 217-146 WATER § 217-147
213:945
(5) None of the foregoing shall be construed as increasing the
permitted density above that which the zoning regulations would
otherwise permit for the development.
B. Nonresidential development.
(1) A net increase due to development, as defined in this chapter, of
every 25 estimated jobs, or fraction thereof, shall increase the
obligation of the Township by one affordable housing unit, or
fraction thereof. The number of estimated jobs shall be based on
the gross floor area in square feet of new buildings or additions to
existing buildings, less the gross floor area of any building to be
demolished on the site, and on the use group of the development, in
accordance with the following table:
Use
Group Description
Square Feet
of Gross Floor
Area
Generating
Obligation of
One
Affordable
Unit
Jobs Per
1,000
Square Feet
B Office buildings.
Places where business
transactions of all
kinds occur. Includes
banks, corporate
offices, government
offices, professional
offices, car showrooms
and outpatient clinics.
8,333 3
M Mercantile uses.
Buildings used to
display and sell
products. Includes
retail stores, strip
malls, shops and gas
stations.
25,000 1
F Factories where
people make, process
or assemble products.
Includes automobile
manufacturers,
electric power plants,
foundries and
incinerators. F use
group includes F1 and
F2.
12,500 2
§ 217-147 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-147
213:946
Use
Group Description
Square Feet
of Gross Floor
Area
Generating
Obligation of
One
Affordable
Unit
Jobs Per
1,000
Square Feet
S Storage uses. Includes
warehouses, parking
garages, lumberyards
and aircraft hangers. S
group includes S1 and
S2.
125,000 0.2
H High hazard
manufacturing,
processing, generation
and storage uses. H
group includes H1, H2,
H3, H4 and H5.
25,000 1
A1 Assembly uses,
including concert halls
and TV studios.
12,500 2
A2 Assembly uses,
including casinos,
night clubs,
restaurants and
taverns.
8,333 3
A3 Assembly uses,
including libraries,
lecture halls, arcades,
galleries, bowling
alleys, funeral parlors,
gymnasiums and
museums but
excluding houses of
worship.
8,333 3
A4 Assembly uses,
including arenas,
skating rinks and
pools.
8,333 3
A5 Assembly uses,
including bleachers,
grandstands,
amusement park
structures and
stadiums.
Exclude Exclude
§ 217-147 WATER § 217-147
213:947
Use
Group Description
Square Feet
of Gross Floor
Area
Generating
Obligation of
One
Affordable
Unit
Jobs Per
1,000
Square Feet
E Schools K - 12. 25,000 1
I Institutional uses, such
as hospitals, nursing
homes, assisted living
facilities and jails. I
group includes I1, I2,
I3 and I4.
12,500 2
R1 Hotels and motels. 31,250 0.8
U Miscellaneous uses.
Fences, tanks, barns,
agricultural buildings,
sheds, greenhouses,
etc.
Exclude Exclude
(2) For every unit increase, or fraction thereof, in the Township's
affordable housing obligation resulting from the development, the
developer shall be required to increase the number of affordable
housing units in the Township by an equal number, as set forth in
Subsection B below.
(3) For every unit increase, or fraction thereof, in the Township's
affordable housing obligation resulting from the development, the
developer shall have the option to:
(a) Develop an affordable unit at another location in the Township,
in accordance with the applicable zoning regulations; and/or
(b) Pay a fee to the Township in accordance with § 217-149. In the
case of a fractional unit obligation, the developer shall have the
option to develop an affordable unit at another location in the
Township, in accordance with the applicable zoning
regulations, and to claim a credit for any resulting fractional
surplus, or to pay a fee to the Township in accordance with
§ 217-149.
(4) None of the foregoing shall be construed as increasing the
permitted floor area ratio or density above that which the
regulations for the zone district would otherwise permit for the
development.
§ 217-147 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-148
213:948
§ 217-148. Requirements for affordable housing units.
All affordable housing units shall be subject to the requirements of this
chapter that apply to comparable market rate housing units of the same
type in the same zone district. In addition, affordable housing units provided
pursuant to this section shall be subject to the requirements set forth in
Article VIII of this chapter and the following:
A. All affordable units to be created shall be eligible for credit against the
Township's affordable housing obligations and, to that end, shall comply
with all applicable regulations of the New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing. No age-restricted affordable units and/or affordable sales
units may be credited in excess of the number of such units permitted to
be credited within the Township by such regulations.
B. The developer, in cooperation with the Township Committee, shall:
(1) Demonstrate capacity to administer the units in accordance with
the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.
(2) Demonstrate that the units will have a low/moderate-income split
in accordance with the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls,
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26. For example, in each affordable development, at
least 50 percent of the restricted units within each bedroom
distribution shall be low-income units and the remainder may be
moderate-income units. Where an odd number of affordable units
are required to be provided, a majority of the units shall be lowincome
units.
(3) Demonstrate that the rents or sale prices of affordable units shall
be established in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:94-7 and with the
Uniform Housing Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26. For
example:
(a) The maximum rent for affordable units within each affordable
development shall be affordable to households earning no
more than 60% of median income. The average rent for lowand
moderate-income units shall be affordable to households
earning no more than 52% of median income. The developers
and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units shall
establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both lowincome
and moderate-income units, provided that at least 10%
of all low- and moderate-income units shall be affordable to
households earning no more than 35% of median income.
(b) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within
each affordable development shall be affordable to households
earning no more than 70% of median income. Each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55% for
restricted ownership units. In achieving this affordability
average, moderate-income ownership units must be available
for at least three different prices for each bedroom type, and
§ 217-148 WATER § 217-148
213:949
low-income ownership units must be available for at least two
different prices for each bedroom type, insofar as is possible
given the number of affordable units in the development.
(4) Demonstrate that the units will be affirmatively marketed in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:94-7 and with the Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.
(5) Demonstrate that the units will have the appropriate controls on
affordability in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:94-7 and with the
Uniform Housing Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.
(6) Demonstrate that the units will have the appropriate bedroom
distributions in accordance with the Uniform Housing Affordability
Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.
(a) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such
that:
[1] The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
is no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units.
[2] At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units are
two-bedroom units.
[3] At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units are
three-bedroom units.
[4] The remainder, if any, may be allocated at the discretion of
the developer.
[5] Where there are an insufficient number of affordable units
provided to meet the above bedroom distribution, the first
unit shall be a two-bedroom unit, the second unit shall be a
three-bedroom unit and the third unit shall be a onebedroom
unit.
(b) Age-restricted low- and moderate-income units may utilize a
modified bedroom distribution. At a minimum, the number of
bedrooms shall equal the number of age-restricted low- and
moderate-income units within the affordable development. The
standard may be met by creating all one-bedroom units or by
creating a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
(7) Comply with all other applicable requirements of the substantive
rules of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing, N.J.A.C.
5:94, and the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.
§ 217-148 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-149
213:950
§ 217-149. Payments in lieu of developing affordable housing.
When approved by the Planning Board, Zoning Board or Township
Committee, in the case of permit applications not before a board, a
developer may make a payment to the Township in lieu of developing
affordable housing units under the following conditions:
A. The amount of payments in lieu of constructing affordable units shall be
negotiated between the applicable authority and the developer. The
amount of the payment shall be based upon the cost to the Township to
create, or subsidize the creation of, the same number, or fraction
thereof, of affordable housing units within the Township as the
increased obligation resulting from the development, using any of the
methods permitted by the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
(COAH) as set forth in Subsection B below. Both hard and soft costs
shall be included in the calculation. The applicable authority shall
require the preparation of a pro-forma to confirm that the payment is
accurate and based upon realistic costs within the Township to create
such affordable units, and the applicable authority may submit such
pro-forma for review by a third party retained by the applicable
authority.
B. Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site shall only be
used to fund eligible affordable housing activities within the Township,
in accordance with COAH's substantive rules at N.J.A.C. 5:94-4.5,
5:94-4.6 and 5:94-4.8 through 5:94-4.15, provided that such activities
are eligible for credit against the Township's affordable housing
obligation, comply with all applicable requirements of COAH's
substantive rules and comply with the zoning regulations of the
Township.
C. Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units shall be deposited in a
separate interest- bearing housing trust fund or deposited in the
Housing Trust Fund established pursuant to Chapter 111, Article VII,
and shall at all times be identifiable from development fees. No funds
shall be spent by the Township until and unless COAH has approved a
spending plan for such funds. The Finance Officer shall maintain a
record of the amount deposited in the account, plus interest, and shall
make such record available for public inspection upon request.
D. In the event that a developer makes such a payment, but then does not
proceed to develop the project that resulted in the affordable housing
obligation, the developer may request a refund of the payment. Such
request shall be made in writing to the Township Committee. If
approved, the Township shall refund such fee, plus any interest in the
account resulting from the payment, less any administrative expenses
required to administer the account. Any refund issued by the Township
shall be construed as a failure of the applicant to satisfy a condition
precedent to the development approval and shall therefore terminate
any and all rights to such development. The developer may reinstate
such rights by making a new payment, with the amount of such
§ 217-149 WATER § 217-149
213:951
payment to be renegotiated as set forth in § 217-149A. The foregoing
shall not be construed to extend or otherwise alter any rights to
proceed with the development as established by the New Jersey
Municipal Land Use Law, the rules of the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing or other applicable law.
§ 217-149 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-149
213:952
ARTICLE XV
Municipal Housing Liaison
[Added 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 25-06]
§ 217-150. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to create the administrative mechanisms
needed for the execution of the Township of Washington's responsibility to
assist in the provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing
Act of 1985.
§ 217-151. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering the
affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program
for the Township of Washington to ensure that the restricted units under
administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable,
only to low- and moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the Township
Committee with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the
affordable housing program for the Township of Washington.
§ 217-152. Establishment of Municipal Housing Liaison position
and compensation; powers and duties.
A. Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is hereby
established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for the Township
of Washington.
B. Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH),
the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the Township
Committee and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee.
C. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for the Township of
Washington, including the following responsibilities which may not be
contracted out:
(1) Serving as the Township's primary point of contact for all inquiries
from the state, affordable housing providers, administrative agents,
and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Township's Fair
Share Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reporting as required
by COAH;
§ 217-150 WATER § 217-152
213:953
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable;
(5) Attending continuing education programs as may be required by
COAH;
(6) If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or all of
the restricted units in the Township as described in Subsection F
below.
D. Subject to approval by COAH, the Township may contract with or
authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency charged by
the Township Committee, which entity shall have the responsibility of
administering the affordable housing program of the Township of
Washington. If the Township contracts with another entity to administer
all or any part of the affordable housing program, including the
affordability controls and affirmative marketing plan, the Municipal
Housing Liaison shall supervise the contracting administrative agent.
E. Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the Township
Committee at the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing
Liaison.
F. Administrative powers and duties assigned to the Municipal Housing
Liaison.
(1) Affirmative marketing.
(a) Conducting an outreach process to insure affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with the
affirmative marketing plan of the Township of Washington and
the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15.
(2) Household certification.
(a) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
(b) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(c) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(d) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendixes J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(e) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
§ 217-152 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-152
213:954
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located; and
(f) Employing the random selection process as provided in the
affirmative marketing plan of the Township of Washington
when referring households for certification to affordable units.
(3) Affordability controls.
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the appropriate County's register of deeds or County
Clerk's office after the termination of the affordability controls
for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(e) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
(4) Resale and rental.
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rental; and
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or re-rental.
(5) Communicating with unit owners.
(a) Reviewing and approving requests from owners of restricted
units who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance
during the term of their ownership;
(b) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of
central air-conditioning systems; and
§ 217-152 WATER § 217-152
213:955
(c) Processing requests and making determinations on requests
by owners of restricted units for hardship waivers.
(6) Enforcement.
(a) Ensure that all restricted units are identified as affordable
within the Tax Assessor's office and any municipal utility
authority (MUA) and upon notification to the administrative
agent of change in billing address, payment delinquency of two
consecutive billing cycles, transfer of title, or institution of a
writ of foreclosure on all affordable units, notifying all such
owners that they must either move back to their unit or sell it;
(b) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the administrative agent;
(c) The posting annually in all rental properties, including twofamily
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent
together with the telephone number of the administrative
agent where complaints of excess rent can be made;
(d) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined
in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(e) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to
the municipality's affordable housing trust fund or other
appropriate municipal fund approved by the DCA;
(f) Establishing a rent-to-equity program;
(g) Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as
approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering
such affordability controls; and
(h) Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
(7) The Municipal Housing Liaison shall have authority to take all
actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
§ 217-152 WASHINGTON CODE § 217-152
213:956
Part III: Board of Health
Chapter 221
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of Code by governing body — See
Ch. 1, Art. II.
§ 217-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 217-152
221:957

ARTICLE I
Definitions; General Penalty
[Adopted 3-15-1972 as Ch. BH-I of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 221-1. Definitions, construction and severability.
The provisions of Chapter 1, General Provisions, concerning short title,
definitions, construction and severability shall apply to all chapters adopted
by the Board of Health.
§ 221-2. General penalty.
A. Maximum penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of any
chapter adopted by the Board of Health of the township shall, upon
conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $500
for each offense. Complaint shall be made in the Municipal Court of the
township or before any other judicial officer having authority under the
laws of the State of New Jersey. The Court shall have the power to
impose the other and additional penalties provided by N.J.S.A. 26:3-77
and N.J.S.A. 26:2-78.
B. Separate violation. Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in
which a violation of any of the provisions of any chapter adopted by the
Board of Health exists shall constitute a separate violation.
C. Collection of fees and penalties. All fees and penalties collected under
any provision of any chapter adopted by the board of health shall be
paid to the treasurer of the township.
§ 221-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-2
221:959

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code by Board of Health
[Adopted 2-23-1999 by Ord. No. 1-99]
Be it ordained and enacted by the Board of Health of the Township of
Washington, County of Morris, State of New Jersey, as follows:
§ 221-3. Adoption of renumbering.
The ordinances of the Township of Washington adopted by the Board of
Health of the Township of Washington 3-15-1972, as revised, codified and
consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by General Code
Publishers Corp. as set forth below, and as renumbered to consist of
Chapters 221 through 255, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as "Part III, Board of Health Legislation, of the Code of the
Township of Washington," hereafter known and referred to as the "Code."
Distribution Table
Chapter in
1971 Code Chapter in 1998 Code
BH-I General Ch. 221
BH-II Administration Ch. 224
BH-III (Reserved)
BH-IV Public Health Nuisance
Code
Ch. 243
BH-V Retail Food Establishment
Code
Ch. 239
BH-VI (Reserved)
BH-VII (Reserved)
BH-VIII Public Noncommunity and
Nonpublic Water Systems
Ch. 255, Art. I
BH-IX Maintenance of Swine Ch. 231, Art. II
BH-X Mink Ranches Ch. 231, Art. I
BH-XI Solid Waste Code Ch. 250
BH-XII Air Pollution Control Code Ch. 227
BH-XIII Public Recreational
Bathing Code
Ch. 235
BH-XIV (Reserved)
BH-XV Individual Sewage
Disposal Code
Ch. 247, Art. I
BH-XVI Rabies Vaccination of Cats Ch. 231, Art. III
§ 221-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-4
221:961
§ 221-4. Additional changes.
The following changes are hereby adopted as part of the process of
republication:
A. References to N.J.R.S. are hereby revised to cite N.J.S.A.
B. References to "this revision" are hereby revised to "this Code."
§ 221-4 WASHINGTON CODE § 221-4
221:962
Chapter 224
ADMINISTRATION
§ 224-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Administrative Code of
the Board of Health of the Township of Washington and is herein referred to
as the code.
§ 224-2. President of the Board of Health.
There shall be a President of the Board of Health who shall preside at all
its meetings. The President shall be appointed by the Board of Health from
among its members for a term of one year.
§ 224-3. Secretary of the Board of Health.
There shall be a Secretary of the Board of Health who shall be responsible
to the Board and who shall issue all licenses authorized by the Board. The
Secretary shall be appointed by the Board for a term of one year.
§ 224-4. Registrar of Vital Statistics.
There shall be a Registrar of Vital Statistics who shall be responsible to the
Board of Health. The Registrar of vital statistics shall be appointed by the
Board of Health for a term of three years.
§ 224-5. Health Officer.
There shall be a Health Officer of the Board of Health who shall be
responsible to the Board of Health. The Health Officer shall hold the
necessary license. He shall be appointed by the Board of Health for a term
of one year. The Health Officer shall, subject to the superior authority of
the Board, be the general agent of the Board for the enforcement of its
ordinances and the sanitary laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 224-6. Special Health Officers.
There shall be, when appointed by the Board, Special Health Officers of
the Board of Health who shall promptly report to the Board every violation
of health ordinances, rules and regulations which may come within their
observation or knowledge. The police and fire officers of the Township of
Washington may be designated Special Health Officers of the Board of
Health.
§ 224-7. Plumbing Inspector.
There shall be a Plumbing Inspector of the Board of Health who shall be
responsible to the Board. The Plumbing Inspector shall be appointed by the
Board of Health for a term of one year.
§ 221-4 ADMINISTRATION § 224-8
224:963
§ 224-8. Employment of additional personnel.
The Board may employ such other personnel as it deems necessary,
including technicians, inspectors and others necessary to carry out the
powers vested in the Board by law and by this Code. All such personnel shall
where required be appropriately licensed.
§ 224-9. Emergency powers of the Health Officer.
Whenever the Health Officer finds that the public safety will not permit
delay, he may exercise one or more of the following powers without having
to resort to legal proceedings and without the necessity of giving notice or
holding any hearing which would otherwise be required under any provision
of this Code:
§ 224-10. Right of entry.
§ 224-11. Abatement of nuisances.
A. Power to prevent the sale of food. The Health Officer may prohibit the
importation into the township or sale of any food, drink or other item
intended for human consumption or use from a source suspected of
being infected, contaminated, unsanitary, unhealthy or dangerous.
B. Power to seize and destroy unwholesome food. The Health Officer may
order the seizure and destruction of any food, drink or other item
intended for human consumption which is unwholesome or dangerous
or likely to cause sickness to injury to the persons who consume it.
A. Inspection of premises. The Board of Health, its agents and employees
shall have the right to inspect any premises in the township if they have
reason to believe that any provision of this Code is being violated, or as
part of a regular program of inspection.
B. Search warrant. If the owner or occupant of any premises refuses to
permit entry for the purpose of inspection, the Board of Health may
apply to the municipal judge for a search warrant. The application shall
be based upon an affidavit setting forth that the inspection is part of a
regular program of inspection or that conditions and circumstances
provide a reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or unsanitary
or unhealthy condition exists on the premises. If the judge is satisfied as
to the matters set forth in the affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance
of a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of the
premises.
A. Notice to abate nuisance.
(1) Whenever anything declared by this chapter or revision to be a
nuisance or any unsanitary or unhealthy condition is found on any
premises within the township, notice shall be given to the owner or
person in control of the premises to remove or abate it within the
§ 224-8 WASHINGTON CODE § 224-11
224:964
§ 224-12. Power to make rules and regulations.
The Board of Health may, by resolution make rules and regulations which
interpret or amplify any provision of this chapter or for the purpose of
making the provisions of this chapter more effective. No regulation shall
be inconsistent with, alter or amend any provision of this chapter and no
time specified not less than five days from the date of service in the
notice.
(2) Whenever anything declared by this chapter or revision to be a
nuisance or any unsanitary or unhealthy condition is found on any
public property, highway or other public premises or place, notice
shall be given to the person in charge to remove or abate the same
within the time specified. If that person fails to comply with the
notice within the time specified, the Board of Health or its agents
or employees may remove or abate such nuisance or condition in
the manner provided for a like condition existing on a private
premises or place.
B. Abatement by Health Officer. If the owner or person in control of the
premises, upon being noticed as provided by Subsection A, does not
comply with the notice within the time specified and fails to remove or
abate the nuisance or condition, the Board of Health or its agents or
employees shall proceed to abate the nuisance or condition or may
cause it to be removed or abated in a summary manner by such means
as shall be deemed proper.
C. Recovery of costs.
(1) Whenever any cost or expense is incurred by the township as a
result of the Board of Health, its agents or employees abating or
removing or causing to be abated or removed any nuisance or
unsanitary or unhealthy condition, such costs and expense may be
recovered in the following manner:
(a) In all cases where practical and permitted by law, such costs
shall be certified to the tax assessment authority and shall be a
part of the taxes next assessed against the premises upon
which the nuisance or unsanitary or unhealthy condition was
located.
(b) Where it is impossible or impractical to proceed under
Subsection C(1)(a) above, the cost or expense shall be
recovered in an action at law in any court of competent
jurisdiction. The action shall be instituted by the Board of
Health in the name of the township or ex rel the State of New
Jersey.
(2) Regardless of how costs are actually recovered, they shall be in
addition to and shall not affect the imposition of any penalties for
the violation of this section.
§ 224-11 ADMINISTRATION § 224-12
224:965
regulation shall impose any requirement which is in addition to or greater
than the requirements that are expressly or by implication imposed by any
provision of this chapter.
Chapter 227
AIR POLLUTION CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 217.
§ 224-12 WASHINGTON CODE § 224-12
227:966
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 227-1. Title and policy.
§ 227-2. Definitions.
The following terms, wherever used herein or referred to in this code, shall
have the respective meanings assigned to them unless a different meaning
clearly appears from the context:
AIR CONTAMINANT — Solid particles, liquid particles, vapors or gases
which are discharged into the outdoor atmosphere.
AIR POLLUTION — The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one or
more air contaminants in such quantities and duration as are, or tend to
be injurious to human health or welfare, animal or plant life or property, or
would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property.
ASBESTOS — Actinolite, amosite, anthophyllite, chrysotile, crocidolite and
tremolite.
DIRECT HEAT EXCHANGER — Equipment in which heat from the
combustion of fuel is transferred to a substance being heated so that the
latter is contacted by the products of combustion and may contribute to the
total effluent.
DIRECTOR OF AIR POLLUTION CONTROL or DIRECTOR — The person
or persons who are authorized by this chapter to exercise the powers
prescribed by this code.
ECONOMIC POISONS — Those chemicals used as insecticides,
rodenticides, fungicides, herbicides, nematocides or defoliants.
FRIABLE MATERIAL — Any material which can be crumbled, pulverized or
reduced to powder by hand pressure.
FUEL — Solid, liquid or gaseous materials used to produce useful heat by
burning.
A. Title. This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Air Pollution Control
Code of the Township of Washington."
B. Findings and declaration of policy. It is hereby declared that air
pollution is a menace to the health, welfare and comfort of the residents
of the Township of Washington and a cause of substantial damage to
property. For the purpose of preventing and reducing atmospheric
pollution, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the Township of
Washington to minimize air pollution as herein defined and to establish
standards governing the installation, maintenance and operation of
equipment and appurtenances relating to combustion, which is a source
or potential source of air pollution.
§ 227-1 AIR POLLUTION CONTROL § 227-2
227:967
GARBAGE — Waste animal or vegetable matter from houses, kitchens,
restaurants, hotels, produce markets or any other source or food of any kind
to be thrown away.
INCINERATOR — Any device, apparatus, equipment or structure used for
destroying, reducing or salvaging by fire any material or substance,
including but not limited to refuse, rubbish, garbage, trade waste, debris or
scrap; or a facility for cremating human or animal remains.
INDIRECT HEAT EXCHANGER — Equipment in which heat from the
combustion of fuel is transferred by conduction through a heat-conducting
material to a substance being heated, so that the latter is not contacted by
and adds nothing to the products of combustion.
INTERNAL CROSS-SECTIONAL DIMENSION — Any maximum linear
perpendicular distance from an inside wall of a stack or chimney to the
inside of an opposite wall, such as the diameter of a circular cross section
or the length or width of a rectangular cross section.
LIQUID PARTICLES — Particles which have volume but are not of rigid
shape and which, upon collection, tend to coalesce and create uniform
homogenous films upon the surface of the collecting media.
MANUFACTURING PROCESS — Any action, operation or treatment
embracing chemical, industrial, manufacturing or processing factors,
methods or forms, including but not limited to furnaces, kettles, ovens,
converters, cupolas, kilns, crucibles, stills, dryers, roasters, crushers,
grinders, mixers, reactors, regenerators, separators, filters, reboilers,
columns, classifiers, screens, quenchers, cookers, digesters, towers,
washers, scrubbers, mills, condensers or absorbers.
MOTOR VEHICLES — Includes all vehicles propelled otherwise than by
muscular power, excepting such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks.
ODOR — The property of a substance which affects the sense of smell.
OPACITY — The property of a substance which renders it partially or wholly
obstructive to the transmission of visible light expressed as the percentage
to which the light is obstructed.
OPEN BURNING — Any fire wherein the products of combustion are
emitted into the open air and are not directed thereto through a stack or
chimney of an incinerator.
OPERATOR — Any person who has care, custody or control of a building
or premises or a portion thereof, whether with or without knowledge of the
owner thereof.
OUTDOOR ATMOSPHERE — Air space outside of buildings, stacks or
exterior ducts.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall
have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof; or shall have charge or control of any dwelling
or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as fiduciary including
but not limited to executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee, receiver
§ 227-2 WASHINGTON CODE § 227-2
227:968
or guardian of the estate; or as a mortgagee in possession regardless of
how such possession was obtained. Any person who is a lessee subletting or
reassigning any part or all of any dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed
to be a co-owner with the lessor and shall have a joint responsibility over
the portion of the premises sublet or assigned by said lessee.
PARTICLES — Any material, except uncombined water, which exists in
finely divided form as liquid particles or solid particles at standard
conditions.
PERSON — Includes corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms,
partnerships and joint-stock companies, as well as individuals, and shall
also include all political subdivisions of this state or any agencies or
instrumentalities thereof.
PLANT LIFE — Vegetation, including but not limited to trees, tree branches,
leaves, yard trimmings, shrubbery, grass, weeds and crops.
REFUSE — Rubbish, garbage, trade waste and plant life.
RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART — Ringelmann's Scale for Grading the
Density of Smoke, as published by the United States Bureau of Mines,
or any chart, recorder, indicator or device which is approved by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection as the equivalent of said
Ringelmann's Scale for the measurement of smoke density.
RUBBISH — Waste solids not considered to be highly flammable or
explosive, including but not limited to rags, old clothes, leather, rubber,
carpets, wood, excelsior, papers, ashes, furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery,
masonry and other similar materials.
SALVAGE OPERATION — Any operation or activity from which is salvaged
or reclaimed any product or material, including but not limited to metals,
chemicals or shipping containers.
SMOKE — Small gasborne or airborne particles, exclusive of water vapor,
arising from a process of combustion in sufficient number to be observable.
SOLID PARTICLES — Particles of rigid shape and definite volume.
SOURCE OPERATION — Any manufacturing process or any identifiable part
thereof emitting an air contaminant into the outdoor atmosphere through
one or more stacks or chimneys.
STACK or CHIMNEY — A flue, conduit or opening designed and constructed
for the purpose of emitting air contaminants into the outdoor air.
STANDARD CONDITIONS — Shall be 70º F. and one atmosphere of
pressure (14.7 pounds per square inch absolute or 760 millimeters of
mercury).
TRADE WASTE — All waste solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting
from construction, building operations or the prosecution of any business,
trade or industry, including but not limited to plastic products, cartons,
paint, grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders and
other forms of solid or liquid waste material.
§ 227-2 AIR POLLUTION CONTROL § 227-2
227:969
VISIBLE SMOKE — Smoke which obscures light to a degree readily
discernible by visual observation.
§ 227-3. Air pollution prohibited.
No person or owner of property or person or persons having possession or
control thereof shall cause, suffer, allow or permit to be emitted into the
open air substances in such quantities as shall result in air pollution. The
provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the use of economic poisons.
§ 227-2 WASHINGTON CODE § 227-3
227:970
ARTICLE II
Open Burning
§ 227-4. Salvage operations.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit a salvage operation by open
burning.
§ 227-5. Rubbish or trade waste.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the disposal of rubbish,
garbage or trade waste or buildings or structures by open burning.
§ 227-6. Plant life.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the disposal of any type of
plant life by open burning.
§ 227-7. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
A. Variances approved and issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:27-2 of the New
Jersey Administrative Code.
B. Open burning of refuse for training or research exercises when
conducted at a permanent facility or training center designed to be
used solely for such purposes on a continuing basis.
§ 227-4 AIR POLLUTION CONTROL § 227-7
227:971

ARTICLE III
Smoke from Combustion of Fuel
§ 227-8. Indirect heat exchanger.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit visible smoke to be emitted
to be emitted into the outdoor air from combustion of fuel in any stationary
indirect heat exchanger, except as provided in § 227-9 hereof.
§ 227-9. Standards.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke the shade or
appearance of which is darker than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart
or greater than twenty-percent opacity, exclusive of water vapor, to be
emitted into the outdoor air from the combustion of fuel in any stationary
indirect heat exchanger having a rated hourly capacity of 200,000,000
British thermal units or greater gross heat input and discharging through a
stack or chimney having all internal cross-sectional dimensions of 60 inches
or greater.
§ 227-10. Time limits.
The provisions of §§ 227-8 and 227-9 shall not apply to smoke which is
visible for a period of not longer than three minutes in any consecutive
thirty-minute period.
§ 227-11. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to direct heat exchangers or
manufacturing processes or any motor vehicle while operating on the public
highways.
§ 227-12. Testing and measurement.
Any person responsible for the construction, installation, alteration or use
of an indirect heat exchanger shall, when requested by the Director, provide
the facilities and necessary equipment for determining the density or
opacity of smoke being discharged into the open air.
§ 227-8 AIR POLLUTION CONTROL § 227-12
227:973

ARTICLE IV
Standards for Emission of Solid Particles
§ 227-13. Prohibition.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit particles to be emitted from
any stack or chimney into the outdoor air the shade or appearance of which
is greater than twenty-percent opacity, exclusive of water vapor.
§ 227-14. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
A. Particles the shade or appearance of which is greater than twentypercent
opacity, exclusive of water vapor, for a period of not longer than
three minutes in any consecutive thirty-minute period.
B. Source operations issued a variance by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:27-6.5 of the
New Jersey Administrative Code.
C. Indirect heat exchangers.
D. Incinerators.
§ 227-13 AIR POLLUTION CONTROL § 227-14
227:975

ARTICLE V
Stacks and Chimneys
§ 227-15. Submission of information.
Except as herein provided, persons burning solid or liquid fuel whose
products of combustion are discharged into the open air from a stack or
chimney shall submit to the Director information for each such stack or
chimney relating to place, type of fuel burned, heat content in fuel burned,
quality of fuel burned per hour and/or year, description of combustion
equipment, usual period of operation, height and size of outlet and
description of air-pollution-control equipment and such other and pertinent
information as may be requested on forms provided for that purpose by
the Director. The application forms shall also require submission of name,
address and telephone number of person or persons responsible for day-today
operation and, also, of person or persons responsible for maintenance
of any such equipment. Any change in the name, address or telephone
number of such person or persons shall be reported within 10 days of the
occurrence of such change to the Director.
§ 227-16. Time limitation.
Such information shall be submitted to the Director within 90 days after
either new installations are placed into service or existing installations are
altered. Nothing herein shall be construed as relieving any person from
the requirements of the Building Code of the Township of Washington.
Additional reports concerning these items may be requested by the
Director.
§ 227-17. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to equipment designed or used
for a heat input rate of not more than 1,000,000 British thermal units (Btu's)
per hour unless the equipment is designed for or actually using No. 4, 5 or
6 fuel oil or coal.
§ 227-15 AIR POLLUTION CONTROL § 227-17
227:977

ARTICLE VI
Operation and Installation of Incinerators
§ 227-18. Permit required.
No person shall operate or permit the operation of an incinerator in the
Township of Washington without a permit issued by the Director in
accordance with this code. The Director shall recommend issuance of a
permit for the operation of an incinerator after examining the application
and inspecting the facility and being satisfied that it may be operated
in accordance with this code. Said permit may be conditioned on
improvements being made within a prescribed time or on certain operating
restrictions, if necessary, to comply with this code. All permits shall be
issued by the Board of Health and shall expire on December 31 following
their issuance, or at such time prior thereto as any conditions or restrictions
shall not be complied with. Each incinerator shall require a permit for which
the annual fee shall be $25, payable to the Township of Washington.
§ 227-19. Hours of operation.
No person shall operate or permit the operation of an incinerator in the
Township of Washington before 9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m., and all
operation shall be completely terminated by 5:00 p.m., including complete
extinction of the fire and removal of materials from the firebox to a
noncombustible container and in a safe manner; provided, however, that
the Director may, by special permit, because of exceptional circumstances,
permit different hours of operation under such conditions as he shall deem
necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the public or of persons in
the vicinity.
§ 227-20. Abatement.
Where the operation of an incinerator constitutes an immediate and
substantial menace to public health and safety or is a substantial source of
air pollution causing irritation and discomfort to persons in the vicinity and
the owner or operator fails, upon written or oral notice, to take immediate
corrective measures, the Director may take all necessary measures to abate
the condition, including but not limited to ordering the cessation of use of
the equipment and sealing the same, pending a hearing in the Municipal
Court.
§ 227-21. Emission standards.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke from any incinerator,
the shade or appearance of which is darker than No. 1 of the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart, to be emitted into the open air; or emissions of such opacity
within a stack or chimney or, exclusive of water vapor, of such opacity
leaving a stack or chimney to a degree greater than the emission designated
as No. 1 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart.
§ 227-18 AIR POLLUTION CONTROL § 227-22
227:979
§ 227-22. Exceptions.
The provisions of § 227-21 shall not apply to smoke emitted during the
building of a new fire, the shade or appearance of which is not greater than
No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, for a period of three consecutive
minutes; or emissions of such opacity within a stack or chimney or, exclusive
of water vapor, of such opacity leaving a stack or chimney, to a degree
greater than the emission designated as No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke
Chart, for a period no greater than three consecutive minutes.
§ 227-23. Emission of particles.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the emission of particles of
unburned waste or ash from any incinerator which are individually large
enough to be visible while suspended in the atmosphere.
§ 227-24. Odors prohibited.
No person shall construct, install, use or cause to be used any incinerator
which will result in odors being detectable by sense of smell in any area of
human use or occupancy.
§ 227-22 WASHINGTON CODE § 227-24
227:980
ARTICLE VII
Air Pollution From Asbestos Surface Coatings
§ 227-25. Prohibited spraying.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit surface coating by spraying on
any building, structure, facility, installation or internal or external portion
thereof, asbestos or friable material containing in excess of 0.25% (by
weight) asbestos.
§ 227-26. Tests.
A. Any person responsible for the manufacture, application or use of any
coating, which the Director or any agent thereof has reason to believe
contains asbestos shall, when requested by the Director, conduct such
tests as are necessary, in the opinion of the Director, to determine the
presence and the amount and/or kinds of asbestos in the coating. Such
tests shall be conducted in a manner approved by the Director and shall
be made at the expense of the person responsible.
B. The director may waive the testing requirements of Subsection A of this
section upon receipt of a materials specification report from the
material manufacturer certifying that the asbestos content of the
surface coating for which testing is required complies with the
provisions of § 227-25.
§ 227-25 AIR POLLUTION CONTROL § 227-26
227:981

ARTICLE VIII
Director of Air Pollution Control
§ 227-27. Appointment and duties.
§ 227-28. Inspections and right of entry.
A. The Health Officer of the Township of Washington shall, in addition to
his other duties, enforce and administer the provisions of this code and,
in exercising his powers and duties hereunder, shall be known as the
Director of Air Pollution Control. The Director may appoint or designate
other employees or officers of the Township of Washington to perform
duties necessary for the enforcement of this code.
B. Other enforcing officials. The Board of Health, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
26:3-90, may appoint any person employed by the Township of
Washington, or its successor, to administer and enforce this code in
addition to the powers and appointments provided by Subsection A
hereof.
A. Emergency inspections authorized. Emergency inspections may be
authorized without warrant if the Director has reason to believe that a
condition exists which poses an immediate threat to life, health or
safety. Such procedure shall only take place where the time taken to
apply for and secure the issuance of a warrant would render ineffective
the immediate action necessary to abate the condition.
B. Air pollution emergency inspections. Emergency inspections may also
be authorized by the Governor in times of air pollution emergencies in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 26:2C-32.
C. Access refused. Where the Director or his agent is refused entry or
access or is otherwise impeded or prevented by the owner, occupant or
operator from conducting an inspection of the premises, such person
shall be in violation of this code and subject to the penalties hereunder.
D. Search warrant or access warrant. The Director may, upon affidavit,
apply to the Judge of the Township of Washington Municipal Court for a
search warrant setting forth factually the actual conditions and
circumstances that provide a reasonable basis for believing that a
violation of the code may exist on the premises, including one or more
of the following:
(1) That the premises require inspection according to the cycle
established by the town for periodic inspections of premises of the
type involved.
(2) That observation of external conditions (smoke, ash, soot, odors) of
the premises and its public areas has resulted in the belief that
violations of this code exist.
§ 227-27 AIR POLLUTION CONTROL § 227-28
227:983
§ 227-29. Violations and penalties.
§ 227-30. Construction.
This Code is to be liberally construed to effectuate the purpose herein
described. Nothing herein is to be construed as repealing or abridging
the emergency powers of any agency of government, except to the extent
expressly set forth herein.
(3) Circumstances such as age and design of fuel-burning equipment
and/or system, type of incinerator, particular use of premises or
other factors which render systematic inspections of such buildings
necessary in the interest of public health and safety. If the Judge of
the Township of Washington Municipal Court is satisfied as to the
matter set forth in the said affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance
of a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part
of the premises on which the nuisance or violation may exist.
E. Inspection procedure. All buildings and premises subject to this code
are subject to inspection from time to time by the Director of Air
Pollution Control or his duly authorized representatives. All rooms and
areas in the building shall be available and accessible for such
inspection which shall be made during usual business hours if the
premises are used for nonresidential purposes; provided, however, that
inspections may be made at other times if:
(1) The premises are not available during the foregoing hours for
inspection;
(2) There is reason to believe that violations are occurring on the
premises which can be determined and proved by inspection only
during other than the prescribed hours; or
(3) There is reason to believe a violation exists of a character which is
an immediate threat to health or safety requiring inspection and
abatement without delay.
A. Fine; jail term. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
code or who shall fail to comply therewith or with any of the
requirements thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500
or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both, for each
violation. Each day that such violation shall continue shall constitute a
separate offense.
B. Separate offenses. The violation of any section or subsection of this
code shall constitute a separate and distinct offense independent of the
violation of any other section or subsection or of any order issued
pursuant to this code.
§ 227-28 WASHINGTON CODE § 227-31
227:984
§ 227-31. Statutory authority.
This chapter is promulgated and adopted in accordance with Section
26:2C-8 of P.L. 1954, c. 212 (N.J.S.A. 26:2C-1 to 2C-23), amended by P.L.
1962, c. 215; P.L. 1967, c. 105, and P.L. 1967, c. 106; and nothing contained
herein or any action taken hereunder is to be interpreted as being in
conflict with the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Act and the New Jersey
Administrative Code.
§ 227-31 AIR POLLUTION CONTROL § 227-31
227:985
Chapter 231
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 46.
§ 227-31 WASHINGTON CODE § 227-31
231:986
ARTICLE I
Mink Ranches
[Adopted 3-15-1972 as Ch. BH-X of the Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 231-1. License required.
No person shall operate, conduct or maintain a mink ranch within the
corporate limits of the township unless a license is obtained from the Board
of Health.
§ 231-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MINK RANCH — Any premises within the corporate limits of the township
where two or more mink are raised, grown, kept and maintained.
§ 231-3. Application.
Any person desiring a license to operate, conduct or maintain a mink ranch
shall file with the Secretary of the Board of Health:
A. A written application signed by the applicant, which shall state:
(1) The name and residence of the applicant; and if a firm, association
or partnership, the names and addresses of the members thereof;
and if a corporation, the names and addresses of the stockholders,
directors and officers thereof, together with the name and address
of its registered agent, and the address of the principal office.
(2) The location of the premises, giving a full description thereof, at
which it is proposed to operate, conduct or maintain the mink
ranch and whether the applicant owns or leases such premises.
B. An agreement that the license shall be accepted upon the condition that
it may be suspended or revoked by the Board of Health for cause after
five days' notice of hearing before the Board, which right of suspension
or revocation the applicant agrees shall be vested in the Board of
Health.
C. An agreement permitting inspection of the premises at reasonable
times and within reasonable hours by the Health Officer of the Board of
Health, whose judgment as to conditions pertaining to the applicant's
conduct of the mink ranch and his compliance with this section
approved by the Board of Health shall be determinative of the
applicant's compliance.
§ 231-1 ANIMALS § 231-4
231:987
§ 231-4. License approval.
All applicants for a license pursuant to this article shall be submitted by the
Secretary of the Board of Health to the Board for approval by it, and no
license may be issued by the Secretary unless first approved by the Board,
which approval shall be based upon the location, suitability and fitness of
the premises for use as a mink ranch and the compliance of the premises
with Chapter 217, Zoning.
§ 231-5. License fee.
An annual fee of $100 shall be paid for a license. All license shall be subject
to a full charge and shall expire on December 31. The license shall not be
transferable to any person or to any other premises.
§ 231-6. Rules and regulations.
§ 231-7. Record of license.
The record of such license when issued shall be kept by the Board of Health
and shall be subject to revocation for violation of any law, rule or regulation
existing or promulgated pursuant to this article.
A. The license shall comply with all applicable statutes, ordinances and
regulations now existing or hereafter promulgated, and with the
following rules and regulations and such rules and regulations as may
be subsequently established:
B. All mink shall be raised off the ground to allow for proper cleaning and
disinfecting of the area.
C. The area beneath which the mink are raised shall be disinfected with an
effective disinfectant at least once in each week and shall be limed at
least once each month.
D. Refuse and manure shall be removed daily from the grounds above
which the mink are raised and be properly buried.
E. All food fed to mink not consumed as well as spoiled food shall be
removed daily and be properly buried.
F. Proper fly and rodent control shall be maintained.
G. Mink raising shall be conducted in such manner so as not to constitute a
nuisance, the constitution of which shall be determinative by the Board
of Health.
§ 231-4 WASHINGTON CODE § 231-7
231:988
ARTICLE II
Swine185
[Adopted 12-12-1979 (Ch. BH-IX of the Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 231-8. Adoption of standards; modifications.
§ 231-9. Copies placed on file.
Three copies of the Maintenance of Swine Code of New Jersey/1975 have
been placed on file in the Board of Health office for use and examination by
the public.
§ 231-10. Enforcing authority.
The administrative and enforcing authority for the provisions of this article
shall be the Health Officer.
A. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 through
26:3-69.6, the Maintenance of Swine Code of New Jersey/1957 is
hereby adopted as the standards governing and establishing the
minimum acceptable standards for the maintenance of swine in order to
protect the public health and general welfare.
B. Additions, changes and deletions. [Added 9-16-1981 by Ord. No.
6-81]
(1) Section 4 is supplemented by adding the following: No person shall
maintain more than 10 adult swine, as defined in said code, on
premises within the boundaries of this municipality until a valid
permit therefor shall have been issued by the Board of Health,
excepting that persons now maintaining swine, as defined by said
code, shall not be obliged to obtain a permit for one year from the
effective date of said code. No person may maintain more than 100
swine.
(2) Section 6 is supplemented by adding the following: The fee for a
permit to maintain swine on a premises shall be $15.
(3) Section 7 is supplemented by adding the following: Permits issued
for the maintenance of swine on premises shall expire annually on
January 1 of each year, and application for renewal thereof shall be
submitted together with the required fee prior to January 31 of
each year.
185. Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Ch. BH-IX, Maintenance of Swine,
adopted by 2-2-52.
§ 231-8 ANIMALS § 231-10
231:989

ARTICLE III
Rabies Vaccination of Cats
[Adopted 4-24-1990 by Ord. No. 2-1990 (Ch. XVI of the Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 231-11. Vaccination requirements.
§ 231-12. Vaccination certificate.
A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the owner of each animal
vaccinated on a form recommended by the state.
§ 231-13. Exemptions.
Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of such vaccination for
a specified period of time by the Board of Health, upon presentation of
a veterinarian's certificate stating that because of an infirmity or other
physical condition or regimen of therapy, the inoculation of such cat shall
be deemed inadvisable.
§ 231-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply with this article shall
be liable to a penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $500 for each
offense, to be recovered by and in the name of the Board of Health.
A. No person shall own, keep, harbor or maintain any cat over seven
months of age within the Township of Washington, unless such is
vaccinated. The provisions of this section do not apply to cats held in a
cattery or those held by a state or federal licensed research facility or a
veterinary establishment where cats are received or kept for
diagnostic, medical, surgical or other treatments, or licensed animal
shelters, pounds, kennels or pet shops.
B. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian in
accordance with the latest Compendium of Animal Rabies Vaccines and
Recommendations for Immunization published by the National
Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as provided for
in § 231-13.
§ 231-11 ANIMALS § 231-14
231:991
Chapter 235
BATHING, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Swimming pools — See Ch. 179.
§ 235-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.2, the Board of Health
of the Township of Washington, Morris County, New Jersey, hereby adopts
by reference the Public Recreational Bathing Code of New Jersey (2000),
including any amendments which may be made thereto. A copy of the Public
Recreational Bathing Code is attached hereto and made part of this chapter
without the text being included herein.
§ 235-2. Copies on file.
Three copies of the Public Recreational Bathing Code have been placed on
file in the office of the Secretary of the Board of Health and the Township
Clerk for use and examination by the public.
§ 235-3. Permits. [Amended 3-23-2004 by Ord. No. 1-04]
It shall be unlawful for any person to locate and construct or operate
a swimming pool, bathing beach, public bathing place, hot tub or spa,
as defined in the Public Recreational Bathing Code, without first having
obtained approval from the Board of Health.
§ 235-4. Fees. [Amended 3-23-2004 by Ord. No. 1-04]
§ 235-5. Amendments.
The New Jersey State Sanitary Code, Chapter IX, Public Recreational
Bathing Code, is hereby amended, in part, to read as follows:
A. The fee for filing an application and plans for a permit to locate and
construct a swimming pool, bathing beach, public bathing place, hot
tub or spa, as defined in the Public Recreational Bathing Code, shall be
$200 for the initial submission. The fee for subsequent revision
submissions shall be $150.
B. The fee for an annual license to operate a swimming pool, bathing
beach or public bathing place shall be $200. All reinspection fees shall
be $50. The fee for a license to operate a hot tub shall be $200. The
reinspection fees shall be $50.
A. Subchapter 5, Waterfront Safety, 5.1, Exceptions, is amended as
follows:
§ 231-14 WASHINGTON CODE § 235-5
235:992
§ 235-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or code established
herein shall, upon conviction thereof be liable to penalties in accordance
with Chapter 221, General Provisions, § 221-2, General penalty.
Chapter 239
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL
§ 239-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
A code regulating retail food establishments and fixing penalties for
violations thereof is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to
26:3-69.6. A copy of the code is annexed to this chapter and made a part of
it without the inclusion of the text herein.
(1) The provisions set forth in N.J.A.C. 8:26-5.1(a) and (b) are not
applicable.
(2) N.J.A.C. 8:26-5.2(b) is hereby revised to read as follows: "At least
one person currently certified in standard first aid and professional
level infant, child and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) by a
Department of Health and Senior Services approved organization
as listed in the Appendix shall be at poolside when the pool is in
use."
(3) N.J.A.C. 8:26-5.6(b) is hereby revised to read as follows: "A wading
pool shall have a person currently certified in standard first aid and
professional level infant, child and cardiopulmonary resuscitation
(CPR) by a Department of Health and Senior Services approved
organization as listed in the Appendix at poolside when the wading
pool is in use."
(4) N.J.A.C. 8:26-5.8(b) is hereby revised to read as follows: "At least
one person currently certified in standard first aid and professional
level infant, child and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) by a
Department of Health and Senior Services approved organization
as listed in the Appendix shall be on the premises, available and
readily accessible when the hot tub or spa is in use."
(5) N.J.A.C. 8:26-5.10(b) is hereby revised to read as follows: "At least
one person currently certified in standard first aid and professional
level infant, child and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) by a
Department of Health and Senior Services approved organization
as listed in the Appendix shall be at lakeside when the bathing
beach is in use."
§ 235-5 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL § 239-2
239:993
§ 239-2. Title.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is and shall be commonly
known as the " Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and Food and
Beverage Vending Machines (2007) (Chapter 24, N.J.A.C. 8:24)," and this
chapter shall hereafter be cited and known by the short title of "Chapter 24
for the Township of Washington."
§ 239-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of the Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and Food and
Beverage Vending Machines (2007) have been placed on file in the office of
the Secretary of the Board of Health and the Township Clerk for use and
examination by the public.
§ 239-4. Licenses.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or any body corporate to construct,
alter or operate a retail food establishment, as defined in and governed
by the Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and Food and Beverage
Vending Machines (2007), without first having procured approval from
the Board of Health to do so or without complying with any or all of the
provisions concerning operation and maintenance of the same as
contained in the aforementioned code.
B. All licenses shall expire on July 15 each year and shall be renewed for
the ensuing year prior to continued operation of the retail food
establishment.
C. Suspension or revocation of license; hearings.
(1) Any license issued under the terms and provisions of this chapter
may be suspended or revoked by the Board of Health of the
Township for the violation by the licensee of any provision of this
chapter or the Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and Food
and Beverage Vending Machines (2007).
(2) A license issued under the terms and provisions of this chapter
shall not be revoked, canceled or suspended until a hearing
thereon shall have been had by the Board of Health. Written notice
of the time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the
licensee at least seven days prior to the date set for such hearing.
Such notice shall also contain a brief statement of the grounds to
be relied upon for revoking, canceling or suspending such license.
Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the
person to be notified or by depositing said notice in the United
States Post Office in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed
to such person to be notified at the business address appearing
upon the license. At the hearing before the Board of Health, the
person aggrieved shall have an opportunity to answer and may
thereafter be heard, and, upon due consideration and deliberation
§ 239-2 WASHINGTON CODE § 239-4
239:994
by the Board of Health the complaint may be dismissed, or, if the
Board of Health concludes that the charges have been sustained
and substantiated, it may revoke, cancel or suspend the license
held by the licensee.
(3) If any permit is revoked, neither the holder nor any person acting
for him, directly or indirectly, shall be entitled to another permit to
carry on the same business within the Township unless the
application for a permit is approved by the Board of Health.
D. Exception. No provision of this section shall be applied so as to impose
any unlawful burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of
the state or federal government.
E. Food handlers.
(1) Training of food handler.
(a) Any person employed in a retail food establishment who
routinely comes into contact with food, beverages, utensils or
food equipment shall be required to attend and successfully
complete a retail food handler's course to be conducted under
the direction of the Board of Health within six months of the
date of hire.
(b) Each food handler shall be required, every three years, to
attend and successfully complete the Washington Township
food course or equivalent course approved by the Washington
Township Health Officer.
(2) Certification of certified food protection manager.
(a) No Risk Type 2 or Risk Type 3 food establishment, as defined
by N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.5, shall operate after July 15, 2008, without a
food protection manager with a current food safety
certification acquired through a course of instruction approved
by the New Jersey State Department of Health as required by
N.J.A.C. 8:24-2.1.
(b) All food protection managers shall obtain a food safety
certificate by July 15, 2008.
(c) No retail food license shall be issued to a perspective
establishment that does not have a currently certified food
protection manager.
(d) Each Risk Type 2 and Risk Type 3 retail food establishment
must notify the Department of Health, in writing, within 15
days, in the event that their certified food protection manager
ceases to be employed by the establishment as food protection
manager.
§ 239-4 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL § 239-4
239:995
§ 239-4.1. Fees.
(e) In the event that a newly hired food protection manager does
not possess a current New Jersey food protection manager's
certificate, the establishment shall provide the Department of
Health with written notice of the anticipated date of
completion and location of the food protection manager's
training course and the name of the employee who will attend.
A. Fees for permitting.
(1) The fees for acquiring a permit to construct or permit to alter a
retail food establishment shall be:
(a) For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to locate
and construct a new retail food establishment, the fee shall be
$200. To file a revision, the fee shall be $50.
(b) For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to alter an
existing retail food establishment, the fee shall be $50. To file a
revision, the fee shall be $25.
B. Fees for licensing.
(1) The fee for a preoperational reinspection shall be $25.
(2) Retail food establishment, permanent location.
(a) The fee for a retail food establishment license, permanent
location, shall be based on the square footage of the retail food
establishment, to be calculated as follows:
Square Feet Permit Fee
0 to 2,000 $100
2,001 to 5,000 $150
5,001 to 10,000 $200
10,001 and above $250
(b) The square footage of a retail food establishment shall include
all areas of the establishment, including but not limited to
dining areas, food preparation areas, food storage areas,
hallways and rest rooms.
(3) The fee for a temporary retail food establishment, including
seasonal agricultural market, shall be $50.
(4) The fee for a license to sell prepackaged nonperishable foods only
shall be $50.
(5) The fee for a mobile retail food license shall be $100.
§ 239-4 WASHINGTON CODE § 239-4.1
239:996
§ 239-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or code established
herein shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than
$5 or more than $500 for each violation. Each day a particular violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 240
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 56.
Housing rehabilitation program — See Ch.
105, Art. I.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 121.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 148.
Zoning — See Ch. 217.
(6) The fee for a retail food establishment permit for a nonprofit
religious, charitable, civic, educational or service organization to
operate or to conduct a special event shall be $1.
(7) Fees for a reinspection for a retail food establishment:
(a) The following reinspection fees are established for an
establishment receiving less than a satisfactory rating during
an inspection:
[1] First occurrence: annual license fee.
[2] Second offense: two times annual license fee.
[3] Third offense: three times annual license fee.
(b) The reinspection fee shall be paid within seven days of the
inspection posting. Fees for occurrences are cumulative within
the licensing period.
(8) An annual license fee of $25 per machine shall be charged for each
machine vending prepackaged nonperishable items such as canned
or bottled sodas and juice, candy, chips, etc., or potentially
hazardous foods or bulk food or beverage items such as coffee, etc.,
except the fee shall be $1 per machine if the machine is located
within a nonprofit religious, charitable, civic, educational or service
organization.
(9) The fee for failure to obtain, within 15 days of expiration, the
current annual license to operate shall be $5 per day until the
license is made current.
§ 239-4.1 HOUSING STANDARDS § 240-1
240:997
§ 240-1. Adoption of standards by reference. [Amended 9-18-1989
by Ord. No. 22-1989]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A 40:49-5 1, the New Jersey
State Housing Code (1980 Revision), as approved by the Department of
Community Affairs, Division of Housing and as filed with the Secretary of
State and as may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted as
a standard governing supplied utilities and facilities and other physical
things and conditions essential to making dwellings safe, sanitary and fit
for human habitation, occupancy or use and governing the condition of
dwellings. A copy of the New Jersey State Housing Code is attached to and
made a part of this chapter without the text being included herein.
§ 240-2. Copies on file.
Three copies of the New Jersey State Housing Code have been placed on file
in the office of the Clerk for the use and examination of the public.
§ 240-3. Enforcing authority.
The administrative and enforcing authority for the provisions of this chapter
shall be the Sanitary Inspector.
§ 240-4. Standards.
This chapter shall constitute the standards to guide the Sanitary Inspector
in determining the fitness of any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or
premises for human habitation, use or occupancy.
§ 240-5. Rules and regulations.
The Sanitary Inspector may make rules and regulations which interpret
or amplify any provision of this chapter or for the purpose of making the
provisions of this chapter more effective. No regulation shall be inconsistent
with or alter or amend any provision of this chapter, and no regulation
shall impose any requirement which is in addition to or greater than the
requirements that are expressly or by implication imposed by any provision
of this chapter. Rules and regulations shall be subject to the same penalty
as other violations of this chapter.
§ 240-6. Inspection.
The Sanitary Inspector or his agents or employees shall make inspections
to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and
premises located within the township. For the purpose of making
inspections, the Sanitary Inspector or his agents are authorized to enter
and examine any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises at such
reasonable hours as the circumstances of the case permit. This section
shall not be construed to prohibit the entry of the Sanitary Inspector or his
agents at any time when an actual emergency exists, which tends to create
§ 240-1 WASHINGTON CODE § 240-6
240:998
a danger to public health or safety, or at any time when an inspection is
requested by an owner or occupant.
§ 240-7. Access to premises.
Upon presentation of proper identification, the owner, occupant or person
in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit shall give the Sanitary
Inspector or his agents free access to the premises for the purpose of
inspection of or making any repairs or alterations which are necessary to
effect compliance with this chapter.
§ 240-8. Search warrant.
The Sanitary Inspector or his agents may, upon affidavit, apply to the
Municipal Judge of the township for a search warrant setting forth factually
the actual conditions and circumstances that provide a reasonable basis for
believing that a nuisance or violation of this chapter exists on the premises,
and if the Municipal Judge is satisfied as to the matter set forth in the
affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of a search warrant permitting
access to and inspection of that part of the premises on which the nuisance
or violation may exist. A search warrant may also be obtained in connection
with a general program of inspection.
§ 240-9. Notice of violation.
§ 240-10. Hearings.
A. Whenever the Sanitary Inspector determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe there has been a violation of any provision of this
chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he shall
give notice of the alleged violation to the person responsible as
hereinafter provided. The notice shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued.
(3) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires.
(4) Be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case
may require, provided that notice shall be deemed to be properly
served upon such owner or agent or upon such occupant, if a copy
thereof is served upon him personally, or if a copy thereof is sent,
by certified mail, to his last known address, or if a copy thereof is
posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by
the notice, or if he is served with such notice by any other method
authorized or required under the laws of this state.
B. The notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken,
will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter and rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 240-6 HOUSING STANDARDS § 240-10
240:999
A. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto may request and shall be granted
a hearing on the matter before the Board of Health, provided that such
person files in the office of the Board of Health a written petition
requesting a hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds
therefor within 10 days after the day the notice is served.
B. Upon receipt of the petition, the Board of Health shall set a time and
place for the hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice
thereof.
C. At the hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard
and to show why the notice should be modified or withdrawn.
D. The hearing shall be commenced not later than ten days after the day
on which the petition is filed, provided that upon application of the
petitioner the Board of Health may postpone the date of the hearing for
a reasonable time beyond the ten-day period, if in its judgment the
petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for the
postponement.
E. After the hearing the Board of Health shall sustain, modify or withdraw
the notice, depending upon its findings as to whether the provisions of
this chapter and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto
have been complied with. If the Board of Health sustains or modifies the
notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice served pursuant to
this chapter shall automatically become an order if a written petition
for a hearing is not filed in the office of the Board of Health within ten
days after the notice is served.
F. The proceedings at the hearings, including the findings and the
decision of the Board of Health, shall be summarized, reduced to
writing, and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the
Board of Health. The record shall also include a copy of every notice or
order issued in connection with the matter.
G. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Health may seek
relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction as provided by
the laws of the state.
H. Whenever the Board of Health finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect public health or safety, it may,
without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such
an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as it deems
necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions
of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to
whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but
upon petition, shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After
such hearing, depending upon the findings as to whether the provisions
of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
§ 240-10 WASHINGTON CODE § 240-10
240:1000
§ 240-11. Unfit dwellings.
Whenever a petition is filed with the Board of Health by a public authority
as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2 4, or by at least five residents of the township
charging that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation as defined in the
housing code, or whenever it appears to the sanitary inspector on his own
motion that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, he shall, if his
preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause
to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such dwelling a
complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a
hearing will be held before the Board of Health at a place therein fixed not
less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint;
that the owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an
answer to the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise, and give
testimony at the time and place fixed in the complaints; and that the rules
of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in
hearings before the Board of Health.
§ 240-12. Order for abatement or demolition.
If after notice and hearing the Board of Health determines that the dwelling
under consideration is unfit for human habitation, as defined in the Housing
Code, it shall state, in writing, its findings of fact in support of such
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof and parties in interest an order requiring:
thereto have been complied with, the Board of Health shall continue
such order in effect, or modify it, or revoke it.
A. The repair, alteration or improvement of the building to be made by the
owner, within a reasonable time which shall be set forth in the order, or
at the option of the owner to vacate or to have the building vacated and
closed within the time set forth in the order.
B. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises, and the owner
fails to repair, alter or improve the building within the time specified in
the order, that the owner shall remove or demolish the building within a
reasonable time as specified in the order of removal.
C. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve, or
at the option of the owner to vacate and close the building, the Board of
Health may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved, or
to be vacated and closed; that the Board of Health may cause to be
posted on the main entrance of any building so closed, a placard with
the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this building is prohibited
and unlawful."
D. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, that the Board of Health may cause such building to be
§ 240-10 HOUSING STANDARDS § 240-12
240:1001
§ 240-13. Serving of complaints or orders on unfit dwellings.
Complaints or orders issued by the Board of Health or its agent pursuant to
this chapter shall be served upon persons either personally or by certified
mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the same
removed or demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition
thereof after advertisement and receipt of bids therefor.
E. The amount of:
(1) The cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses' fees, search
fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this chapter determined in favor of the
township.
(2) Repairs, removal or demolition.
(a) The cost of repairs, alterations or improvements, or of vacating
and closing, or removal or demolition, if any, or the amounts of
the balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if
any, realized from the sale of materials derived from such
building or from any contract for removal or demolition
thereof, shall be a municipal lien against the real property
upon which such cost was incurred.
(b) If the building is removed or demolished by the Board of
Health, it shall sell the materials of such building. There shall
be credited against the cost of removal or demolition thereof
the proceeds of any sale of such materials or any sum derived
from any contract for the removal or demolition of the building.
If there are no such credits or if the sum total of such costs
exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed statement of the
aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be filed with the
Municipal Tax Assessor or other custodian of the records of tax
liens, and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded to the
owner by certified mail. If the total of the credits exceeds such
costs, the balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior
Court by the Board of Health, shall be secured in such a
manner as may be directed by such Court and shall be
disbursed according to the order or judgment of the Court to
the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or
judgment of such Court, provided that nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of
the township to define and declare nuisances and to cause
their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or
otherwise. Any owner or party in interest may, within 60 days
from the date of the filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a
summary manner in the Superior Court to contest the
reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set
forth in the municipal lien certificate.
§ 240-12 WASHINGTON CODE § 240-13
240:1002
cannot be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence and the Board
of Health shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of the
complaint or order upon such persons may be made by publishing the same
once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper having circulation
in the township. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order, and
a copy shall be recorded with the Morris County recording officer.
§ 240-14. Powers of the Sanitary Inspector.
The Sanitary Inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to exercise
such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate
the purposes and provisions of this chapter, including the following in
addition to others herein granted:
§ 240-15. Compliance with Housing Code.
No person shall occupy as owner or occupant or rent to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein
which does not conform to the provisions of the New Jersey State Housing
Code established hereby as the standard to be used in determining whether
a dwelling is safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation.
§ 240-16. Demolition permit required.
The owner of any building located within the limits of the township who
desires to demolish the same shall first obtain a permit for that purpose
from the Building Subcode Official and shall pay a fee as provided in
Chapter 56, Building Construction, § 56-7C, Demolition fees. The fee shall
be paid prior to the issuance of any permit. The owner shall also furnish the
township with a bond in the amount of $5,000, conditioned on the complete
performance of the work in accordance with the terms of the application
and permit, without injury to public property and without creation of a
hazard to the public health, safety and welfare.
Chapter 243
A. To investigate the dwelling conditions in the township in order to
determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation.
B. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination,
provided that such entries are made in such a manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he deems necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
E. To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to such
officers and agents as he may designate.
§ 240-13 NUISANCES § 240-16
243:1003
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Livestock nuisances — See Ch. 46, Art. III.
Nuisances by dogs — See Ch. 46, Art. I.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 148.
Mink ranches as nuisances — See Ch. 231,
Art. I.
§ 243-1. Standards adopted by reference.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance, prohibiting certain noises or sounds,
requiring the proper heating of apartments, prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings, prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks, authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official, providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in
removing or abating such nuisances and prescribing penalties for violations
is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1, et seq. A copy of the
code is annexed to this chapter and made a part of it without the inclusion
of the text herein.
§ 243-2. Title.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)."
§ 243-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of the Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953) have
been placed on file in the offices of the Secretary of the Board of Health and
the Township Clerk for the use and examination of the public.
Chapter 247
SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sanitary standards in mobile home
parks — See Ch. 121.
Sewer connections — See Ch. 155, Art. I.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 175.
§ 240-16 WASHINGTON CODE § 243-3
243:1004
ARTICLE I
Individual Sewage Disposal Systems
[Adopted 3-27-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90 (Ch. BH-XV of the Revised
General Ordinances); amended in its entirety 3-22-2016 by Ord. No.
1-2016]
§ 247-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
§ 247-2. Septic system installer's license.
A. The regulations promulgated by the State Commissioner of the
Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the Realty
Improvement Sewerage and Facilities Act (1954) and subsequent
amendments thereto186 and known as "Standards for Individual
Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems (2012)," and subsequent
amendments thereto, which provide standards for the proper location,
design, construction, installation, alteration, operation and
maintenance of individual subsurface sewage disposal systems are
hereby adopted and are of full force and effect in the Township of
Washington, except for the regulations and higher standards prescribed
by this chapter.
B. Reference to the Realty Improvement Sewerage and Facilities Act, P.L.
1954, c. 199, and Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal
Systems (2012) shall include subsequent amendments thereto.
C. Three copies of said Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage
Disposal Systems (2012) have been placed on file in the office of the
Secretary of this Board of Health upon the introduction of this chapter
and will remain in said office for the use and examination of the public.
A. License required. No person shall engage in the business of installing
individual or any other type of sewage disposal systems in the Township
unless he has demonstrated a thorough knowledge of the law applicable
to installation of individual sewage disposal systems.
B. Examination. The Board of Health or its authorized agent shall conduct
examinations designed to test the knowledge and ability of an applicant
for a license as a certified builder and installer of individual sewage
disposal systems in accordance with the code. Examinations shall be
held at least once yearly. No person shall be admitted to the
examination for a license as a certified individual sewage disposal
system installer unless he/she has met the requirements as set forth on
the application and has shown proof of being at least 18 years of age, is
a citizen of the United States and has had at least two years' experience
in the business of installing individual sewage disposal systems or the
equivalent thereof. There shall be an examination fee of $25 to be paid
186. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq.
§ 247-1 NUISANCES § 247-2
243:1005
§ 247-3. Hearing on denial of license or permit.
If any license, permit or certificate required by this chapter is denied by the
Board of Health, a hearing shall be held thereon before the Board within 15
days after request is made by the applicant. Upon such hearing, the Board
of Health shall affirm, alter or rescind its previous determination and take
action accordingly within 15 days thereafter.
§ 247-4. Stop order.
The Board of Health may order all further work in and about any individual
sewage disposal system which is being erected or installed in violation of
the code to be stopped forthwith, except such work as shall be necessary
to remedy the violation, and thereafter the work continued without any
violation of any of the provisions of the code, and after issuance of such
order and the service of a copy upon the person connected with or working
in and about the erection or installation of the disposal system or any part
thereof, no further work shall be done except as aforesaid.
by the applicant upon submission of the septic installer's examination
application.
C. Issuance of license. The Board of Health shall issue an appropriate
license to each applicant who has successfully passed the examination
for a license to build and install individual sewage disposal systems in
the Township, and such license shall not be transferable. Current
licenses held in other municipalities or a National Environmental
Health Association CIOWTS advanced certification may be accepted in
lieu of taking the examination. A current copy of the contractor's home
improvement contractor's license issued by the State of New Jersey is
required at the time of license application.
D. Renewal of license. All licenses to build and install individual sewage
disposal systems in the Township shall expire on April 15 each year and
shall be renewed for the ensuing year prior to any work being done
during that year. A current copy of the contractor's home improvement
contractor's license issued by the State of New Jersey is required at the
time of renewal.
E. Revocation of license. The license held by a certified installer of
individual sewage disposal systems in the Township may be suspended
or revoked by the Board of Health or by the Board's authorized agent if
the holder of such license is shown to be incompetent in his work or if it
is proven that the license was obtained through fraudulent means or
misrepresentation.
F. License fee. A fee of $100 shall be paid annually by each certified
installer of individual sewage disposal systems for a license to operate
in the Township.
§ 247-2 WASHINGTON CODE § 247-5
243:1006
§ 247-5. Fees and charges.
The following fees and charges shall be established:
A. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to locate and
construct an individual sewage disposal system, the fee shall be $200.
For the filing of a redesign, the fee shall be $200. For the filing of a
revision, the fee shall be $50.
B. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to alter an existing
individual sewage disposal system, the fee shall be $50. For the filing of
a revision, the fee shall be $50.
C. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to repair an
existing sewage disposal system, the fee shall be $25. For the issuance
of a permit to repair an existing sewage disposal system, the fee shall
be $25. The permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance,
but may be renewed upon the payment of an annual fee of $25. No
permit may be renewed more than four times.
D. For the issuance of a license or permit to locate and construct an
individual sewage disposal system, the fee shall be $300. The permit
shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance, but may be
renewed upon the payment of an annual fee of $50. No permit may be
renewed more than four times.
E. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to alter or expand
an existing realty improvement serviced by an on-site sewage disposal
system, the fee shall be $50. For the filing of a revision, the fee shall be
$25. For the issuance of a permit to alter or expand an existing
individual sewage disposal system, the fee shall be $50. The permit
shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance, but may be
renewed upon the payment of an annual fee of $50. No permit may be
renewed more than four times.
F. For each reinspection of an individual sewage disposal system or part
thereof caused by the failure of the permittee/contractor to locate and
construct or alter the same in accordance with the terms of the permit
issued or the terms of the aforesaid code, the fee shall be $100.
G. For the observation of a test of soil characteristics by a representative
of the Board of Health, for purposes of meeting the requirements of an
application for subdivision approval or the purpose of filing an
application for an individual sewage system permit, the applicant must
file an application with the Board of Health. Said application shall be on
file at the Board of Health office prior to the request for the viewing of
each test. A valid New Jersey one-call underground utilities mark-out
number is required for each site.
H. For soil tests performed in conjunction with a sewage disposal system,
the fees shall be $50 per lot (two logs, no testing) for alterations to
existing systems and $200 per lot (two logs, one split soil sample) for
§ 247-5 NUISANCES § 247-5
243:1007
§ 247-6. Amendments.
The Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems is
hereby amended, in part, to read as follows:
new construction. When additional tests are performed, additional fees
of $25 per soil log and $100 per soil class rating analysis split sample
shall be required.
I. The fee for reviewing the feasibility of installing a septic system within
a subdivision for Planning Board approval shall be $50 per proposed
lot.
A. N.J.A.C. 7:9A-4.3 is amended to change certain of the minimum
distances provided therein as follows:
Component Water-course (feet)
Disposal field or trench 100
B. Requirements for soil profile pits and borings.
(1) N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.2(b) is hereby revised to read as follows: "A
minimum of two profile pits are required for each disposal field."
(2) The provisions set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.2(c)(3) are not
applicable.
(3) N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.2(d) is hereby revised to read as follows: "When a
seepage pit(s) is proposed, as allowed in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-7.6, a
minimum of one profile pit shall be performed for each seepage pit.
Profile pits shall be located no further than 15 feet from the
proposed seepage pit."
C. General design and construction requirements.
(1) The construction of the disposal system must be performed after
the dwelling has been substantially constructed. Special
permission may be given by the Health Officer or authorized agent
to grant a waiver from this requirement if appropriate.
(2) The design engineer must stake and certify the bed location when
the field is located within 20 feet of a neighboring property line.
Grading associated with the installation of a septic system cannot
encroach within five feet of a neighboring property line.
(3) All excavation inspections require a valid underground utility markout
number.
(4) N.J.A.C. 7:9A-7.5 is hereby revised to read as follows: "A greywater
system may be approved by the administrative authority, provided
that all of the requirements of these standards are satisfied and
provided that an acceptable means for disposal of the black water
from the building served is indicated in the system design. When
§ 247-5 WASHINGTON CODE § 247-6
243:1008
the black water from the building serviced by a greywater system
is to be disposed of into a separate subsurface sewage disposal
system, the black water system shall meet all the requirements of
this chapter, and the volume of sanitary sewage used in the design
of both the greywater system and black water system shall be a
minimum of 75% of the volume of sanitary sewage determined as
prescribed in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-7.4."
(5) N.J.A.C. 7:9A-7.6 is hereby revised to read as follows: "Each system
approved by the administrative authority pursuant to this chapter
shall consist of a septic tank which discharges effluent through a
gravity flow, gravity dosing, or pressure dosing network to a
disposal field as hereafter described. Seepage pits shall not be
approved for new installations. Installation of seepage pits may be
approved as an alteration for an existing system subject to the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:9A-3.3."
D. Pretreatment units.
(1) N.J.A.C. 7:9A-8.2(c) is hereby revised to read as follows: "Garbage
grinder units are prohibited from use in those homes served by an
individual sewage disposal system."
(2) N.J.A.C. 7:9A-8.2(h) is hereby revised to read as follows: "Metal
septic tanks are prohibited. The use of septic tanks constructed of
materials other than concrete is prohibited except as approved by
the administrative authority."
(3) N.J.A.C. 7:9A-8.2(i) is hereby revised to add a new item, 5, to read
as follows:
"5. All new tanks shall have two compartments and meet the
requirements of 7:9A-8.2(d)".
(4) N.J.A.C. 7:9A-8.2(j)(3) is hereby revised to read as follows: "A septic
solids retainer or septic effluent filter shall be installed and
maintained in conjunction with all new septic tanks prior to the
effluent distribution network and in accordance with all
manufacturer's specifications. Septic solids retainers and septic
effluent filters shall be certified by, and bear the mark of, NSF
International (NSF) under NSF Standard 46. Filters must be a
minimum of six inches in diameter (or equivalent area) measured at
the inlet to the filter. Additionally, the Department recommends
that system designers provide a means in the design to prevent
flow of solids, scum and floatables out of the tank when the filter is
removed for maintenance through a means of a solids retainer or
gas deflector on the effluent filter housing. Outlet connections of an
existing tank or each compartment thereof and connections
between new tank compartments or tanks installed in series shall
be provided with a tee not less than six inches in diameter or a
durable baffle equivalent in size. They shall be permanently
fastened in place with the bottom opening extending below the
§ 247-6 NUISANCES § 247-6
243:1009
liquid level by a distance equal to 25% to 40% of the total liquid
depth. Outlet baffles or tees shall be provided with a gas deflection
device adequately designed to prevent gases generated in the
septic tank from rising through the outlet baffle or tee. The gas
deflection device shall be constructed of, or coated with, materials
which are resistant to corrosion by sulfuric acid and shall be
securely fastened to the tee or the side of the tank. Figure 12 of
Appendix A illustrates several acceptable gas deflection devices.
Where two compartment tanks are utilized the first chamber outlet
pipe will be supplied with a gas deflection device, and the second
chamber outlet pipe will be supplied with a minimum six-inch
effluent filter.
(5) N.J.A.C. 7:9A-8.2(l)(3) is hereby revised to read as follows: "An
inspection port extending to finished grade shall be provided over
each tank or compartment inlet and outlet which is not directly
below a manhole except for those outlets where a septic solids
retainer is used. Inspection ports shall extend to finished grade,
shall be constructed of polyvinyl chloride (PVC), and shall have a
locked or bolted cap."
(6) The location of the septic tank and/or pump tank may not be within
10 feet of any encroachment (including, but not limited to,
driveways). Special permission may be granted if the applicant
agrees to construct a permanent barrier between the tank(s) and
the encroachment, and the engineer's plan specifies this
requirement.
(7) An electrical permit is required for all pump installations.
E. Advanced Wastewater Pretreatment Components. N.J.A.C.
7:9A-8.3(c)(1) is hereby revised to read as follows: "Any system that
includes an advanced pretreatment device must be installed by a
currently certified National Environmental Health Association CIOWTS
advanced license holder. The authorized installer shall be physically
present at all times of the installation and inspection of an advanced
wastewater pretreatment device and septic system.
F. Effluent distribution networks.
(1) The provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:9A-9.3(b)(2) are hereby deleted.
(2) Any connecting pipe that traverses under a driveway must be
sleeved with Schedule 80 pipe or equivalent (as approved by the
Health Officer or authorized agent).
G. Disposal fields.
(1) The location of the tanks, disposal field or trenches may not be
within 10 feet of any encroachment (including, but not limited to,
driveways and trees). Special permission may be granted if the
applicant agrees to construct a permanent barrier between the
§ 247-6 WASHINGTON CODE § 247-6
243:1010
§ 247-7. Permeability tests.
§ 247-8. Engineer's requirements.
For new construction/expansion and alterations of septic system
installations, the engineer must provide the following certifications prior to
the issuance of the certificate of compliance:
septic component(s) and the encroachment, and the engineer's
plan specifies this requirement.
(2) The header pipes out of the distribution box, prior to even lateral
separation distance must be constructed of solid PVC pipe.
H. When compliance with the Shimel criteria is required by the
Washington Township Engineer, the following setback distances must
be maintained:
(1) If the footing drain is in the seasonally high-water table, as
demonstrated by mottling, seepage or standing water, it is to be
considered a watercourse, and the following distances will be
enforced:
(a) Septic and pump tanks to drain: 25 feet.
(b) Disposal field or trenches to drain: 100 feet.
(2) If the footing drain is above the seasonally high-water table and/or
the invert elevation is higher than the bottom of the disposal field
or trenches, the following distances are required:
(a) Septic and pump tanks to drain: 12.5 feet.
(b) Disposal field or trenches to drain: 50 feet.
A. For new construction/expansion design, one permeability test is
required in each soil profile pit within the zone of disposal when a soil
replacement design is proposed. For conventional systems, tests must
also be performed in the zone of treatment in each soil profile pit.
B. In the case of a slowly rising water table, the SCRA, percolation test and
tube permeameter test may be used as long as the soils are not
saturated at the time of sampling/testing. If the water table rises into
the percolation or tube permeameter tests, they must be abandoned
and a pit bail test performed.
A. A sample of suitable fill must be taken from a stockpile on site for SCRA
compliance with N.J.A.C. 7:9A-10.1(f)4 and 7:9A-10.1(f)5 prior to
installation.
B. The engineer must certify that the suitable fill was installed per N.J.A.C.
7:9A-10.4(f)3.
§ 247-6 NUISANCES § 247-8
243:1011
C. If applicable, the engineer must certify the float settings and alarm of
the pump tank.
D. The engineer or land surveyor must perform an as-built drawing
locating all components of the septic system in relation to a permanent
structure on the property.
E. Provide a tank tightness test for any new tanks used in the installation
process.
F. Must certify that the septic system was installed per the approved plan
and meets the standards of N.J.A.C. 7:9a.
G. Must provide a percolation test of suitable fill used in the disposal field
that meets the requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.1A.
§ 247-8 WASHINGTON CODE § 247-8
243:1012
Chapter 250
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recycling — See Ch. 168, Art. I. Nuisances — See Ch. 243.
§ 250-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
A code regulating the manner in which refuse may be stored, collected
and disposed of, declaring and defining certain conditions as nuisances,
and fixing the responsibilities and duties of persons storing, collecting or
disposing of refuse and providing for the issuance of permits to collect
refuse is hereby established pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1950, c. 188,
except that Section 6.1 is hereby deleted. A copy of the code is annexed to
this chapter and made a part hereof without the inclusion of the text thereof
herein.
§ 250-2. Title.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Solid Waste Code of New Jersey 1959."
§ 250-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of the Solid Waste Code of New Jersey 1959 have been placed
on file in the office of the Secretary of the Board of Health for the use and
examination by the public.
§ 250-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-12-1979]
Any person who violates any provision of, or order promulgated under, this
chapter or code established herein shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable
to a penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $500 for each violation. Each
day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 252
TATTOO AND BODY-PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 252-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Board of Health of the Township of Washington or its duly
authorized agent, officer or inspector.
BODY PIERCER — One who engages in the art of body piercing.
§ 247-8 SOLID WASTE § 252-1
250:1013
BODY PIERCING — The piercing or puncturing of the skin, cartilage, bone
or other tissue of the body of a person.
CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION — Written approval from the Board that
said tattoo studio has been inspected and meets all of the requirements of
this chapter.
LICENSE TO OPERATE — A license issued to the owner of a tattoo studio
to operate a business under the provisions of this chapter.
OWNER — Any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation or
association that owns and/or operates an establishment where tattooing or
body piercing is performed.
REGISTRATION — A registration issued to a tattoo artist or body piercer
under the provisions of this chapter.
TATTOO ARTIST — One who engages in the art of tattooing.
TATTOO OR BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENT — Any premises where a
tattoo artist does tattooing and/or a body piercer performs body piercing for
a fee or other consideration.
TATTOO or TATTOOING — To mark or color the skin by pricking in by
subcutaneous introduction, nontoxic dyes or pigments so as to form
indelible marks or figures or by production of scars.
§ 252-2. Registration required; exception.
No person, except a duly licensed physician, shall engage in the practice
of tattooing or body piercing without having first been registered and in
receipt of an approved license with the Board of Health.
§ 252-3. Application for license; fees; expiration and renewal.
A. Any person desiring to engage in tattooing or body piercing shall
submit an application to the Board of Health in the form prescribed by
said Board. No registration shall be issued or renewed unless the
applicant has taken a physical examination, reported on a form
prescribed by the Board of Health, which examination shall include but
not be limited to an X-ray of the chest, Hepatitis B pre-exposure
vaccination or proof of immunity or declination letter and reported to
be free from all contagious or communicable diseases. Records of all
such examinations shall be submitted to the Board of Health and kept
on file by the holder of the certificate of inspection for the tattoo or body
piercing establishment in which the person to whom the license is
issued is employed.
B. A fee of $200 shall be required for the initial application. A fee of $100
shall be required of each applicant for the renewal of a license.
C. All fees paid pursuant to this section are nonrefundable.
D. All registrations shall expire on the 31st day of December of each year.
Applications for the renewal of a registration must be presented to the
§ 252-1 WASHINGTON CODE § 252-3
252:1014
§ 252-4. Certificate of inspection for establishment.
No person, partnership, firm or corporation shall operate a tattoo or body
piercing establishment unless such person, partnership, firm or corporation
has registered such shop with the Board of Health and has received a
certificate of inspection from said Division. No certificate of inspection shall
be issued unless the studio was inspected by the Board of Health and found
to be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 252-5. License to operate business; fee; expiration; renovation.
§ 252-6. Revocation or suspension of license to operate.
In addition to any other penalty that may be imposed by § 252-9 of this
chapter, after due notice and hearing before the Health Officer of the
Township of Washington, the Board may suspend or revoke any tattoo artist
registration or body piercer registration or license to operate a tattoo or
body piercing establishment issued pursuant to this chapter for violations
of the provisions of the chapter.
§ 252-7. Requirements to qualify for certificate of inspection.
In order to qualify for a certificate of inspection there must be compliance
with the following requirements:
Board of Health no later than 45 days prior to December 31 of each
year.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
operating an establishment where tattooing or body piercing is
performed without first obtaining a license from the Board of Health to
engage in such business in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
B. An application for a license shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount
of $200. Any change of ownership shall require a new application and
license with payment of fees therefor.
C. All licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December annually. In the
event that renovations and/or alterations are made to the tattoo or body
piercing establishment, plans must be submitted to the Board of Health
and the applicant will be required to comply with § 252-7 of this
chapter.
A. The tattoo or body piercing establishment shall be so located or
constructed as to prevent the contamination of the work areas of the
establishment by dust from the street or sidewalk.
B. The building and equipment shall be maintained in a state of good
repair at all times. All parts of the establishment shall be kept neat,
clean and free from litter and rubbish.
§ 252-3 TATTOO AND BODY-PIERCING § 252-7
252:1015
C. All walls, ceilings and floors shall be smooth, made of nonporous
material and easily cleaned. Walls, ceilings and floors shall be kept
clean and free from dust and debris. The floor shall be swept and wet
mopped daily. Floors, walls or ceilings shall not be swept or cleaned
while tattooing or body piercing is in operation.
D. Adequate light and ventilation shall be provided.
E. Each tattooing or body piercing establishment shall contain a sink with
foot pedals for the exclusive use of the tattoo artists or body piercers to
wash their hands and prepare the customers for tattooing or body
piercing. The sink shall be provided with adequate hot and cold running
water. There shall also be available at the sink approved soap, clean
individual towels and refuse containers. Individual ultrasonic cleaners
shall be provided by the owner at each station with single service
application.
F. Adequate toilet, urinal and handwashing facilities shall be available on
the premises for the use of customers, tattoo artists, and body piercers.
Toilets, urinals and handwashing facilities shall be maintained in a
sanitary condition at all times.
G. An adequate number of work tables shall be provided for each tattoo
artist or body piercer. The surface of all work tables shall be
constructed of metal or other material which is smooth, light-colored,
nonabsorbent, corrosive-resistant and easily sanitized.
H. The tattoo and body piercing establishment shall be arranged so that
work tables will be located at least 10 feet from observers or waiting
customers or such work tables shall be separated from observers or
waiting customers by a panel or other barrier at least six feet in height.
The panel may be constructed of glass, solid plastic or similar materials.
I. Proper closed and locked cabinets for the exclusive storage of
instruments, dyes, pigments, carbon stencils and other paraphernalia
used in the establishment shall be provided for each tattoo artist or
body piercer. Sharps containers shall be made available at each
location.
J. The tattooing and body piercing establishment shall have proper
facilities for the disposition of waste materials. Written plans are to be
submitted to the Board of Health for proper disposal.
K. Each tattoo artist or body piercer shall be provided with individual hand
brushes and fingernail files.
L. No smoking shall be permitted in any tattoo studio.
M. The holder of any license to operate shall not allow a tattoo artist or
body piercer to perform in his/her tattoo or body piercing establishment
unless the tattoo artist or body piercer is the holder of a valid
registration as defined in this chapter.
§ 252-7 WASHINGTON CODE § 252-7
252:1016
N. The holder of a license to operate shall maintain proper records for
each patron. A record of each patron shall include the date on which he/
she was tattooed or body pierced, his/her name and his/her signature,
address and age, the design of the tattoo and its location on his/her
body, the physical location and description of the body piercing, and the
name, address and telephone number of the tattoo artist who tattooed
him/her or the body piercer who pierced him/her. A record of each
patron who received a tattoo shall also include the name, address and
other information about the manufacturer of the dyes used as well as
information about the dye solutions and types of dyes used. If a patron
requests this information, it must be released to the patron. These
records shall be entered in ink or indelible pencil in a bound book kept
solely for this purpose. This book shall be available at reasonable hours
for examination by the Board of Health or any law enforcement officer
and shall be preserved for at least five years from the date of the last
entry therein. Certified birth certificate and written consent permitting
the tattooing or body piercing of individuals under the age of 18 shall be
kept on file for five years by the holder of the certificate of sanitation for
the tattoo studio in which the tattooing or body piercing was performed
and shall be available for inspection upon request. At such time when
the tattoo establishment or body piercing establishment ceases doing
business or is removed from the township or changes its name or has a
change in management or ownership, all such records shall be turned
over to the Township Board of Health.
O. Only tattooing and/or body piercing shall be permitted in the tattoo or
body piercing establishment.
P. Interior design and floor plans for the tattoo or body piercing
establishment must be submitted to the Board of Health and approved
prior to operation of the facility.
Q. No person shall state or imply in an advertisement or in any other way
that the tattooing or body piercing establishment is endorsed,
regulated or approved by the township or by any of its departments or
by the Board of Health or is conducted in compliance with the terms of
this chapter.
R. The name, address and telephone number of the establishment must be
on the heading of all waivers, care sheets, consent and other forms
utilized by the establishment.
S. Information pertaining to employees.
(1) The establishment must file with the Board of Health annually with
the license application and any renewal thereof a list of the
following information for each employee:
(a) Name.
(b) Home address
§ 252-7 TATTOO AND BODY-PIERCING § 252-7
252:1017
§ 252-8. Minimum operating standards.
(c) Home phone number.
(d) Position or job title.
(2) The owner or person in charge of the establishment shall amend
the list accordingly and submit it to the Board of Health
immediately upon the addition of any employee or termination of
an employee.
A. The tattoo artist or body piercer will use standards of aseptic technique
in tattooing or body piercing, dressing and other operations that are
approved by the Board of Health. He/she will use only such germicides
and dressings as are approved by said Board. All instruments, needles,
stencils, dyes, pigments, dressing materials, razors, handbrushes,
fingernail files and other equipment used by the tattoo artist or body
piercer while tattooing or body piercing shall be sterile.
B. The following minimum standards shall be observed at all times.
(1) No person, except a duly licensed physician, shall practice
tattooing or body piercing in any place other than a tattooing or
body piercing establishment for which a certificate of inspection
has been issued.
(2) It shall be unlawful to perform any tattooing or body piercing on an
individual who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
drugs.
(3) It shall be unlawful to perform any tattooing or body piercing on an
individual under the age of 18 years without the notarized written
consent of a parent(s) or legal guardian of such individual and
certified birth certificate. Such written consent and birth certificate
shall be kept on file as provided in this chapter.
(4) No person, customer or patron with any disease in a communicable
form or suspected of having such disease shall engage in tattooing
or body piercing. Such diseases may include, but shall not be
limited to, the common cold, influenza, tuberculosis, scabies,
impetigo, syphilis, chickenpox, measles (rubeola), German measles
(rubella), mumps, whooping cough, hepatitis, AIDS, skin infections,
infection on hands or arms, sore throat or jaundice of the skin or
sclera. The Board of Health may require a certificate signed by a
duly licensed physician stating that said person is free from
communicable diseases before permission to resume operation is
granted. All infections resulting from the practice of tattooing or
body piercing which become known to the owner or person in
charge of the tattooing or body piercing establishment shall
promptly be reported to the Township Board of Health by the
person owning or in charge of the tattoo or body piercing
§ 252-7 WASHINGTON CODE § 252-8
252:1018
establishment and the infected client shall be referred to a
physician.
(5) Immediately after tattooing or body piercing a patron, the tattoo
artist or body piercer shall advise that patron in writing on the care
of the tattoo or area pierced and shall instruct the patron to consult
a physician at the first sign of infection of the tattoo or area
pierced.
(6) Each tattoo artist or body piercer must wear a clean outer garment.
(7) Each tattoo artist or body piercer shall have an individual fingernail
file and individual handbrush which shall be clean and which shall
be sterilized before each use by boiling for 15 minutes or by
immersion in an approved germicidal solution for not less than 20
minutes. Germicidal solutions used to sterilize shall be changed
daily and the container thoroughly cleansed.
(8) Before working on each patron, each tattoo artist or body piercer
shall clean his/her fingernails with his/her individual nail file and
shall thoroughly wash and scrub his/her hands with hot running
water, an approved soap and his/her individual handbrush. When
working on a patron each tattoo artist or body piercer shall wear
protective gloves made of rubber or latex-like material.
(9) That portion of the patron's skin to be tattooed or pierced shall be
prepared by washing with hot water and approved soap; by shaving
with a sterile safety razor and a single-service blade; and shaving
shall be followed by a thorough cleansing with hot water and
approved soap applied with a clean, disposable cotton gauze or
paper towel. A sterile handbrush shall be used, if necessary, to
provide a clean skin area.
(10) Following the cleansing of the patron's skin, the tattoo artist or
body piercer shall again wash and scrub his/her hands in the
manner prescribed above. He/she shall allow his/her hands to dry
without the use of towel or other mechanical means. Before placing
the design on the patron's skin or piercing, the tattoo artist or body
piercer shall treat the skin area with 70% alcohol or other approved
germicidal solution which shall be applied with sterile cotton or
sterile paper towel. An atomizer bottle used in the application of
alcohol and soap used in preparing the patron's skin should be
covered with a disposable plastic bag and shall be discarded after
each use.
(11) Only petroleum jelly, United States Pharmacopoeia or National
Formulary, shall be applied to the area to be tattooed by sterile
tongue depressors using a single disposable container. The
application may be spread by the use of sterile gauze, but not
directly with the finger.
§ 252-8 TATTOO AND BODY-PIERCING § 252-8
252:1019
(12) The stencils for transferring the design to the skin for a tattoo shall
be disposable paper stencils. No plastic or reusable stencils shall
be used.
(13) Only FDA-approved dyes shall be used in the tattooing process, and
no homemade dyes may be used. Single-service or individual
portion of dyes or pigments in clean, sterilized, individual
containers or single service containers must be used for each
patron. After tattooing, the remaining unused dye or pigment in the
single service or individual containers must be discarded. All dyes
or pigments used in tattooing shall be approved by the Board of
Health.
(14) A set of individual, single-service sterilized needles or instruments
shall be used for each patron. Needles should be of a silver
soldered nature containing no lead. Needles should be cleaned in
an ultrasonic cleaning device, sterilized and stored in
individualized sterile bags (steribags). Tubes used in the operation
shall be made of stainless steel.
(a) Sterilization shall be done by holding in an approved autoclave
for 25 minutes at 200 pounds pressure.
(b) Proper functioning of sterilization cycles shall be verified by
the weekly use of biological indicators (i.e. spore tests). A log
book of these weekly test results shall be available, and a test
may be required to be performed during any inspection.
(c) If the primary source of sterilization malfunctions, the Board of
Health must be notified within 24 hours. In an emergency
situation, the Board of Health may approve alternate
sterilization techniques.
(d) No rusty, dull or faulty needles shall be used for tattooing or
piercing. No needle grouping shall be reused.
(15) As the tattoo operation progresses, any excess dye or pigment
applied to the skin shall be removed with sterile gauze, sterile
cotton or paper towels.
(16) The completed tattoo shall have the excess dye or pigment
removed with paper towels and green soap. It shall then be washed
with a piece of sterile gauze, sterile cotton or paper towel saturated
with an approved germicidal solution (tincture of green soap). It
shall be allowed to dry. After drying, petroleum jelly, United State
Pharmacopoeia or National Formulary, shall be applied and the
entire area covered with a piece of sterile gauze, which may in turn
be covered with a piece of tissue and fastened to the site with an
approved type of adhesive.
(17) Storage cabinets shall be maintained in a sanitary condition, and
all instruments, dyes, pigments, stencils and other paraphernalia
§ 252-8 WASHINGTON CODE § 252-8
252:1020
§ 252-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be punishable by a fine of not more than $500 nor less than $5 for each
violation. Each day that such violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
Chapter 253
TOBACCO PRODUCTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drug-fee school zones — See Ch. 79. Tobacco sales — See Ch. 189.
shall, when not being used, be kept in them in an orderly
arrangement.
(18)Work tables shall be kept clean and orderly and shall have
washable interiors.
(19)No tattooing or body piercing operation shall be carried out closer
than 10 feet from observers or waiting customers unless such
operation is separated from observers or waiting customers by a
panel or other barrier as provided by Section 7H.
(20)No person, except a duly licensed physician, shall engage in the
practice of removing any tattoo.
§ 252-8 TOBACCO PRODUCTS § 252-9
253:1021

ARTICLE I
On School Property
[Adopted 5-23-2000 by Ord. No. 1-00]
§ 253-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the Township of Washington
and/or his designee.
PERSON — Includes, but is not limited to, any and all students, teachers,
aides, administrators, supervisors, secretarial and clerical staff, custodial
and maintenance staff, and all other employees of the school district as
well as vendors, independent contractors, consultants who may from time
to time be employed by or volunteer for the West Morris Regional Board of
Education, parents, and visitors.
POLICE OFFICER — A police officer of the Township of Washington.
PROPERTY — Includes, but is not limited to, any and all school buildings,
including garages, indoor and outdoor premises and grounds, including, but
not limited to, athletic fields, stadiums and tennis courts, and any and all
school-owned or leased vehicles. Property also includes any other schoolapproved
vehicles used to transport any and all persons during any school
sponsored or school-approved activity, event, or function, including, but not
limited to, field trips and athletic events.
SMOKING — The burning of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other
matter or substance that contains tobacco.
USE OF TOBACCO — Smoking, as defined herein, and the use of any
tobacco-containing product, including, but not limited to, smokeless
tobacco, chewing and spitting tobacco and snuff.
§ 253-2. Possession of tobacco prohibited; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or carry any lighted tobacco
product, in or upon the building or premises owned by the West Morris
Regional Board of Education within the Township of Washington, except
as part of a classroom instruction or theatrical production under the
supervision of the West Morris Regional Board of Education.
§ 253-3. Offense occurring on school property
A. If a violation of this article occurs, the offender's name and address,
date, time and location of the violation shall be reported to the Health
Officer for further action in accordance with the provisions of the
article.
§ 253-1 TOBACCO PRODUCTS § 253-3
253:1023
§ 253-4. Notification; posting of signs.
§ 253-5. Enforcement.
The enforcing authority of this article shall be the Health Officer, the West
Morris Regional Board of Education and any police officer of the Township
of Washington.
§ 253-6. Violations and penalties.
For a violation of any provision of this article, the following penalties shall
apply:
B. The principal of the school and/or his/her designee (or designees) are
authorized to confiscate the illegally possessed tobacco or tobacco
products.
C. The provisions of this section shall apply to all persons, regardless of
age.
A. The Superintendent shall give written notification to all students and
employees of this policy annually.
B. All prospective employees will be informed of this policy prior to
employment.
C. Announcements will be made to the public not to smoke at school
activities and events.
D. The West Morris Regional Board of Education shall post "No Smoking"
and "No Tobacco Use" signs clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously on
West Morris Regional Board of Education property, at appropriate
locations, including, but not limited to, driveway entrances, entrances
to buildings, athletic fields and stadiums, and on or within affected
vehicles. Each sign shall have the words "No Smoking" and "No
Tobacco Use" in lettering that is not less than three inches in height,
and shall contain the international "no smoking" sign or symbol
(consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed
in a circle with a bar diagonally through the pictorial) that is not less
than four inches in height.
A. Minors.
(1) First offense: A written or verbal warning shall be mailed or
personally delivered to the offender and his or her parent or
guardian by the Health Officer or by a representative of the West
Morris Regional Board of Education.
(2) Second and subsequent offense(s).
(a) A complaint will be issued to the offender for appearance in
Municipal Court;
§ 253-3 WASHINGTON CODE § 253-6
253:1024
§ 253-7. Implementation of statutory provisions.
This article is intended to implement N.J.S.A. 2A:170-51 et. seq.
(b) The offender may be referred to an advanced anti-smoking
education program approved by the Township Health
Department. Any costs involved for these programs shall be
paid by the offender; and
(c) The offender may be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
B. All other persons: For a violation of the provisions of this article by all
other individuals who are 18 years of age or older, the maximum
penalty upon conviction shall be a fine up to $500.
§ 253-6 TOBACCO PRODUCTS § 253-7
253:1025

ARTICLE II
Use on Township Recreational Facilities
[Adopted 4-16-2007 by Ord. No. 10-07]
§ 253-8. Prohibition; definition.
It is unlawful for any person to smoke tobacco products or to carry a
lighted cigarette, cigar or pipe at any and all recreational facilities, parks,
playgrounds, sports fields and recreational properties that are owned,
leased or operated by the Township of Washington or by the Township
of Washington's Recreation Department. For purposes of this article,
"tobacco" shall mean any product that is made from the tobacco plant for
the purpose of being smoked or inhaled by a person, including, but not
limited to, cigars, pipe tobacco and cigarettes in any form.
§ 253-9. Signage.
A "No Smoking" sign shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted
at every entrance to every public recreational facility and property where
smoking is prohibited by this article. The signs shall be posted by the owner,
operator, manager or other person having control of such building or other
area. The signs shall have the words "No Smoking" in lettering that is
not less than two inches in height, or shall contain the international no
smoking sign or symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning
cigarette enclosed in a circle with a bar diagonally through the cigarette)
that is not less than two inches in height. Signs that are removed shall be
replaced within five working days by the owner, operator, manager or other
person having control of such building or other area.
§ 253-10. Informational program.
The Recreation Director or designee shall engage in a continuing program
to explain and clarify the purpose and requirements of this article to citizens
affected by this article and to guide owners, operators and managers in
their compliance. Such a program may include publications explaining the
provisions of this article.
§ 253-11. Enforcement.
The Recreation Director or designee and the Police Department are hereby
charged with the enforcement of this article. All members of the Recreation
Department and the Police Department are hereby designated as
enforcement officers for the purpose of enforcement of this article.
§ 253-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject, upon
conviction thereof, to the penalties provided in § 1-3 of the Code of the
Township of Washington.
§ 253-8 TOBACCO PRODUCTS § 253-12
253:1027
Chapter 255
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer connections — See Ch. 155, Art. I.
Site plan review — See Ch. 159.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 175.
Zoning — See Ch. 217.
§ 253-12 WASHINGTON CODE § 253-12
255:1028
ARTICLE I
Public Noncommunity and Nonpublic Water Systems
[Adopted 3-15-1972 as Ch. BH-VIII of the Revised General
Ordinances; amended in its entirety 10-23-2001 by Ord. No. 3-01187]
§ 255-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
A code regulating the location, construction, alteration, use and supervision
of individual and semipublic water supplies, requiring certain permits,
providing for the inspection of such supplies, the fixing of fees and
prescribing penalties for violation is hereby adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A.
26:3-69.1 to 3-69.6. A copy of the code is annexed to this article and made
a part of it without inclusion of the text herein.
§ 255-2. Title.
The code established and adopted by this article is described and commonly
known as "Standards for the Construction of Public Noncommunity and
Nonpublic Water Systems (2000)" which is set forth in Chapter 7:10-12.1
through 7:10-12.43 of the New Jersey Administrative Code and the
supplements and additions thereto pursuant to N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq. and
N.J.S.A. 58:12A-1 et seq. and the amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 255-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of N.J.A.C. 7:10-12.1 et seq., Standards for the Construction
of Public Noncommunity and Nonpublic Water Systems (2000), have been
placed on file in the offices of the Secretary of the Board of Health and the
Township Clerk for use and examination by the public.
§ 255-4. Permit required.
No person shall locate, construct or alter any water supply until a permit
for the location, construction or alteration of such water supply is issued by
the Board of Health.
§ 255-5. Issuance of permit.
The Board of Health may issue a permit if an application therefor is
accompanied by a certificate made by an engineer licensed to practice
professional engineering in the State of New Jersey or a New Jersey State
licensed well driller stating that the design of the water supply as proposed
is in compliance with the code. In the case of a replacement well for a
building or facility already served by an individual water supply system, a
New Jersey licensed well driller may make such application and certification
in lieu of an engineer.
187. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it take effect 1-1-2002.
§ 255-1 WATER § 255-6
255:1029
§ 255-6. Certificate of compliance required.
New water supplies shall not be placed in operation, nor shall new dwellings
or buildings or additions thereto be sold or occupied which must rely on
such a supply for water, until the Board of Health has issued a certificate
indicating that the water supply has been located and constructed in
compliance with the terms of the permit issued and the requirements of the
code. Issuance of such certificate shall not be required for alteration to an
existing water supply.
§ 255-7. Hearing on denial of permit or certificate.
If any person or certificate required by this article is denied by the Board
of Health, a hearing shall be held thereon before the Board within 15 days
after request is made by the applicant. Upon such hearing the Board of
Health shall affirm, alter or rescind its previous determination and take
action accordingly within 15 days thereafter.
§ 255-8. Stop orders.
The Board of Health may order all further work in and about any water
supply which is being erected or installed in violation of the code to be
stopped forthwith, except such work as shall be necessary to remedy such
violation, and thereafter the work continued without any violation of any of
the provisions of the code. After issuance of any such order and the service
of a copy thereof upon any person connected with or working in and about
the erection or installation of such water supply or any part thereof, no
further work shall be done thereon except as aforesaid.
§ 255-9. Standards for certificate of compliance. [Amended
11-26-2002 by Ord. No. 2-02]
A. The well must be staked by a land surveyor or engineer for wells on
vacant lots. The well driller may stake the well for replacement wells.
B. The casing of each well shall extend 18 inches above grade, and all
pump and well installations shall include a pitless adapter and shall be
properly vented.
C. Well caps or coverings shall be bonnet-type, heavy pattern, and
Harvard or Martinson brands are the types preferred. Other makes may
be approved by the inspector.
D. The minimum distance between a new well and any component of a
septic system shall be 100 feet. In the event a new well must be
constructed to replace a preexisting well, in circumstances where the
physical condition of the lot renders compliance with this requirement
impossible, then the Board may apply the less stringent distance
standards set forth in the Standards for the Construction of Public
Noncommunity and Nonpublic Water Systems (2000), provided that the
§ 255-6 WASHINGTON CODE § 255-9
255:1030
§ 255-10. Amendments pertaining to individual wells.
The following amendments, for the purpose of upgrading and establishing
specific criteria for individual water systems to protect the health of the
Township residents, are made to the Standards for the Construction of
Public Noncommunity and Nonpublic Water Systems (August 21, 2000),
adopted by reference in § 255-1 of this article. This article shall apply to all
new water wells, which will supply new homes and/or buildings.
applicant shows to the satisfaction of the Board that those less stringent
standards can be applied with safety.
E. All wells shall be cased to a minimum depth of 50 feet.
F. The well line must be located a minimum of 48 inches below grade and
must be bedded with six inches of clean sand below and six inches of
clean sand above the well line.
G. If an existing septic system needs to be altered or constructed within
100 feet of a substandard well (well has less than 50 feet casing, is a
spring, dug well, cistern, or Kelly concrete-cased well), a new well must
be drilled in compliance with the Standards for the Construction of
Public Noncommunity and Nonpublic Water Systems (2000). The old
well must be properly sealed by a person who possesses a valid New
Jersey well driller's license of the proper class as issued by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to N.J.S.A.
58:4A-4.1 et seq.
A. Minimum well yields.
(1) Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
MAXIMUM PUMPING LEVEL — A distance of 10 feet above the
bottom of a well.
PEAK LOAD — The amount of water used during periods of the day
when demand is highest.
PEAK LOAD TIME — The length of time during which the peak load
is to be delivered.
PNEUMATIC TANK STORAGE — Volume of water stored between
the minimum and maximum pressure settings in pressure tanks
with a two-hundred-twenty-gallon maximum size.
STATIC WATER LEVEL — The elevation of water in a well when no
pumping is in progress.
WELL FLOW — Initial well yield at the wellhead in gallons per
minute reduced by a decremental factor of 10%.
WELL STORAGE — The volume of water stored in the well between
the static water level and the maximum pumping level.
§ 255-9 WATER § 255-10
255:1031
(2) All new water wells drilled within the Township of Washington
which are intended to be used as potable water supply for new
residential and/or commercial use shall yield not less than two
gallons per minute at the tap.
(3) Any such residential well shall produce at peak load time a well
flow and well storage which, when combined with pneumatic tank
storage, exceeds the peak load. Compliance with this requirement
shall be determined in accordance with the following formulas:
[Amended 11-26-2002 by Ord. No. 2-02]
(a) (Well flow x peak load time) + well storage + pneumatic tank
storage greater than peak load
(b) Well flow = .9 x (initial well yield)
(c) Peak load time = :
75 x (number of bedrooms)
—————————————
3 x (number of bathrooms)
(d) Well storage = 3.14 x r2 (well depth - static water level -10)
(e) Peak load 75 x (number of bedrooms)
B. The yield shall be determined through the use of a four-hour pumping
test. The test shall show static level drawdown during pumping test and
recovery time to static level.
C. The well driller/pump installer shall: [Amended 11-26-2002 by Ord.
No. 2-02]
(1) Perform the pumping test described in Subsection B of this section.
(2) Supply the Department of Health of the Township of Washington
with detailed information regarding the pump test and shall certify
the same to the Board of Health of the Township of Washington on
forms supplied by said Department.
D. The well shall be installed and pump tested before any other
construction permits are issued. [Amended 11-26-2002 by Ord. No.
2-02]
E. The builder or property owner of newly constructed dwellings shall be
responsible for the quality of the water produced by the individual
water supply system until the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The
builder or property owner shall arrange for an initial water test in
accordance with the requirements of the Private Well Testing Act,
N.J.A.C. 7:9E, including the following parameters as soon as the water
is available within the dwelling. The sample for this initial test must be
collected prior to the installation of any treatment system. Prior to
§ 255-10 WASHINGTON CODE § 255-10
255:1032
signing an application for a certificate of occupancy, the Department of
Health of the Township of Washington shall confirm that all parameters
listed are in compliance with applicable standards as indicated.
Treatment systems installed to correct for parameters which fail the
initial test will be required. Retesting for failing parameters after
treatment will be required to ensure compliance with the specifically
enumerated standards.
Substance/Condition Concentration Maximum
Corrosivity Within plus/minus 1.0 LSI units as
defined by the Langelier Index
pH Within 6.5 to 8.5 pH units
Arsenic 0.01 mg/L
Total Coliform bacteria 0/negative
Copper 1.3 mg/L Action Level
Fluoride 2.0 mg/L
Iron 0.3 mg/L
Lead 0.015 mg/L Action Level
Mercury 0.002 mg/L
Manganese 0.05 mg/L
Nitrates 10 mg/L
Volatile organics MCLs established under the Safe
Drinking Water Act, N.J.S.A.
58:12A-1 et seq., and
implementing rules, N.J.A.C. 7:10.
F. When it becomes necessary to install a water treatment device on any
potable water supply system in the Township of Washington, it shall
become the obligation of the owner or builder of said system to install
the appropriate water treatment device. Once said device is installed, it
must remain on the site and be utilized in conjunction with the water
supply system. [Amended 11-26-2002 by Ord. No. 2-02]
G. The builder shall provide the Health Department with the list of water
treatment devices installed on the water supply (if applicable), and list
the reasons for the installation. [Amended 11-26-2002 by Ord. No.
2-02]
H. Wells drilled to service existing dwellings must be sampled in
accordance with the Private Well Testing Act, N.J.A.C. 7:9E, for the
following parameters: pH, arsenic, total coliform bacteria, iron,
manganese, nitrates, volatile organics, copper and lead. Compliance for
those parameters for which there is a primary standard will be
required. [Amended 11-26-2002 by Ord. No. 2-02]
§ 255-10 WATER § 255-11
255:1033
§ 255-11. Fees and charges. [Amended 11-26-2002 by Ord. No. 2-02;
3-23-2004 by Ord. No. 4-04]
§ 255-12. Certificates of potability; fee; violations and penalties.
[Amended 11-26-2002 by Ord. No. 2-02]
A. For the filing of an application and plans for the issuance of a permit to
locate and construct a new water supply system, the fee shall be $200,
plus, if applicable, the cost to the Department of Health of initial water
supply testing. The permit shall be valid for two years from the date of
issuance, but may be renewed upon payment of an annual renewal fee
of $50. No permit may be renewed more than four times.
B. For the filing of an application and plans for the issuance of a permit to
alter an existing water supply system, the fee shall be $50, plus, if
applicable, the cost to the Department of Health of the initial water
supply testing. The permit shall be valid for two years from the date of
issuance, but may be renewed upon payment of an annual renewal fee
of $50. No permit may be renewed more than four times.
A. Certificate required. Prior to the transfer of title of any residential
dwelling serviced by an individual water supply, a certificate of
potability shall be obtained from the Board of Health indicating that the
water supply meets specific current primary potable water supply
standards of the State of New Jersey and the Board of Health. The
applicant must note the source of water. Dug wells, springs, Kelly
concrete-cased wells and cisterns are not acceptable sources of water.
If a home is serviced by a source of water other than a well (as defined
by Chapter 10, Safe Drinking Water Act), a new well must be drilled and
tested prior to the transfer of title. All water treatment/purification
devices must be noted by the applicant on the application for the
certificate. Certified laboratory results of samples taken by a New
Jersey certified laboratory or their authorized agent must be supplied
prior to certificate of potability issuance, by providing the original copy
of the water results from the water testing laboratory, or a fax directly
from the water-testing laboratory. The water supply must be sampled in
accordance with the Private Well Testing Act (N.J.A.C. 7:9E). Results
must indicate pH, total coliform bacteria, nitrates, iron, manganese,
lead, copper, arsenic and volatile organics. If water treatment/
purification devices are in place, an additional test for total coliform
bacteria, plus any other primary drinking water parameter(s) treated
for by the system, must be performed at a primary cold water nonaerated
tap with the treatment device functioning. The results of all
laboratory analyses used to obtain a certificate of potability are valid for
12 months after the date of sampling. The only exception will be in the
case of total coliform bacteria testing where the results are valid for six
months after the sampling date. The requirement for a certificate of
potability shall be noted on all tax searches performed by the Township
of Washington. The report shall be made part of the property's
permanent file.
§ 255-11 WASHINGTON CODE § 255-12
255:1034
§ 255-13. Well pumps; fee.
Only a New Jersey licensed well driller or pump installer may repair, install
or replace a well pump. A permit will be required to repair, replace or install
a well pump in an existing well. The applicant must note the approved
individual who will be performing the work. The fee for this permit will be
$50. This fee includes a total coliform bacteria test, which may be taken by
the applicant or this Department.
§ 255-14. Well lines; fee.
Any relocation, changes, alterations or repairs to a well line must be
permitted and inspected by the Health Department. The fee for this permit
will be $50. This fee includes a total coliform bacteria test, which may be
taken by the applicant or this Department.
B. Exemptions. New water wells regulated by § 255-10 shall be exempt
from this section.
C. Fees. For the filing of an application and the issuance of a certificate of
potability, the fee shall be $50. For the filing of an application to reissue
a certificate of potability, the fee shall be $25. [Amended 3-23-2004
by Ord. No. 4-04]
D. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of this
article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 90 days, or both, for each violation.
§ 255-12 WATER § 255-14
255:1035
Appendix
Chapter A258
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A258-1. Purpose.
The municipality hereby grants to Comcast renewal of its nonexclusive
municipal consent to place in, upon, across, above, over and under
highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public ways and public
places in the municipality, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors, fixtures, apparatus and
equipment as may be necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance in the municipality of a cable television and communications
system.
§ A258-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission ("FCC") rules and regulations, 47 C.F.R.
Subsection 76.1 et seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C.
§ 521 et seq., as amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et
seq., and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with the
federal and state definitions:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — The company's application for renewal of municipal
consent.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Any service tier which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by the FCC.
BOARD or BPU — The Board of Public Utilities, State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this ordinance and is known as
Comcast of Northwest New Jersey, LLC.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
OFFICE or OCTV — The Office of Cable Television of the Board.
PRIMARY SERVICE AREA or PSA — Consists of the area of the municipality
currently served with existing plant as set forth in the map annexed to the
company's application for municipal consent.
TOWN or MUNICIPALITY — The Washington Township, County of Morris,
State of New Jersey.
§ 255-14 WASHINGTON CODE § A258-3
255:1036
§ A258-3. Statement of findings.
Public hearings conducted by the municipality concerning the renewal of
municipal consent herein granted to the company were held after proper
public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act and the
regulations of the Board adopted pursuant thereto. Said hearings, having
been fully open to the public, and the municipality, having received at said
public hearings all comments regarding the qualifications of the company
to receive this renewal of municipal consent, the municipality hereby finds
that the company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character,
financial and other qualifications and that the company's operating and
construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A258-4. Duration of franchise.
§ A258-5. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the
nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for cable television
reception service in the municipality or any higher amount permitted by the
Act or otherwise allowable by law, whichever is greater. The fee shall be
paid on or before January 31 of each year.
§ A258-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to the renewal of the franchise
shall apply to the entirety of the municipality and any property subsequently
annexed hereto.
§ A258-7. Extension of service. [Amended 6-16-2008 by Ord. No.
10-08188]
A. The nonexclusive municipal consent granted herein shall expire 15
years from the date of expiration of the previous certificate of approval
issued by the Board.
B. In the event that the municipality shall find that the company has not
substantially complied with the material terms and conditions of this
ordinance, the municipality shall have the right to petition the OCTV,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47, for appropriate action, including
modification and/or termination of the certificate of approval; provided,
however, that the municipality shall first have given the company
written notice of all alleged instances of noncompliance and an
opportunity to cure same within 90 days of that notification.
188. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it shall take effect upon final passage,
approval and publication and upon issuance of an amended certificate of approval by the
Board of Public Utilities.
§ A258-3 WATER § A258-7
255:1037
§ A258-8. Construction requirements.
§ A258-9. Customer service.
In providing services to its customers, the company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq., and all applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations. The company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
A. The Company shall be required to proffer service to any residence or
business along any public right-of-way in the primary service area, as
set forth in the company's application. The company's line extension
policy, as set forth in the company's application, shall govern any
extension of plant beyond the primary service area, provided that the
company's line extension policy shall be modified to reflect that the
company shall extend its plant along public rights-of-way to all
residences and businesses within 300 aerial or underground feet of the
operator's existing plant at no cost beyond the normal installation rate.
B. Comcast will comply with all lawful rules and regulations governing the
operation of its cable television system and cable communications
system within the Township of Washington. If any referenced
regulations are deemed unlawful by a court of competent jurisdiction or
superseded by a duly enacted state or federal statute or regulation,
Comcast will not be bound by such regulation, nor will the company be
bound by any provision of the municipal consent ordinance or renewal
certificate of approval with regard to same. Comcast reserves the right
to seek administrative or judicial review of the validity of any statute,
regulation or ordinance.
A. Restoration: In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface
in the natural topography, the company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good a
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work. The
Township will make all reasonable efforts to insure the prompt issuance
of municipal permits when required to install, repair or replace
company cable plant.
B. Relocation: If at any time during the period of this consent the
municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place, the company, upon reasonable notice by the municipality,
shall remove, re-lay or relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
company.
C. Removal or trimming of trees: During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public places of the municipality so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cable of the company.
Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance of the company's wire and cables.
§ A258-7 WASHINGTON CODE § A258-9
255:1038
company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
shall be prepared to report on it to the municipality upon written request of
the Municipality Administrator or Clerk.
§ A258-10. Municipal complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designed as the complaint officer
for the municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b). All complaints shall
be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The
municipality shall have the right to request copies of records and reports
pertaining to complaints by municipality customers from the OCTV.
§ A258-11. Local office.
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a business office or agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:18-5.1 for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all local
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and
similar matters. Such a business office shall have a publicly listed toll-free
telephone number and be open during standard business hours, and in no
event (excepting emergent circumstances) less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday. The toll-free number shall be accessible 24 hours a
day, seven days a week and listed on monthly customer bills.
§ A258-12. Performance bonds.
During the life of the franchise, the Company shall give to the municipality
a bond in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful
performance of all undertakings of the company as represented in its
application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
A. The company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding credit for outages, the
reporting of same to regulatory agencies and notification of same to
customers.
B. The company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable state and
federal statues and regulations regarding the availability of devices for
the hearing impaired and the notification of same to customers.
C. The company shall use every reasonable effort to meet or exceed
voluntary standards for telephone accessibility developed by the
National Cable Television Association (NCTA).
D. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the
municipality to express any comment with respect to telephone
accessibility to the complaint officer, or impair the right of the
complaint officer to take any action that is permitted under law.
§ A258-9 WATER § A258-13
255:1039
§ A258-13. Subscriber rates.
The rates of the company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
federal and state law.
§ A258-14. Public, educational and governmental access.
§ A258-15. Commitments by the company.
A. The company shall continue to provide a system-wide public access
channel maintained by the company for the purpose of providing access
time to public, educational and governmental entities of the Township.
Qualified individuals and organizations may utilized the public access
channel for the purpose of cablecasting noncommercial access
programming in conformance with the Company's published public
access rules.
B. The company shall take any steps that are necessary to ensure that the
signal originated on the access channel are carried without material
degradation and with a signal whose quality is equal to that of other
standard channels that the company transmits.
C. The company will produce, at its expense and upon request of the
Township, two programs on an annual basis for the Township, provided
that the company is given at least 30 days' notice. Such programs shall
be aired on the system access channel. The Township Clerk shall act as
the contact person between the Township and the company with
respect to such matters. If the company has already produced programs
similar to those requested by the Township, those programs already
produced shall count towards the two-program requirement. Similarly,
if the company has already promoted the Township by way of two
programs previously produced by the company during the year, they
shall also be counted towards the company's requirement under this
section. The Township Clerk must approve, in writing, any program the
company wants to count towards its obligation under this section.
D. Subject to the provisions herein, and under supervision, if required, the
company shall lend to the Township, for PEG broadcast, videotapes of
programming relating to the Township or matters of particular interest
to the Township (including but not limited to the interviews with
Township officials and sporting events involving Township teams and
local school events) which are in the company's possession or control
and which have been previously shown on the company channel or such
other channel the company uses for it own originated programming,
provided that the company may withhold such videotapes on
reasonable grounds, including but not limited to the rights of copyright
holders or other commitments or policies with respect to such
programming.
A. The Company shall provide or continue to provide standard installation
and basic cable television service on one outlet at no cost to each school
§ A258-13 WASHINGTON CODE § A258-15
255:1040
§ A258-16. Emergency uses.
§ A258-17. Insurance and indemnity.
in the municipality, public and private, elementary, intermediate and
secondary, and public library; and the Board of Education facilities at
53 West Mill Road and 259 Bartley Road, provided that each school,
library or other facility is within 200 feet of active cable distribution
plant. Each additional outlet installed, if any, shall be paid for on
a materials-plus-labor-and-equipment basis by the school requesting
service. Monthly service charges shall be waived on all additional
outlets.
B. The company shall provide or continue to provide standard installation
and basic cable television service at no cost on one outlet to each police,
fire, first aid squad, and emergency management facility in the
municipality and in the following municipal facilities: Public Works
facility, 54 Rock Road; Recreation, Buildings and Grounds facility, 50
Rock Road; Senior Citizen Center, East Springtown Road; Recreation
facility, 212 West Mill Road; Municipal Building and Court, 43
Schooley's Mountain Road, provided the facility is located within 200
feet of active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet installed, if
any, shall be paid for on a materials-plus-labor-and-equipment basis by
the municipality. Monthly service charges shall be waived on all
additional outlets.
C. The company shall provide standard installation and one free
nonnetworked Internet connection and service via high-speed cable
modem in each public library building, and all public and private
schools. Connections are to be located in areas accessible to student
and community use and cannot be restricted to administrative use. All
facilities must be located within 200 feet of active cable plant.
D. Within 180 days of the issuance of a renewal certificate of approval
(COA) by the BPU, the company shall provide to the municipality a onetime
grant for access-related needs in the amount of $20,000.
E. The company shall provide limited training and access to production
equipment for local programming to the extent that such equipment
and training are available.
A. The company will comply with the Emergency Alert System ("EAS")
rules in accordance with applicable state and federal statues and
regulations.
B. The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the
municipality or any other person, during an emergency, if for any
reason the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television
system as contemplated herein.
§ A258-15 WATER § A258-17
255:1041
§ A258-18. Incorporation of the application.
All of the statements and commitments contained in the application or
annexed thereto and incorporated therein, and any amendment thereto,
except as modified herein, is binding upon the company as terms and
conditions of this consent. The application and other relevant writings
submitted by the company shall be annexed hereto and made a part hereof
by reference, provided same do not conflict with applicable state or federal
law.
§ A258-19. Separability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and its validity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
the ordinance.
A. The company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general
liability insurance policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000
covering liability for any death, personal injury, property damages or
other liability arising out of its construction and operation of the cable
television system, and an excess liability (or "umbrella") policy in the
amount of $5,000,000.
B. The company shall indemnify, protect and save the Township harmless
from and against losses and physical damages to property, including
those properties owned or under the control of the Township, and
bodily injury or death of persons, including payments made under any
worker's compensation law, which may arise out of or be caused by the
construction, location, installation, operation, erection, maintenance,
repair, replacement, removal or use of the cable television system
within the Township contemplated by this franchise or by any act of the
company, its agents or employees; provided, however, that the company
shall not be required to indemnify, protect and save harmless for any
losses and physical damages and bodily injury or death of persons
which may arise out of or be caused by the negligent acts or omissions
of the Township, its agents or employees.
C. The company shall also carry such insurance as it deems necessary to
protect it from all claims under the workmen's compensation laws in
effect that may be applicable to the franchise.
D. All insurance required by this ordinance shall be and remain in full
force and effect for the entire life of the franchise. A certificate of
insurance must be submitted to the Township Attorney to review for
compliance with the above-mentioned limits of liability, and the
Township shall be a named insured on said policies. The insurer shall
notify the Township at least 30 days prior to its intention to cancel any
policy.
§ A258-17 WASHINGTON CODE § A258-20
255:1042
§ A258-20. Third-party beneficiaries.
Nothing in this franchise or in any prior agreement is or was intended to
confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce
the terms of such agreements or franchise.
Chapter A259
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 111.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 172.
Zoning — See Ch. 217.
§ A258-20 WATER § A258-20
255:1043

ARTICLE I
Bell Atlantic - New Jersey, Inc.
[Adopted 11-16-1998 by Ord. No. 37-98]
§ A259-1. Permission granted; preservation of rights.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:17-10, N.J.S.A. 48:17-11, and
N.J.S.A. 48:17-12, permission and consent is hereby granted to Bell Atlantic-
New Jersey, Inc. (the "company"), its successors and assigns, to install,
operate, inspect, maintain, repair, replace and remove its communications
facilities and other transmission or process equipment, including
underground facilities, such as conduits, manholes, cables, wires and all
other facilities appurtenant thereto, and aboveground facilities, such as
cables, wires, antennas, poles, posts, supports, guys, pedestals, cable
termination and distribution cabinets and all other facilities appurtenant
thereto, in, through, upon, along, over, under and across all of the various
public streets and ways, which include the roads, avenues, rights-of-way,
sidewalks, highways, bridges, waterways and other public places, and parts
thereof, throughout their entire length, and to effect the necessary street
openings and lateral connections to curb poles, property lines and other
facilities in the Township of Washington (the "Township") for said company's
local and through lines and other communications facilities in connection
with the transaction of its business. In the event that any public street
or way where the company has facilities is vacated by the Township, the
Township agrees to reserve unto said company the rights granted the
company by the present ordinance.
§ A259-2. Placement of aboveground facilities.
All poles, posts, pedestals, cabinets or other facilities shall be located and
placed back of the curblines where shown on the Official Map(s) of the
Township; the poles and posts, however, shall be located within 18 inches
of the face of such curbline or as may otherwise be mutually agreed upon
by both parties or at the points or places now occupied by the poles, posts,
pedestals, cabinets or other facilities of the company, its successors and
assigns and, where there are no curblines, at other convenient points or
places in, upon, along, adjacent or across the public streets and ways as
may be mutually agreed upon between the parties.
§ A259-3. Placement of underground facilities.
The company may bury its local and through communications facilities such
as cables, conduits, manholes and associated equipment, fixtures, process
equipment and appurtenances within the rights-of-way of the various public
streets and ways and at such locations as shall be mutually agreed upon by
the parties for said company's local and through lines and communications
facilities. Underground conduits and associated facilities, as
aforementioned, shall be placed at least 18 inches below the surface of said
public streets and ways and, with the exception of lateral branches to curb
poles and property lines and other facilities, the same shall generally not be
§ A259-1 WATER § A259-3
255:1045
constructed more than 10 feet from the curbline, unless obstructions make
it necessary to deviate from such course or unless the parties mutually
agree to another location. Manholes shall be located at such points along
the line of underground conduits as may be necessary or convenient for
placing, maintaining and operating the facilities, as aforementioned, which
the company may from time to time use in connection with its underground
conduit system and shall be so constructed as to conform to the crosssectional
and longitudinal grade of the surface so as not to interfere with
the safety or convenience of persons or vehicles.
§ A259-4. Construction requirements; permits.
Before proceeding with any new construction or relocation work in an
area covered by this ordinance, the company shall give prior notice in
writing thereof to the Township, through its designated representative,
of its intention to perform such work. The company shall obtain such
street opening or excavation permits as may be lawfully required by any
applicable ordinances regulating such openings or excavations. Any such
area affected by the company in constructing its facilities shall be restored
to as good condition as it was before the commencement of work thereon.
No public streets or ways shall be encumbered for a period longer than shall
be reasonable to execute the work.
§ A259-5. Indemnification and liability.
The company agrees to indemnify and save harmless the Township from and
against all claims and liabilities resulting from any injury or damage to the
person or property of any person, firm or corporation caused by or arising
out of road conditions resulting from any negligent or faulty excavations,
installation or maintenance connected with the work or equipment of said
company, and not attributable to the fault or negligence of the Township,
except that if such injury or damage shall be caused by the joint or
concurring negligence or fault of the company and the Township, the same
shall be borne by them to the extent of their respective fault or negligence.
§ A259-6. Adapting to new curblines.
Whenever a curbline shall be established on streets where one does not now
exist or where an established curbline shall be relocated in order to widen
an existing street in conjunction with road construction being performed
by the Township, the company shall change the location of its aboveground
facilities covered by this ordinance in accordance with applicable law, so
that the same shall be back of, and adjacent to, the new curbline so
long as the Township has acted in accordance with applicable law and
with reasonable care in establishing the new curbline and providing notice
thereof.
§ A259-3 WASHINGTON CODE § A259-7
255:1046
§ A259-7. Accommodating other facilities.
Any company or corporation having legal authority to place its facilities in
the public streets and ways of the Township may jointly use the company's
poles, posts, pedestals or other structures for all lawful purposes, provided
that the Township consents to such use, on terms and conditions acceptable
to the Township. Said consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
§ A259-8. Provision of pole space for municipal use; restrictions;
indemnification of company.
The company shall provide space, to the extent available, on its poles
so long as said poles are occupied by the company and space, to the
extent available, in its main conduits existing on the date of passage of
this ordinance, but not exceeding one duct of standard size, for the sole
benefit of the Township during the pendancy of this ordinance. Such space
shall be provided for the exclusive use of the Township, which use shall
be limited to accommodating the wires or electrical conductors required
for one-way signal control in connection with municipal police patrol, fire
alarm signal control and traffic signal control systems only; but for no
other uses or purposes, either alone or in conjunction therewith; nor for
circuits for the supply of electrical energy for traffic or other signals; nor
for wires, conductors, cable or the equivalent which provide a means of
transmitting any signal to a private, commercial or residential location
and which is normally provided by a nongovernmental supplier; provided,
further, that no such use or attachment by the Township shall interfere
with the plant or facilities of or the use thereof by the company. All costs
or expenses incurred by the company in connection therewith shall be
paid by the Township. It shall be the obligation of the Township to attach
its wires to the poles or place its electric conductors in the conduits or
manholes of the company, provided that before proceeding with said work,
either by itself or by a person, firm or corporation engaged to perform
such work, the Township shall give the company 30 days' prior notice in
writing. All such work shall be performed under the supervision of said
company. The Township will indemnify and save harmless the company
from and against all claims, liabilities or demands arising in any manner
in connection with the Township's wires or facilities or their installation,
maintenance, operation or removal, or the Township's use or enjoyment of
the company's plant or facilities provided under this § A259-8.
§ A259-9. Future rights of county and state preserved.
If any or all of the said streets or ways are later taken over by the County
of Morris or the State of New Jersey, such county or state shall have such
rights and privileges and be subject to the same terms, conditions and
limitations of use as apply herein to the Township; provided, however, that
satisfactory prior arrangements as may be necessary are made with the
Township and the company for the full protection of the respective interest
of each.
§ A259-7 WATER § A259-10
255:1047
§ A259-10. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TOWNSHIP — Applies to and includes any form of municipality or
government into which the Township or any part thereof may at any time
hereafter be changed, annexed or merged.
§ A259-11. Applicability; cancellation of prior agreements.
The permission and consent hereby granted shall apply to and cover all
communications facilities of the company existing at any time and related
structures, process equipment and appurtenances heretofore or hereafter
erected, constructed, reconstructed, removed, located, relocated, replaced,
maintained, repaired or operated by the company, its predecessors,
successors or assigns within the Township. Said transfer must be approved
by the Washington Township Committee, and said approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld. This ordinance shall cancel and supersede all prior
consent ordinances between the Township and the company regarding the
subject matter hereof.
§ A259-12. Local office required.
The company shall maintain its property within the Township and shall
comply with applicable law for the provision of safe, adequate and proper
service at just and reasonable rates and safeguard the public interest in
continuous and uninterrupted service within the Township.
§ A259-13. Construal of provisions.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to impose any obligation on
the part of the Township to open any streets, roads, avenues or highways,
or parts thereof, not heretofore dedicated or open to the public use, and
nothing herein contained shall be construed in any court or place as an
acceptance of an unaccepted street, road, avenue or highway, or any part
thereof.
§ A259-14. No exclusive rights implied.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to grant unto said company,
its successors and assigns, an exclusive right, or to prevent the granting of
permission and consent to other companies for like purposes on any of the
streets, roads, avenues or highways of the Township.
§ A259-15. Duration and terms of agreement; restrictions.
The permission and consent given and granted by this ordinance shall
continue and be enforced for a period of 15 years from the date of the
approval thereof, and throughout the full time of this ordinance, said
company, its successors and assigns shall furnish safe, adequate and proper
§ A259-10 WASHINGTON CODE § A259-15
255:1048
service within the Township and keep and maintain its property and
equipment in such condition as to enable it to do so.
§ A259-16. Requirements for adoption of provisions.
§ A259-17. Repealer.
All ordinances of the Township of Washington which are inconsistent with
the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
§ A259-18. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is
for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not
affect the remaining portions of this ordinance.
§ A259-19. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage, approval
and publication as required by law.
A. The company shall pay the expenses incurred for advertising required
in connection with the passage of this ordinance, after the date of its
first reading, within 30 days after the company has received a bill for
said advertising from the publisher.
B. Following final passage of this ordinance, the Township Clerk shall
provide the company with written notice thereof by certified mail. As
provided by applicable law, this ordinance, and any subsequent
amendments, shall not become effective until acceptance thereof by the
company and approval thereof by the Board of Public Utility
Commissioners.
§ A259-15 WATER § A259-19
255:1049

ARTICLE II
United Telephone Company of New Jersey, Inc.
[Adopted 12-20-1999 by Ord. No. 33-99]
§ A259-20. Permission granted.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:17-10, N.J.S.A. 48:17-11 and
N.J.S.A. 48:17-12, that permission and consent be and the same is hereby
granted to the company, its successors and assigns to erect, construct,
reconstruct, lay, maintain and operate its underground conduits and
subways, cables, poles, posts, wires, manholes, loading coil vaults, loading
coils, including the necessary street openings and lateral connections to
curb poles and property lines, and its other fixtures and appurtenances
in, through, upon, along, over, under and across all of the various streets,
roads, avenues and highways and parts thereof, throughout their entire
length, in this Township for its local and through lines and systems in
connection with the transaction of its business, and all of the various
streets, roads, avenues and highways and parts thereof, throughout their
entire length, in this Township are hereby designated and prescribed for the
uses and purposes of said company as aforementioned.
§ A259-21. Poles and posts.
All poles or posts hereafter to be erected, constructed, reconstructed,
maintained and operated shall be located and placed back of and adjacent
to the curblines where shown by Official Maps of this Township and within
eighteen inches thereof, and at the points or places now occupied by the
poles or posts of said company, its successors and assigns, and at other
convenient points or places upon the streets, roads, avenues and highways
adjacent to such curblines.
§ A259-22. Placement of facilities.
Said company may construct, reconstruct, maintain and operate in its
subways or underground conduits, manholes and loading coil vaults the
wires, cables, loading coils and other electrical conductors and
appurtenances necessary in connection therewith for its local and through
lines and systems; it may also erect, construct, reconstruct, maintain and
operate the necessary distributing poles or posts, fixtures and supports and
distribute therefrom upon, along, across, over and above the surface of
said streets, roads, avenues and highways and parts thereof such wires,
cables and other electrical conductors which it may find necessary to erect,
construct, reconstruct, maintain and operate in connection with the system
of subways, underground conduits and manholes aforementioned. With
the exception of lateral branches to curb poles and property lines, said
underground conduits shall be placed below the surface of said streets,
roads, avenues and highways and parts thereof, and said conduits generally
shall not be constructed more than 10 feet from the curblines unless
obstructions make it necessary to deviate from such course, and all
§ A259-20 WATER § A259-22
255:1051
underground conduits shall be placed at least eighteen inches below the
surface of the street.
§ A259-23. Underground location; filing of map or plan.
§ A259-24. Restoration.
The surface of the streets, roads, avenues and highways and any pavement
or flagging taken up by said company in building its lines shall be restored
to as good condition as it was before the commencement of work thereon,
and no highways shall be encumbered for a longer period than shall be
necessary to execute the work.
§ A259-25. Opening of streets; indemnification.
A. All manholes and loading coil vaults shall be located beneath the
surface of said streets, roads, avenues and highways and parts thereof
at such points along the line of the subways or underground conduits as
may be necessary or convenient for placing, maintaining and operating
the cables and other electrical conductors which said company may
from time to time place in said subways or underground conduits and
shall be so constructed as to conform to the cross-sectional and
longitudinal grade of the pavement and so as not to interfere with the
safety or convenience of persons or vehicles traveling on or over such
streets, roads, avenues and highways and parts thereof.
B. Except in the case of an emergency involving health, safety and/or
public welfare, 30 days before proceeding with the work of erecting any
pole or poles or of constructing underground conduits and cables,
subways, manholes and/or loading coil vaults under the permission and
consent herein contained said company shall file with the Township
Committee of this Township a map or plan showing the location and size
of any such proposed pole or poles, underground conduits, subways,
manholes and loading coil vaults, which map or plan shall be first
approved by said Township Committee or their authorized
representative before any such work is begun as aforesaid. Such
advance notice will not be required in the case of repair to or
replacement of an existing facility.
A. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to impose any obligation
on the part of this Township to open any streets, roads, avenues or
highways or parts thereof not heretofore dedicated or opened to the
public use, and nothing herein contained shall be construed in any
court or place as an acceptance of any unaccepted street, road, avenue
or highway or any part thereof.
B. The company agrees to indemnify and save harmless the Township from
and against all claims and liabilities resulting from any injury or
damage to the person or property of any person, firm or corporation
caused by or arising out of road conditions resulting from any negligent
or faulty excavations, installation or maintenance connected with the
§ A259-22 WASHINGTON CODE § A259-25
255:1052
§ A259-26. Adapting to new curblines.
§ A259-27. Sharing of poles and posts.
§ A259-28. Pole space for municipal use; indemnification of
company; future rights of county and state.
Said company shall provide free of charge to this Township as long as
this ordinance continues in effect space on its poles so long as said poles
are occupied by said company for the placing by this Township of one
crossarm or, in lieu thereof, two pins on a crossarm of said company
to be designated by it, and space in its main subways (not exceeding
one clear duct of standard size) to accommodate the wires or electrical
conductors required for signal control in connection with its police patrol,
fire alarm telegraph signal systems and traffic signal control systems, but
not to include circuits for the supply of electrical energy for the traffic or
other signals; provided, however, that such crossarms, wires or electrical
conductors shall not be installed, used or maintained in such manner as
work or equipment of said company and not attributable to the fault or
negligence of the Township.
A. Wherever the curbline shall be established hereafter on streets where
the same has not yet been established or where an established curbline
shall be relocated in order to widen an existing street or highway, said
company shall change the location of its poles at its expense so that the
same shall be back of and adjacent to the new curbline so established
and within 18 inches thereof, upon receipt of notice from the Township
Clerk that the curbline has been so established.
B. Should the Township request, for good cause such as approved road
improvements and/or municipal construction projects, the relocation of
utility poles and/or wires, said company shall change the location of the
poles at its sole expense, so long as this ordinance is in effect.
A. Upon any of the streets, roads, avenues and highways in this Township
now or hereafter occupied by the poles or posts of said company, its
successors and assigns or any other companies or corporations having
legal authority to erect and maintain poles or posts, said company and
such other companies or corporations may use the same poles, provided
they can agree so to do.
B. The permission and consent hereby granted shall apply to and cover all
communications facilities of the company existing at any time and
related structures, process equipment and appurtenances heretofore or
hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, removed, located,
relocated, replaced, maintained, repaired or operated by the company,
its predecessors, successors or assigns within the Township. This
ordinance shall cancel and supercede all prior consent ordinances
between the Township and the company regarding the subject matter
hereof.
§ A259-25 WATER § A259-28
255:1053
to interfere with the crossarms, wires or electrical conductors which said
company, its successors and assigns may then have or may thereafter from
time to time place on its poles or in its main subways, and said Township
shall indemnify and save harmless said company from all claim or suits for
damages arising from the attachment to its poles or the location in its main
subways of any such crossarms, wires or electrical conductors used by this
Township. Before proceeding with the attachment of its said crossarms and/
or wires to the poles or the placing of its said electrical conductors in the
main subways or manholes of said company, either on the part of itself or
on the part of a person, firm or corporation engaged to perform such work,
this Township shall give to the said company 30 days' notice in writing,
in order that the work may be performed under the supervision of said
company. If any or all of said streets or highways be later taken over by the
Board of Chosen Freeholders of the County of Morris or the State Highway
Department, then such Board of Chosen Freeholders or the State Highway
Department may use the same clear duct of standard size referred to for
their respective police patrol, fire alarm telegraph and traffic signal control
systems in conjunction with the Township's use thereof for similar purposes,
but only after making such satisfactory arrangements as may be necessary
with the Township and the company for the full protection of each other's
interests.
§ A259-29. Duration and terms of agreement; restrictions.
The permission and consent given and granted by this ordinance shall
continue and be in force for a period of 15 years from the date of the
approval thereof, and throughout the full time of this ordinance, said
company, its successors and assigns shall furnish safe, adequate and proper
service within this Township and keep and maintain its property and
equipment in such condition as to enable it to do so.
§ A259-30. No exclusive rights implied.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to grant unto said company,
its successors and assigns, an exclusive right, or to prevent the granting of
permission and consent to other companies for like purposes on any of the
streets, roads, avenues or highways of this Township.
§ A259-31. Definitions.
The term "Township" as used in this ordinance in its application to the
Township of Washington shall be held to apply to and include any form of
municipality or government into which this Township, or any part thereof,
may at any time hereafter be changed, annexed or merged; and the term
"Township Committee" or any other term herein used in referring to the
governing body of this Township shall be held to apply to and include the
governing body of such other form of municipality.
§ A259-28 WASHINGTON CODE § A259-32
255:1054
§ A259-32. Applicability.
The permission and consent hereby granted shall apply to and cover the
poles, posts, wires, cables, underground conduits and subways, manholes,
fixtures and appurtenances heretofore erected, constructed, placed,
maintained and renewed by said company or its predecessors, under and by
virtue of any and all permissions and consents heretofore given by the said
Township of Washington.
§ A259-33. Advertising and legal fees.
Said company shall pay the expenses incurred for advertising done in
connection with the passage of this ordinance within 30 days after the date
of its going into effect. Said company shall also reimburse the Township for
reasonable legal fees expended in connection with the enactment of this
ordinance.
§ A259-34. Written acceptance by company.
Said company shall file with the Township Clerk of this Township its written
acceptance of this ordinance within 30 days after the date of receipt by it
from the Township Clerk of notice of the passage and approval thereof, and
said ordinance shall, upon the filing of such acceptance, become effective
subject to approval by the Board of Public Utility Commissioners of the
State of New Jersey.
§ A259-35. Fee for use of right-of-way.
The parties hereto acknowledge and agree that as of the effective date of
this ordinance, New Jersey law does not permit a municipality to charge
a fee for use of the municipal right-of-way. The parties agree that, in the
event that the New Jersey law is modified to allow imposition of such a fee
by a municipality, then the Township may terminate and renegotiate this
agreement.
§ A259-36. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is
for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not
affect the remaining portions of this ordinance.
§ A259-37. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage, approval
and publication as required by law.
§ A259-32 WATER § A259-37
255:1055

ARTICLE III
Verizon New Jersey, Inc.
[Adopted 2-17-2014 by Ord. No. 01-14]
§ A259-38. Permission granted.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:17-10, N.J.S.A. 48:17-11, and
N.J.S.A. 48:17-12, permission and consent is hereby granted to Verizon New
Jersey Inc., (the "company"), its successors and assigns, to install, operate,
inspect, maintain, repair, replace and remove its communications facilities
and other transmission or process equipment, including underground
facilities, such as conduits, manholes, cables, wires, and all other facilities
appurtenant thereto, and aboveground facilities, such as cables, wires,
antennas, poles, posts, supports, guys, pedestals, cable termination and
distribution cabinets and all other facilities appurtenant thereto, in,
through, upon, along, over, under, and across all of the various public
streets and ways, which include the roads, avenues, right-of-way, sidewalks,
highways, bridges, waterways, and other public places, and parts thereof,
throughout their entire length, and to effect the necessary street openings
and lateral connections to curb poles, property lines and other facilities in
the Township of Washington (the "Township") for said company's local and
through lines and other communications facilities in connection with the
transaction of its business. In the event that any public street or way where
the company has facilities is vacated by the Township, the Township agrees
to reserve unto said company the rights granted the company by the present
ordinance.
§ A259-39. Placement of poles, posts, pedestals, cabinets and other
facilities.
All poles, posts, pedestals, cabinets, or other facilities shall be located and
placed back of the curblines where shown on the official map(s) of the
Township; the poles and posts, however, shall be located within 18 inches
of the face of such curbline or as may otherwise be mutually agreed by
both parties, or at the points or places now occupied by the poles, posts,
pedestals, cabinets, or other facilities of the company, its successors and
assigns, and where there are no curblines, at other convenient points or
places in, upon, along, adjacent, or across the public streets and ways as
may be mutually agreed upon between the parties.
§ A259-40. Placement of local and through communications
facilities.
The company may bury its local and through communications facilities such
as cables, conduit, manholes and associated equipment, fixtures, process
equipment and appurtenances within the right-of-way of the various public
streets and ways and at such locations as shall be mutually agreed upon by
the parties for said company's local and through lines and communications
facilities. Underground conduits and associated facilities, as
aforementioned, shall be placed at least 18 inches below the surface of said
§ A259-38 WATER § A259-40
255:1057
public streets and ways and with the exception of lateral branches to curb
poles and property lines and other facilities, the same shall generally not be
constructed more than 10 feet from the curbline, unless obstructions make
it necessary to deviate from such course or unless the parties mutually
agree to another location. Manholes shall be located at such points along
the line of underground conduits as may be necessary or convenient for
placing, maintaining, and operating the facilities, as aforementioned, which
the company may from time to time use in connection with its underground
conduit system and shall be so constructed as to conform to the crosssectional
and longitudinal grade of the surface so as not to interfere with
the safety or convenience of persons or vehicles.
§ A259-41. Notice prior to work; permits; restoration of affected
area.
Before proceeding with any new construction or relocation work in an
area covered by this ordinance, the company shall give prior notice in
writing thereof to the Township, through its designated representative,
of its intention to perform such work. The company shall obtain such
street opening or excavation permits as may be lawfully required by any
applicable ordinances regulating such openings or excavations. Any such
area affected by the company in constructing its facilities shall be restored
to as good condition as it was before the commencement of work thereon.
No public streets or ways shall be encumbered for a period longer than shall
be reasonable to execute the work.
§ A259-42. Indemnification.
The company agrees to indemnify and save harmless the Township from and
against all claims and liabilities resulting from any injury or damage to the
person or property of any person, firm or corporation caused by or arising
out of road conditions resulting from any negligent or faulty excavations,
installation or maintenance connected with the work or equipment of said
company, and not attributable to the fault or negligence of the Township
except that if such injury or damage shall be caused by the joint or
concurring negligence or fault of the company and the Township, the same
shall be borne by them to the extent of their respective fault or negligence.
§ A259-43. Establishment or relocation of curbline.
Whenever a curbline shall be established on streets where one does not now
exist or where an established curbline shall be relocated in order to widen
an existing street in conjunction with road construction being performed
by the Township, the company shall change the location of its aboveground
facilities covered by this ordinance in accordance with applicable law, so
that the same shall be back of, and adjacent to, the new curbline so
long as the Township has acted in accordance with applicable law and
with reasonable care in establishing the new curbline and providing notice
thereof.
§ A259-40 WASHINGTON CODE § A259-44
255:1058
§ A259-44. Use of company's property by others.
Any company or corporation having legal authority to place its facilities in
the public streets and ways of the Township may jointly use the company's
poles, posts, pedestals or other structures for all lawful purposes, provided
the company consents to such use, on terms and conditions acceptable
to the company and not inconsistent with the provisions of the present
ordinance.
§ A259-45. Space for use by Township.
The company shall provide space, to the extent available, on its poles
so long as said poles are occupied by the company and space, to the
extent available, in its main conduits existing on the date of passage of
this ordinance, but not exceeding one duct of standard size, for the sole
benefit of the Township during the pendancy of this ordinance. Such space
shall be provided for the exclusive use of the Township which use shall
be limited to accommodating the wires or electrical conductors required
for one-way signal control in connection with municipal police patrol, fire
alarm signal control and traffic signal control systems only; but for no
other uses or purposes, either alone or in conjunction therewith; nor for
circuits for the supply of electrical energy for traffic or other signals; nor
for wires, conductors, cable or the equivalent which provide a means of
transmitting any signal to a private, commercial or residential location,
and which is normally provided by a nongovernmental supplier; provided,
further, that no such use or attachment by the Township shall interfere
with the plant or facilities of or the use thereof by the company. All costs
or expenses incurred by the company in connection therewith shall be
paid by the Township. It shall be the obligation of the Township to attach
its wires to the poles or place its electric conductors in the conduits or
manholes of the company, provided that before proceeding with said work,
either by itself or by a person, firm or corporation engaged to perform
such work, the Township shall give the company 30 days prior notice in
writing. All such work shall be performed under the supervision of said
company. The Township will indemnify and save harmless the company
from and against all claims, liabilities or demands arising in any manner
in connection with the Township's wires or facilities or their installation,
maintenance, operation or removal, or the Township's use or enjoyment of
the company's plant or facilities provided under this § A259-45.
§ A259-46. Transfer of rights and privileges to county or state.
If any or all of the said streets or ways are later taken over by the County
of Morris or the State of New Jersey, such county or state shall have such
rights and privileges and be subject to the same terms, conditions and
limitations of use as apply herein to the Township; provided, however, that
satisfactory prior arrangements as may be necessary are made with the
Township and the company for the full protection of the respective interest
of each.
§ A259-44 WATER § A259-47
255:1059
§ A259-47. Terms defined.
The term "Township" as used in this ordinance shall be held to apply to and
include any form of municipality or government into which the Township or
any part thereof may at any time hereafter be changed, annexed, or merged.
§ A259-48. Applicability.
The permission and consent hereby granted shall apply to and cover all
communications facilities of the company existing at any time, and related
structures, process equipment, and appurtenances heretofore or hereafter
erected, constructed, reconstructed, removed, located, relocated, replaced,
maintained, repaired, or operated by the company, its predecessors,
successors, or assigns within the Township. This ordinance shall cancel
and supersede all prior consent ordinances between the Township and the
company regarding the subject matter hereof.
§ A259-49. Obligation of company.
The company shall maintain its property within the Township and shall
comply with applicable law for the provision of safe, adequate and proper
service at just and reasonable rates, and safeguard the public interest in
continuous and uninterrupted service within the Township
§ A259-50. Opening or acceptance of streets.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to impose any obligation on
the part of the Township to open any streets, roads avenues or highways
or parts thereof not heretofore dedicated or open to the public use, and
nothing herein contained shall be construed in any court or place as an
acceptance of an unaccepted street, road, avenue or highway, or any part
thereof.
§ A259-51. No exclusive rights implied.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to grant the company, its
successors and assigns, an exclusive right or to permit the granting or
consent to other companies for like purposes on any of the streets, roads,
avenues or highways of the Township.
§ A259-52. Duration and terms of agreement.
The consent and permission given and granted by this ordinance shall
continue and be enforced for a period of 10 years from the date of approval
thereof, and throughout the full term of this ordinance, the company, its
successors and assigns, shall furnish safe, adequate and proper service
within the Township and maintain its property and equipment in such
condition to enable it to do so.
§ A259-47 WASHINGTON CODE § A259-53
255:1060
§ A259-53. Advertising expenses; notice of approval; amendments.
The company shall pay the expenses incurred for advertising required in
connection with the passage of this ordinance, after the date of its first
reading, within 30 days after the company has received a bill for said
advertising from the publisher. Following final passage of this ordinance,
the Township Clerk shall provide the company with written notice thereof
by certified mail. As provided by applicable law, this ordinance, and any
subsequent amendments, shall not become effective until acceptance
thereof by the company and approval thereof by the Board of Public Utility
Commissioners.
§ A259-54. Repealer.
All ordinances of the Township which are inconsistent with the provisions of
this ordinance, are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ A259-55. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is
for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not
affect the remaining portions of this ordinance.
§ A259-56. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication and approval of the Board of Public Utility Commissioners, as
required by law.
§ A259-53 WATER § A259-56
255:1061
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
28-98 9-21-1998 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 111
29-98 9-21-1998 Police Department:
establishment
amendment
Ch. 27, Art. I
30-98 9-21-1998 Land use procedures
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 111 & 217
31-98 9-21-1998 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
32-98 10-19-1998 Acquisition of property NCM
33-98 10-19-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 203
34-98 10-19-1998 Vacation of basin access
easement and dedication
of new access easement
NCM
35-98 11-16-1998 Towing Ch. 192
36-98 11-16-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
37-98 11-16-1998 Communications
facilities
Ch. A259
38-98 12-21-1998 Bond NCM
39-98 12-21-1998 Appropriation NCM
40-98 12-21-1998 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 27, Art. I
41-98 12-21-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 203
42-98 12-21-1998 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 175
43-98 12-21-1998 Acquisition of property NCM
1-99 2-15-1999 Adoption of Code by
Township Committee
Ch. 1, Art. II
§ A259-56 WASHINGTON CODE § DL-1
255:1062
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-99
(Board of
Health)
2-23-1999 Adoption of Code by
Board of Health
Ch. 221, Art. II
2-99 3-15-1999 Administration of
government amendment;
peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 3; Ch. 140
3-99 3-15-1999 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 24
4-99 3-15-1999 Land use procedures
amendment; site plan
review amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 111; Ch. 159; Ch.
217
5-99 4-19-1999 Land use procedures
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 111; Ch. 217
6-99 10-18-1999 Acquisition and
appropriation
amendment
NCM
7-99 4-19-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
8-99 4-19-1999 Recycling amendment Ch. 168, Art. I
9-99 5-17-1999 Salaries NCM
10-99 5-17-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 203
11-99 5-17-1999 Street name change NCM
12-99 5-17-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 203
13-99 5-17-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
14-99 6-21-1999 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 175
15-99 6-21-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
16-99 7-19-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
17-99 7-19-1999 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 111
18-99 7-19-1999 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 111
19-99 7-19-1999 Site plan review
amendment
Ch. 159
20-99 7-19-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
255:1063
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
21-99 7-19-1999 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 111
22-99 7-19-1999 Salaries NCM
23-99 7-19-1999 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 111
24-99 7-19-1999 Appropriation NCM
25-99 8-16-1999 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 24
3-99
(Board of
Health)
11-23-1999 Tattoo and body-piercing
establishments
Ch. 252
4-99
(Board of
Health)
11-23-1999 Retail food
establishments
amendment
Ch. 239
26-99 12-20-1999 Authorization of
agreement
NCM
27-99 10-18-1999 Property acceptance NCM
28-99 11-15-1999 Appropriation NCM
29-99 11-15-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 203
30-99 11-15-1999 Easement conveyance NCM
31-99 12-20-1999 Acquisition of real
property; appropriation
NCM
32-99 12-20-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 203
33-99 12-20-1999 Communications
facilities: United
Telephone Company
Ch. A259, Art. II
34-99 12-20-1999 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 111
1-00 2-21-2000 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
2-00 3-20-2000 Land use procedures
amendment; site plan
review amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 111; Ch. 159; Ch.
217
3-00 2-21-2000 Land use procedures
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 111; Ch. 217
§ DL-1 WASHINGTON CODE § DL-1
255:1064
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-00 2-21-2000 Salaries NCM
5-00 2-21-2000 Salaries NCM
6-00 3-20-2000 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
7-00 3-20-2000 Bond NCM
8-00 3-20-2000 Bond NCM
9-00 4-17-2000 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
10-00 4-17-2000 Appropriation NCM
11-00 4-17-2000 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 175
12-00 5-15-2000 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 27, Art. I
13-00 4-17-2000 Salaries NCM
14-00 5-1-2000 Bond NCM
1-00
(Board of
Health)
5-23-2000 Tobacco products on
school property
Ch. 253, Art. I
15-00 6-19-2000 Salaries NCM
16-00 6-19-2000 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 27, Art. I
17-00 6-19-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
18-00 6-19-2000 Vacation of right-of-way NCM
19-00 8-21-2000 Street openings
amendment
Ch. 172, Art. V
20-00 Voted down
21-00 8-21-2000 Length of service awards
program
Ch. 17
22-00 9-18-2000 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 87
23-00 9-18-2000 Driveway construction
amendment
Ch. 172, Art. III
24-00 11-20-2000 Alcoholic beverages:
possession or
consumption by minors
on private property
Ch. 42, Art. II
25-00 10-16-2000 Execution of deeds NCM
26-00 11-20-2000 Conveyance of easement NCM
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
255:1065
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
27-00 11-20-2000 Farmland preservation
program for particular
property
NCM
3-00
(Board of
Health)
11-28-2000 Retail food
establishments
amendment
Ch. 239
4-00
(Board of
Health)
11-28-2000 Individual sewage
disposal systems
amendment
Ch. 247, Art. I
28-00 12-18-2000 Property conveyance NCM
29-00 12-18-2000 Easement vacation NCM
30-00 12-18-2000 Alarm systems
amendment
Ch. 39
31-00 12-18-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 203
32-00 12-18-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 203
33-00 12-18-2000 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 87
34-00 12-18-2000 Soil removal amendment Ch. 164
35-00 12-18-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 203
36-00 12-18-2000 Land use amendment;
site plan amendment;
subdivision amendment
Chs. 111, 159, 175
37-00 12-18-2000 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 111
1-01 3-19-2001 Conveyance of land NCM
2-01 3-19-2001 Confirmation of Ord. No.
02-00
NCM
3-01 3-19-2001 Bond NCM
4-01 3-19-2001 Conveyance of
recreational trail
easement
NCM
5-01 3-19-2001 Land use amendment;
subdivision of land
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 111, 175, 217
6-01 3-19-2001 Utility easement
conveyance
NCM
§ DL-1 WASHINGTON CODE § DL-1
255:1066
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-01 3-19-2001 Site plan review
amendment; subdivision
of land amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 159, 175, 217
8-01 4-16-2001 Right-of-way vacation NCM
9-01 4-16-2001 Street vacation NCM
10-01 4-16-2001 Conveyance of land NCM
11-01 4-16-2001 Salaries NCM
12-01 5-21-2001 Site plan review
amendment; subdivision
of land amendment
Chs. 159, 175
13-01 5-21-2001 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 175
14-01 6-18-2001 Land use procedures
amendment; site plan
review amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 111, 159, 217
15-01 6-18-2001 Alarm systems
amendment
Ch. 39
16-01 6-18-2001 Bond NCM
17-01 6-18-2001 Bond NCM
2-01
(Board of
Health)
6-25-2001 Public bathing
amendment
Ch. 235
18-01 7-16-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 203
19-01 7-16-2001 Appropriation NCM
20-01 7-16-2001 Conveyance of easement NCM
21-01 7-16-2001 Establishment of Police
Department amendment
Ch. 27, Art. I
22-01 8-20-2001 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 175
23-01 Tabled
24-01 8-20-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
25-01 9-17-2001 Accept donation of
property
NCM
26-01 9-17-2001 Conveyance of property NCM
27-01 9-17-2001 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
255:1067
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
28-01 9-17-2001 Zoning Map amendment NCM
29-01 9-17-2001 Accept donation of
property
NCM
30-01 10-15-2001 Land use procedures and
zoning amendment
Chs. 111 and 217
31-01 10-15-2001 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 175
32-01 10-15-2001 Subdivision of land and
zoning amendment
Chs. 175 and 217
03-01
(Board of
Health)
10-23-2001 Water Ch. 255
33-01 11-19-2001 Conveyance of
development rights
NCM
34-01 11-19-2001 Length of service awards
program amendment
Ch. 17
35-01 11-19-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
36-01 11-19-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
37-01 12-17-2001 Street openings
amendment
Ch. 172, Art. V
38-01 12-17-2001 Acquisition of property NCM
1-02 2-18-2002 Acquisition of property NCM
2-02 2-18-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 203
3-02 Subdivision of land
amendment
Not passed
4-02 2-18-2002 Streets and sidewalks:
street openings
amendment
Ch. 172, Art. V
5-02 2-18-2002 Towing amendment Ch. 192
6-02 3-18-2002 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 175
7-02 3-18-2002 Farmland preservation
program for a particular
property
NCM
8-02 3-18-2002 Salaries NCM
9-02 3-18-2002 Acquisition of property NCM
10-02 3-18-2002 Towing amendment Ch. 192
§ DL-1 WASHINGTON CODE § DL-1
255:1068
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-02 4-15-2002 Acquisition of property NCM
12-02 4-15-2002 Conveyance of property NCM
13-02 Streets and sidewalks:
driveway construction
amendment
Not passed
14-02 4-15-2002 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 175
15-02 5-20-2002 Acquisition of property NCM
16-02 5-20-2002 Bond NCM
17-02 5-20-20002 Bond NCM
18-02 5-20-2002 Site plan review
amendment; subdivision
of land amendment
Ch. 159; Ch. 175
19-02 5-20-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 203
20-02 5-20-2002 Streets and sidewalks:
driveway construction
amendment
Ch. 172, Art. III
21-02 5-20-2002 Salaries NCM
22-02 6-17-2002 Streets and sidewalks:
specifications for street
acceptances amendment;
driveway construction
amendment; subdivision
of land; amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 172, Arts. I and III;
Ch. 175; Ch. 217
23-02 6-17-2002 Land use fees
amendment
Chs. 111; 159; 187;
217
24-02 Land use amendment Tabled
25-02 6-17-2002 Land acquisition NCM
26-02 7-15-2002 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 27, Art. I
27-02 7-15-2002 Salaries NCM
28-02 11-18-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
29-02 Withdrawn
30-02 8-19-2002 Streets and sidewalks:
driveway construction
amendment
Ch. 172, Art. III
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
255:1069
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
31-02 8-19-2002 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 175
32-02 8-19-2002 Land use amendments:
outdoor lighting
Chs. 111; 159; 175;
217
33-02 11-18-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
34-02 9-16-2002 Mutual fire aid Ch. 13, Art. II
35-02 9-16-2002 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 24
36-02 9-16-2002 Salaries amendment NCM
37-02 11-18-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
38-02 10-21-2002 Vacate easement NCM
39-02 10-21-2002 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 175
40-02 10-21-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
41-02 10-21-2002 Acquisition of property NCM
42-02 10-21-2002 Salaries NCM
43-02 2-02
(Board of
Health)
11-18-2002
11-26-2002
Vehicles and traffic
amendment Water
amendment
Ch. 203 Ch. 255
44-02 12-16-2002 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 111
45-02 12-16-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
1-03 1-20-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
1-03
(Board of
Health)
2-25-2003 Water amendment Ch. 255
2-03 2-27-2003 Conveyance of right-ofway
NCM
3-03 2-27-2002 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 175
4-03 2-27-2002 Acquisition of lease-hold
interest
NCM
5-03 3-17-2003 Development easement NCM
6-03 3-17-2003 Fire Department
amendment; personnel
policies amendment
Chs. 13 and 24
7-03 3-17-2003 Sale of property NCM
8-03 3-17-2003 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 WASHINGTON CODE § DL-1
255:1070
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
9-03 4-21-2003 Driveway construction
amendment
Ch. 172, Art. III
10-03 4-21-2003 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 56
11-03 4-21-2003 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
12-03 4-21-2003 Bulky waste cleanup fees Ch. 168, Art. II
13-03 4-21-2003 Salaries NCM
14-03 7-21-2003 Bond NCM
15-03 4-21-2003 Land use procedures and
zoning amendment
Chs. 111, 217
16-2003 5-19-2003 Sale of property NCM
17-2003 5-19-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
18-2003 5-19-2003 Appropriation NCM
19-2003 5-19-2003 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 111
20-2003 6-16-2003 Salaries NCM
21-2003 6-16-2003 Bond NCM
22-2003 6-16-2003 Bond NCM
23-2003 7-21-2003 Land use amendments Chs. 111, 175, 217
24-2003 7-21-2003 Parks and recreation
areas amendment
Ch. 137
25-2003 Withdrawn
26-2003 8-18-2003 Conveyance of easement NCM
27-2003 8-18-2003 Dedication of right-ofway
NCM
28-2003 8-18-2003 Salaries NCM
29-03 10-20-2003 Appropriation NCM
30-03 11-17-2003 Salaries NCM
1-04 2-16-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
2-04 2-16-2004 Driveway construction
amendment
Ch. 172, Art. III
3-04 2-16-2004 Easement NCM
4-04 3-15-2004 Cable television
franchise amendment
Ch. A258
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
255:1071
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-04 3-15-2004 Loitering repealed;
peace and good order
amendment
Chs. 117, 140
6-04 3-15-2004 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
1-04
(Board of
Health)
3-23-2004 Public bathing
amendment
Ch. 235
2-04
(Board of
Health)
3-23-2004 Retail food
establishments
amendment
Ch. 239
3-04
(Board of
Health)
4-27-2004 Individual sewage
systems amendment
Ch. 247, Art. I
4-04
(Board of
Health)
3-23-2004 Public noncommunity
and nonpublic water
systems amendment
Ch. 255, Art. I
7-04 4-19-2004 Sale of easement NCM
8-04 4-19-2004 Bond NCM
9-04 4-19-2004 Bond NCM
10-04 4-19-2004 Bond NCM
11-04 4-19-2004 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
12-04 5-17-2004 Salaries NCM
13-04 5-17-2004 Driveway construction
amendment
Ch. 172, Art. III
14-04 6-21-2004 Land use procedures and
subdivision of land
amendment
Chs. 111 and 175
15-04 7-19-2004 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 87
16-04 7-19-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
17-04 8-16-2004 Driveway construction
and street openings
amendment
Ch. 172, Arts. III V
18-04 8-16-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
19-04 8-16-2004 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
20-04 8-16-2004 Convey easement NCM
§ DL-1 WASHINGTON CODE § DL-1
255:1072
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
21-04 9-20-2004 Alcoholic beverages:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 42, Art. I
22-04 9-20-2004 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 175
23-04 9-20-2004 Acquisition of easement NCM
24-04 9-20-2004 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 143
25-04 11-15-2004 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 111
26-04 11-15-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
27-04 12-20-2004 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
28-04 12-20-2004 Appropriation NCM
1-05 1-17-2005 Salaries NCM
1-05
(Board of
Health)
? Salaries NCM
2-05 2-21-2005 Site plan review and
subdivision of land
amendment
Chs. 159, 175
3-05 2-21-2005 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
4-05 2-21-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 203
5-05 2-21-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 203
6-05 2-21-2005 Conveyance of easement NCM
7-05 2-21-2005 Accept donation of land NCM
8-05 3-21-2005 Land use procedures and
subdivision of land
amendment
Chs. 111, 175
9-05 3-21-2005 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 111
10-05 3-21-2005 Illicit storm sewer
connection
Ch. 155, Art. II
11-05 3-21-2005 Solid waste amendment Ch. 168
12-05 3-21-2005 Feeding of wildlife Ch. 46, Art. IV
13-05 3-21-2005 Littering amendment Ch. 114
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
255:1073
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
14-05 3-21-2005 Animal wastes
amendment
Ch. 46, Art. I
15-05 4-18-2005 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 87
16-05 4-18-2005 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
17-05 5-16-2005 Animals amendment;
littering amendment;
sewers amendment
Ch. 46, Art. IV; Ch.
114; Ch.155, Art. II
18-05 5-16-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
19-05 5-16-2005 Bond NCM
20-05 5-16-2005 Exceed budget
appropriations limits
NCM
2-05
(Board of
Health)
5-24-2005 Retail food
establishments
amendment
Ch. 239
21-05 6-20-2005 Acquisition of property NCM
22-05 6-20-2005 Acquisition of property NCM
23-05 6-20-2005 Street openings
amendment
Ch. 172, Art. V
24-05 6-20-2005 Salaries NCM
25-05 7-18-2005 Length of service awards
program amendment
Ch. 17
26-05 7-18-2005 Land use procedures and
zoning amendment
Chs. 111 and. 217
27-05 7-18-2005 Land use procedures and
zoning amendment
Chs. 111 and 217
28-05 8-15-2005 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
29-05 8-15-2005 Acquisition of land NCM
30-05 8-15-2005 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 111
31-05 8-15-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 203
32-05 8-15-2005 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 111
33-05 8-15-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 203
34-05 8-30-2005 Acquisition of land NCM
§ DL-1 WASHINGTON CODE § DL-1
255:1074
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
35-05 9-19-2005 Land use procedures and
zoning amendment
Chs. 111 and 217
36-05 9-19-2005 Land use procedures and
zoning amendment
Chs. 111 and 217
37-05 9-19-2005 Driveways amendment Ch. 172, Art. III
38-05 10-17-2005 Soil disturbance Ch. 164
39-05 10-17-2005 Lease of property NCM
40-05 11-21-2005 Bond NCM
41-05 11-21-2005 Acquisition of property NCM
42-05 Withdrawn
43-05 12-19-2005 Land use procedures
amendment; site plan
review amendment;
subdivision of land
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 111, 159, 175 and
217
44-05 12-19-2005 Land use procedures
amendment and zoning
amendment
Chs. 111 and 217
45-05 12-19-2005 Fertilizer and pesticide
management
Ch. 85
46-05 12-19-2005 Stormwater management Ch. 170
47-05 12-19-2005 Bond NCM
48-05 12-19-2005 Bond NCM
49-05 12-19-2005 Salaries NCM
50-05 12-19-2005 Acquisition of property NCM
1-06 2-20-2006 Alcoholic beverages:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 42, Art. I
2-06 2-20-2006 Solid waste: fee schedule
amendment
Ch. 168, Art. II
3-06 3-20-2006 Purchase of easement NCM
4-06 4-17-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
5-06 5-15-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
6-06 5-15-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
7-06 5-15-2006 Exceed budget
appropriations limits
NCM
8-06 5-15-2006 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
255:1075
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
9-06 6-19-2006 Salaries NCM
10-06 6-19-2006 Salaries NCM
11-06 6-19-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
12-06 6-19-2006 Highway solicitations Ch. 143, Art. II
13-06 7-17-2006 Emergency appropriation NCM
14-06 7-17-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
15-06 7-17-2006 Land use procedures and
zoning amendment
Chs. 111, 217
16-06 8-21-2006 Salaries NCM
17-06 9-18-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
18-06 11-20-2006 Reconveyance of
property
NCM
19-06 11-20-2006 Salaries NCM
20-06 11-20-2006 First Aid Squad Chs. 3, 14
21-06 11-20-2006 Personnel policies
repealer
Ch. 24 (reference only)
22-06 11-20-2006 Land use procedures
amendment; site plan
review amendment
Chs. 111, 159
23-06 11-20-2006 Bond NCM
24-06 12-18-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 203
25-06 12-18-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
26-06 12-18-2006 Conveyance of easement NCM
27-06 12-18-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
1-07 2-19-2007 Fire Department:
establishment,
organization and
administration
amendment
Ch. 13, Art. I
2-07 2-19-2007 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
3-07 2-19-2007 Animals: dog licensing
amendment
Ch. 46, Art. I
4-07 2-19-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
5-07 2-19-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
6-07 2-19-2007 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 111
§ DL-1 WASHINGTON CODE § DL-1
255:1076
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-07 2-19-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
8-07 4-16-2007 Acquisition of property NCM
9-07 4-16-2007 Penalties amendment Chs. 1, Art. I; 39; 46,
Arts. I and IV; 74, Art.
I; 85; 92; 101; 114;
129; 132; 137; 140;
143, Art. I; 155, Arts. I
and II; 164; 168, Art. I;
170; 175; 185; 207;
217
10-07
(Board of
Health)
4-16-2007 Tobacco products: on
recreational facilities
owned or maintained by
the Township
Ch. 253, Art. II
11-07 5-21-2007 Exceed budget
appropriations limits
NCM
12-07 5-21-2007 Bond NCM
13-07 5-21-2007 Salaries NCM
14-07 5-21-2007 Salaries NCM
15-07 5-21-2007 Conveyance of
development rights
NCM
16-07 6-18-2007 Administration of
Government: Economic
Development Advisory
Committee
Ch. 3, Art. XXXIV
1-07
(Board of
Health)
6-26-2007 Retail food
establishments
Ch. 239
17-07 7-16-2007 Cable agreement:
Comcast renewal
Ch. A258
18-07 7-16-2007 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 137
19-07 8-20-2007 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
20-07 8-20-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
21-07 8-20-2007 Fire Department: Junior
Firemen's Auxiliary
Ch. 13, Art. III
22-07 8-20-2007 Salaries NCM
23-07 9-17-2007 First Aid Squad
amendment
Ch. 14
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
255:1077
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
24-07 9-17-2007 Grant of lease NCM
25-07 9-17-2007 Salaries NCM
26-07 9-17-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
27-07 10-15-2007 Acquisition of property NCM
28-07 12-17-2007 Criminal history
background checks: Fire
Department and First Aid
Squad
Ch. 9, Art. I
01-08 3-17-2008 Bond NCM
02-08 3-17-2008 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 111
03-08 4-21-2008 Salaries NCM
04-08 4-21-2008 Solid waste: recycling
amendment
Ch. 168, Art. I
05-08 4-21-2008 Building construction:
uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 56, Art. II
06-08 Voted down
07-08 5-19-2008 Bond NCM
08-08 5-19-2008 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
09-08 6-16-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 203
10-08 6-16-2008 Cable television
franchise amendment
Ch. A258
11-08 6-16-2008 Salaries NCM
12-08 6-16-2008 Exceed budget
appropriation limits
NCM
13-08 8-18-2008 Site plan review
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 159; 217
14-08 8-18-2008 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 111
15-08 8-18-2008 Officers and employees:
defined contribution
retirement program
Ch. 21, Art. II
16-08 9-15-2008 Sale of property NCM
§ DL-1 WASHINGTON CODE § DL-1
255:1078
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17-08 9-15-2008 Dog licensing
amendment; cats
amendment
Ch. 46, Arts. I and II
18-08 9-15-2008 Site plan review
amendment
Ch. 159
19-08 12-15-2008 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 27, Art. I
20-08 12-15-2008 Acquisition of property NCM
21-08 12-15-2008 Trust fund reserves
appropriation
NCM
01-09 2-16-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
02-09 4-20-2009 Exceed budget
appropriation limits
NCM
03-09 4-20-2009 Salaries NCM
04-09 4-20-2009 Parks and recreation
areas amendment
Ch. 137
05-09 4-20-2009 Salaries NCM
06-09 5-18-2009 Building construction:
uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 56, Art. II
07-09 5-18-2009 Bond NCM
08-09 5-18-2009 Towing amendment Ch. 192
09-09 5-18-2009 Criminal history
background checks
amendment
Ch. 9, Art. I
10-09 5-18-2009 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 143, Art. I
11-09 5-18-2009 Taxicabs and limousines
amendment
Ch. 185
12-09 6-15-2009 Salaries NCM
13-09 6-15-2009 Salaries NCM
14-09 6-15-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
15-09 6-15-2009 Acquisition of property NCM
16-09 7-20-2009 Alarm systems
amendment
Ch. 39
17-09 10-19-2009 Conveyance of easement NCM
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
255:1079
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
18-09 7-20-2009 Administration of
government: fees
amendment
Ch. 3, Art. XXV
19-09 7-20-2009 Conveyance of trail
easement
NCM
20-09 8-17-2009 Streets and sidewalks:
removal of snow and ice
amendment
Ch. 172, Art. IV
21-09 8-17-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
22-09 8-17-2009 Appropriation NCM
23-09 9-21-2009 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 143, Art. I
24-09 9-21-2009 Alarm systems
amendment
Ch. 39
25-09 9-21-2009 Dog licensing
amendment
Ch. 46, Art. I
26-09 9-21-2009 Acquisition of property NCM
27-09 11-16-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
28-09 11-16-2009 Sale of property NCM
29-09 12-21-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
30-09 12-21-2009 Land use procedures
amendment; subdivision
of land amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 111; 175; 217
01-10 2-15-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
02-10 2-15-2010 Land use procedures
amendment; subdivision
of land amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 111; 175; 217
03-10 2-15-2010 Conveyance of easement
amendment (to Ord. No.
17-09)
NCM
04-10 2-15-2010 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 87
05-10 2-15-2010 Site plan review
amendment; subdivision
of land amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 159; 175; 217
06-10 2-15-2010 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
§ DL-1 WASHINGTON CODE § DL-1
255:1080
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
07-10 3-15-2010 Parks and recreation
areas amendment
Ch. 137
08-10 3-15-2010 Building construction:
uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 56
09-10 5-17-2010 Conservation easement
vacation
NCM
10-10 6-21-2010 Salaries NCM
11-10 6-21-2010 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
12-10 7-19-2010 Street vacation NCM
13-10 7-19-2010 Sale of property NCM
14-10 7-19-2010 Abandoned vehicles
amendment
Ch. 200
15-10 7-19-2010 Appropriation NCM
16-10 7-19-2010 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
17-10 8-16-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
18-10 8-16-2010 Easement vacation NCM
19-10 9-20-2010 Appropriation NCM
20-10 10-18-2010 Parks and recreation
areas amendment
Ch. 137
21-10 10-18-2010 Private storm drain inlet
retrofitting
Ch. 170, Art. II
22-10 10-18-2010 Dumpsters and refuse
containers
Ch. 81, Art. I
23-10 10-18-2010 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
24-10 11-15-2010 Salaries NCM
25-10 11-15-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 203
26-10 12-20-2010 Disapproval of farmland
preservation petition
NCM
27-10 12-20-2010 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
01-11 2-21-2011 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
02-11 2-21-2011 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
255:1081
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
03-11 4-18-2011 Land use procedures
amendment; site plan
review amendment;
stormwater control
amendment; and zoning
amendment
Chs. 111; 159; 170;
217
04-11 4-18-2011 Salaries NCM
05-11 7-18-2011 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
06-11 5-16-2011 Salaries NCM
07-11 5-16-2011 Officers and employees:
post-retirement health
benefits
Ch. 21, Art. III
08-11 6-20-2011 Conservation easement
vacation
NCM
09-11 6-20-2011 Parks and recreation
areas amendment
Ch. 137
10-11 6-20-2011 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 148
11-11 7-18-2011 Easement acceptance NCM
12-11 8-15-2011 Appropriation NCM
13-11 9-19-2011 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 170, Art. I
14-11 9-19-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 203
15-11 10-17-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 203
16-11 11-21-2011 Streets and sidewalks:
driveway construction
amendment
Ch. 172, Art. III
17-11 11-21-2011 Soil disturbance
amendment
Ch. 164
01-12 2-20-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 203
02-12 3-19-2012 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 111
03-12 3-19-2012 Mutual aid agreement NCM
04-12 4-16-2012 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
05-12 4-16-2012 Site plan review
amendment
Ch. 159
§ DL-1 WASHINGTON CODE § DL-1
255:1082
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
06-12 4-16-2012 Alarm systems
amendment
Ch. 39
07-12 5-21-2012 Appropriation NCM
08-12 5-21-2012 Assignment of easement NCM
09-12 5-21-2012 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 111
10-12 6-18-2012 Construction of
maintenance garage
NCM
11-12 6-18-2012 Bond NCM
12-12 6-18-2012 Salaries NCM
13-12 7-16-2012 Site plan review
amendment
Ch. 159
14-12 7-16-2012 Mutual aid agreement NCM
15-12 Not adopted
16-12 7-11-2012 Acquisition of property NCM
17-12 9-17-2012 Salaries NCM
18-12 9-17-2012 Grant of easement NCM
19-12 12-17-2012 Acquisition of property NCM
01-13 2-18-2013 Street name change NCM
02-13 3-18-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
03-13 3-18-2013 Construction of
maintenance garage
amendment
NCM
04-13 3-18-2013 Awarding of public
contracts
Ch. 7, Art. I
05-13 3-18-2013 Acquisition of property NCM
06-13 4-15-2013 Taxicabs and limousines
amendment
Ch. 185
07-13 4-15-2013 Conservation easement
modification
NCM
08-13 5-20-2013 Highlands Council
petition for plan
conformance
NCM
09-13 5-20-2013 Parks and recreation
areas amendment
Ch. 137
10-13 5-20-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
11-13 6-17-2013 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
255:1083
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
12-13 6-17-2013 Salaries NCM
13-13 6-17-2013 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 42, Art. I
14-13 6-17-2013 Bond NCM
15-13 6-17-2013 Soil removal amendment Ch. 164
16-13 9-16-2013 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 111
17-13 9-16-2013 Conveyance of property NCM
18-13 10-21-2013 Easement agreement NCM
19-13 11-18-2013 Police Department:
establishment
amendment
Ch. 27, Art. I
01-14 2-17-2014 Communications
facilities: Verizon New
Jersey, Inc.
Ch. A259, Art. III
02-14 3-17-2014 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
03-14 Not adopted
04-14 4-21-2014 Police Department:
establishment
amendment
Ch. 27, Art. I
05-14 4-21-2014 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 175
06-14 4-21-2014 Alarm systems
amendment
Ch. 39
07-14 4-21-2014 Conservation easement
revision
NCM
08-14 5-19-2014 Bond NCM
09-14 6-16-2014 Land use procedures
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 111; 217
10-14 6-16-2014 Salaries NCM
11-14 6-16-2014 Land exchange NCM
12-14 8-18-2014 Highlands Area
exemptions
Ch. 103
13-14 8-18-2014 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 111
14-14 9-15-2014 Salaries and
compensation: direct
deposit
Ch. 31, Art. I
§ DL-1 WASHINGTON CODE § DL-1
255:1084
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
15-14 10-20-2014 Lease of property NCM
16-14 10-20-2014 Animals: dog licensing
amendment; cats
amendment
Ch. 46, Arts. I and II
17-14 12-15-2014 Brush, grass and weeds
amendment; property
maintenance amendment
Chs. 53; 148
01-15 2-16-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
02-15 3-17-2015 Salaries NCM
03-15 5-18-2015 Games of chance
amendment
Ch. 96
04-15 5-18-2015 Appropriation NCM
05-15 5-18-2015 Bond NCM
06-15 6-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 203
07-15 6-15-2015 Site plan review
amendment
Ch. 159
08-15 6-15-2015 Vacation and release of
building restriction
NCM
09-15 9-21-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
10-15 10-19-2015 Franchise agreement
with Aqua New Jersey,
Inc.
NCM
11-15 10-19-2015 Conveyance of property NCM
12-15 11-16-2015 Animals: dog licensing
amendment; cats
amendment
Ch. 46, Art. I; Ch. 46,
Art. II
13-15 11-16-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 203
14-15 12-21-2015 Police Department:
establishment
amendment
Ch. 27, Art. I
01-16 1-18-2016 Street vacation NCM
02-16 2-20-2016 Acquisition of property NCM
03-16 2-10-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
04-16 3-21-2016 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
05-16 3-21-2016 Towing amendment Ch. 192
06-16 3-21-2016 Acquisition of property NCM
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
255:1085
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
07-16 3-21-2016 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 148
01-2016
(Board of
Health)
3-22-2016 Sewage disposal:
individual sewage
disposal systems
amendment
Ch. 247, Art. I
08-16 4-18-2016 Bond NCM
09-16 6-20-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 217
10-16 6-20-2016 Streets and sidewalks:
driveway construction
amendment
Ch. 172, Art. III
11-16 10-17-2016 Parks and Recreation
Areas Amendment
Ch. 137
12-16 12-19-2016 Animals: Dog Licensing
Amendment; Cats
Amendment
Ch. 46, Art. I; Ch. 46,
Art. II
01-17 3-20-2017 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
02-17 3-20-2017 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
03-17 3-20-2017 Peddling and soliciting:
solicitation amendment
Ch. 143, Art. I
04-17 3-20-2017 Soliciting: temporary
mobile merchants and
concessionaires
Ch. 143, Art. III
05-17 3-20-2017 Salaries NCM
06-17 3-20-2017 Easement transfer NCM
07-17 4-17-2017 Bond NCM
08-17 5-15-2017 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 27
09-17 5-15-2017 Easement agreement NCM
10-17 7-12-2017 Bond NCM
11-17 8-21-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 203
12-17 11-20-2017 Soil Disturbance
Amendment
Ch. 164
13-17 12-18-2017 Occupancy Permits
Amendment
Ch. 129
01-18 3-20-2017 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM
§ DL-1 WASHINGTON CODE § DL-1
255:1086
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
02-18 2-14-2018 Police Department:
Establishment
Amendment
Ch. 27, Art. I
03-18 2-14-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 217
04-18 2-14-2018 Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 87
05-18 2-14-2018 Property Acquisition NCM
06-18 4-16-2018 Appropriation NCM
07-18 4-16-2018 Bond NCM
08-18 6-18-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 203
09-18 7-16-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 203
10-18 7-16-2018 Police Department:
Establishment
Amendment
Ch. 27, Art. I
11-18 7-16-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 217
12-18 8-20-2018 Animals: Animal Control
Officer and Municipal
Humane Law
Enforcement Officer;
Cats Amendment
Ch. 46, Art. I; Ch. 46,
Art. II
13-18 8-20-2018 Electric Aggregation
Program
NCM
14-18 9-17-2018 Land Use Procedures
Amendment; Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 111; Ch. 217
15-18 10-15-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 217
16-18 11-19-2018 Property Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 148
17-18 12-17-2018 Easement NCM
01-19 2-13-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM
02-19 3-18-2019 Deed of Dedication NCM
03-19 3-18-2019 Stormwater Control
Amendment
Ch. 170
04-19 3-18-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 217
05-19 4-15-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 203
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
255:1087
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
06-19 4-15-2019 Administration of
Government Amendment
Ch. 3
07-19 4-15-2019 Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 87
08-19 4-15-2019 Soil Disturbance
Amendment
Ch. 164
09-19 4-15-2019 Salaries NCM
10-19 5-20-2019 Bond NCM
11-19 5-20-2019 Streets and Sidewalks:
Driveway Construction
Amendment
Ch. 172, Art. III
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
12-19 7-15-2019 Building
Construction:
Uniform
Construction Codes
Amendment
Ch. 56, Art. II 54
13-19 11-18-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 217 54
14-19 11-18-2019 Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 87 54
15-19 11-18-2019 Appropriation NCM 54
16-19 12-16-2019 Easement Transfer NCM 54
§ DL-1 WASHINGTON CODE § DL-1
255:1088