7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 1/346
A.
Village of Bosque Farms, NM
Tuesday, July 14, 2020
1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1-1. Adoption of Code
[History: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 5-19-2016. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
§ 1-1-1. Legislative intent.
The ordinances and certain resolutions of the Village of Bosque Farms, as codified by General Code,
LLC, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 13, together with an Appendix, shall be known collectively
as the "Code of the Village of Bosque Farms," hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever reference is
made in any of the ordinances and resolutions contained in the Code of the Village of Bosque Farms to
any other ordinance or resolution appearing in said Code, such reference shall be changed to the
appropriate chapter title, chapter number or section number appearing in the Code as if such
ordinance or resolution had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as those of the 1980 Code and
ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the enactment of the Code by this ordinance,
are intended as a continuation of such 1980 Code, ordinances and resolutions and not as new
enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the prior
ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby
reaffirmed as to their adoption by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms, and it is the
intention of said governing body that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby
reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances and/or resolutions as
are omitted from this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-1-3 below.
§ 1-1-3. Repeal of inconsistent enactments not included in Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the Village of Bosque Farms in force on the date
of the adoption of this ordinance which are inconsistent with any provisions of the Code and not
contained herein or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from
and after the effective date of this ordinance.
§ 1-1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following classes
of ordinances, rights and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any legislative provision of the Village
of Bosque Farms prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any action or proceeding brought
for the enforcement of such right or liability.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 2/346
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this ordinance in violation of any
legislative provision of the Village of Bosque Farms or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which
may result therefrom.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any judgment rendered
prior to the effective date of this ordinance brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the
Village of Bosque Farms.
Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore
granted or conferred by the Village of Bosque Farms.
Any ordinance of the Village of Bosque Farms providing for the laying out, opening, altering,
widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance
or vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place within
the Village of Bosque Farms or any portion thereof.
Any ordinance of the Village of Bosque Farms appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any
bond of the Village of Bosque Farms or other instruments or evidence of the Village of Bosque
Farms' indebtedness.
Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property or any lawful contract,
agreement or obligation.
The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
The annexation or dedication of property.
Any ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
Any ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund for the Village of Bosque
Farms employees.
Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee amount for any license, permit
or service obtained from the Village of Bosque Farms.
§ 1-1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of this ordinance or of any
ordinance or resolution included in this Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by
any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section,
article, chapter or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have
been rendered.
§ 1-1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code has been filed in the office of the Clerk/Administrator of the Village of Bosque
Farms and shall remain there for use and examination by the public until final action is taken on this
ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the
Clerk/Administrator of the Village of Bosque Farms by impressing thereon the Seal of the Village of
Bosque Farms, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said Clerk/Administrator, to
be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is in
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 3/346
A.
effect. The enactment and publication of this ordinance, coupled with the availability of a copy of the
Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the ordinances and resolutions
known collectively as the "Code of the Village of Bosque Farms" or any new ordinances or resolutions,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the governing body of the Village
of Bosque Farms to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so that
reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be published as amendments and
supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this ordinance shall affect the status of any ordinance or
resolution contained herein, and such ordinances or resolutions may be amended, deleted or changed
from time to time as the governing body of the Village of Bosque Farms deems desirable.
§ 1-1-8. Code to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village of Bosque Farms Clerk/Administrator to keep up-to-date the certified
copy of the Code of the Village of Bosque Farms required to be filed in the office of the Village of
Bosque Farms Clerk/Administrator for use by the public.
§ 1-1-9. Sale of Code; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from the Village of Bosque
Farms Clerk/Administrator, or an authorized agent of the Clerk/Administrator, upon the payment of a
fee to be set by resolution of the governing body of the Village of Bosque Farms. The
Clerk/Administrator may also arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Village of Bosque Farms Clerk/Administrator, changes
or amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the Village of Bosque Farms or
who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the
Village of Bosque Farms to be misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of this
ordinance shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not
more than $500 or imprisonment for a term of not more than 90 days, or both, in accordance with
NMSA § 4-37-3.
§ 1-1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances and resolutions for publication as the Code of the
Village of Bosque Farms, no changes in the meaning or intent of such ordinances and resolutions
have been made, except as provided for in Subsection B hereof. In addition, certain grammatical
changes and other minor nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces of
legislation. It is the intention of the governing body of the Village of Bosque Farms that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 4/346
B.
A.
B.
C.
In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and
made a part hereof are made herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this
ordinance.
§ 1-1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby made Section 1-1 of the Code of the Village of Bosque
Farms, such ordinance to be entitled "Adoption of Code," and the sections of this ordinance shall be
numbered §§ 1-1-1 through 1-1-15, inclusive.
§ 1-1-13. When effective; effective date of other ordinances.
This ordinance shall take effect 30 days from the date of recording by the Village of Bosque Farms
Clerk/Administrator of a copy authenticated by the Clerk/Administrator's signature, following public
hearing and adoption by the governing body of the Village of Bosque Farms.
Unless the governing body of the Village of Bosque Farms declares that it is necessary for the
public peace, health and safety that an ordinance take effect immediately after passage, all
enacted ordinances shall become effective 30 days from the date of recording by the Village of
Bosque Farms Clerk/Administrator of a copy authenticated by the Clerk/Administrator's signature,
following public hearing and adoption by the governing body of the Village of Bosque Farms.
Where the governing body of the Village of Bosque Farms declares that it is necessary that an
ordinance take immediate effect, the ordinance shall take effect when it is recorded by the Village
of Bosque Farms Clerk/Administrator as provided above (NMSA § 4-37-9).
§ 1-1-14. Jurisdiction.
The Village of Bosque Farms' ordinances are effective within the boundaries of the Village of Bosque
Farms, including privately owned land or land owned by the United States. However, ordinances are
not effective within the limits of any unincorporated municipality.
§ 1-1-15. Conflicting provisions.
In the event of conflict between the provisions of this Code and other ordinances or provisions of the
New Mexico Statutes, the provision imposing the greater restriction shall prevail.
Section 1-2. Definitions and Rules of Construction
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms as Secs. 1-1-3 and 1-1-
9 of the 1980 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 1-2-1. Definitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of the Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction
shall be observed, unless it shall be otherwise expressly provided in any section or ordinance, or
unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the ordinance:
AGENT
A person acting on behalf of another.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 5/346
CODE
The Code of the Village of Bosque Farms as adopted and subsequently amended, unless the
context requires otherwise.
COUNCIL
The governing body of the Village of Bosque Farms.
DAY
The period of time between any 12:00 midnight and the 12:00 midnight following.
DAYTIME
The period of time between sunrise and sunset.
EMPLOYEE
An employee of the Village of Bosque Farms.
FEE
The sum of money charged by the municipality for the carrying on of a business, profession or
occupation.
MONTH
A calendar month.
NIGHTTIME
The period of time between sunset and sunrise.
NMSA 1978
New Mexico Statutes Annotated, 1978 Compilation.
OATH
Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath,
and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and
"affirmed."
OWNER
When applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant
in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON
Any individual, association, society, club, firm, partnership, corporation, or any other form of
association or organization.
PERSONAL PROPERTY
Every species of property except real property, as herein defined.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING
Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY
Real, tangible and intangible personal property.
REAL PROPERTY
Land, tenements and hereditaments.
SHALL; MAY
"Shall" is mandatory; and "may" is permissive.
SIDEWALK
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 6/346
[1]
[1]
Any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
STATE
The State of New Mexico.
STREET
Any thoroughfare that can accommodate pedestrian or vehicular traffic, is open to the public and
is under the control of the municipality.
TENANT or OCCUPANT
When applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or part of such
building or land, whether alone or with others.
THE COUNTY or THIS COUNTY
The County of Valencia, New Mexico.
VILLAGE or THIS VILLAGE
The Village of Bosque Farms.
WRITTEN or IN WRITING
Includes any representation of words, letters or figures, whether in printing or otherwise.
YEAR
A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 1-2-2. Corporate Seal.
The Corporate Seal for the municipality shall be maintained by the Village Clerk.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Section 1-3. Enforcement and Penalties
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms as Secs. 1-1-10 through
1-1-16 of the 1980 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 1-3-1. General penalty.
Whenever in this Code or any other ordinances or resolutions of the municipality or any rule or
regulation promulgated under the provisions of this Code any act is prohibited or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act
is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided
therefor, any person who shall be convicted of the violation of any such provision of this Code or other
ordinances or resolutions of the municipality hereafter enacted or of such rules or regulations shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment in jail not exceeding 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment. Every day any violation of this Code or any other ordinance or resolution
of the municipality or any rule or regulation promulgated under the provisions of this Code continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 1-3-2. Summons.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 7/346
A.
[1]
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
In cases involving alleged violations of any provision of this Code not amounting to a breach of the
peace, the first process shall be a citation or summons requiring the party charged to appear before
the Municipal Court at a time fixed in the citation or summons. Should the party charged fail to appear
as required, a warrant for his or her arrest shall be forthwith issued by the Municipal Judge for the
offense specified in the citation or summons, commanding that the party charged shall be arrested and
be taken before the Court to be tried for the alleged offense, or be allowed to post an appropriate bond.
§ 1-3-3. Suspension of sentence; probation; community service.
Upon entry of a plea of guilty or judgment of conviction, the Municipal Court may suspend, in
whole or in part, the execution of sentence, or may place the defendant on probation for a period
not exceeding one year, on conditions the court deems best, or both; provided that suspension of
execution of the sentence or probation, or both, shall be granted only when the Municipal Judge is
satisfied it will serve the ends of justice and of the public, and that the defendant's liability for any
fine or other punishment imposed is fully discharged upon successful completion of the terms and
conditions of probation.
The Court may, as a condition of probation, require the defendant to serve a period of time in
volunteer labor to be known as "community service." The type of labor and period of service shall
be at the sole discretion of the Court; provided that any person receiving community service shall
be immune from any civil liability other than gross negligence arising out of the community service,
and any person who performs community service pursuant to court order or any criminal diversion
program shall not be entitled to any wages, shall not be considered an employee for any purpose
and shall not be entitled to workmen's compensation, unemployment benefits or any other benefits
otherwise provided by law. As used in this Subsection B, "community service" means any labor
that benefits the public at large or any public, charitable or educational entity or institution.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 1-3-4. Issuance of ordinance violation citations.
Procedure for police officers.
Whenever a person is cited by a police officer after violating an ordinance of the Village of
Bosque Farms not amounting to a breach of the peace punishable by fine and/or
imprisonment, the citing police officer will prepare, in triplicate, the ordinance violation citation
form. This form will be provided by the Village of Bosque Farms and is a written notice to
appear in Municipal Court. Said citation shall contain the name, address, telephone number,
driver's license number or social security number of the person accused; the number of the
ordinance alleged to have been violated; the date, place, and time of the alleged violation;
names and addresses of any witnesses; and the date, time and place of the court hearing the
citation.
At the time the citation is written, the officer shall deliver a copy of the ordinance violation
citation to the person accused.
Procedure for the Mayor or his designated agents. Whenever the Mayor or his designated
agent(s) has probable cause to believe that a person has violated any ordinance of the Village of
Bosque Farms, excluding traffic violations not amounting to a breach of the peace, but punishable
by fine and/or imprisonment, the Mayor or his designated agent(s) shall prepare in triplicate the
ordinance violation citation form which is described in Subsection A of this section. At the time the
citation is written, the Mayor or his designated agent(s) shall deliver a copy of the ordinance
violation citation to the accused.
§ 1-3-5. Failure to obey citations.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 8/346
[1]
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to appear at the court hearing which is set on the ordinance
violation citation, regardless of the disposition of the charge for which the citation was originally issued.
§ 1-3-6. Procedure not exclusive.
The foregoing provisions of this Code shall not be exclusive of any other method prescribed by law for
the prosecution of a person for a violation of any ordinance of the Village of Bosque Farms or for a
violation of any other law within the power of the Village to enforce.[1]
Editor's Note: Original § 1-1-16 of the 1980 Code, Penalty, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
2. ADMINISTRATION
Section 2-1. Chief Executive Officer: Mayor
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms as Sec. 2-1 of the 1980
Code, as amended 4-1984. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 2-1-1. Qualifications; term.
The chief executive officer of the municipality shall be the Mayor, who shall be a qualified elector
residing within the limits of the municipality. The Mayor shall be elected for a four-year term.
§ 2-1-2. Duties.
The Mayor shall preside over all meetings of the Council, and shall vote only when there is a tie
vote.
As the chief executive officer of the municipality, the Mayor shall:
Cause the ordinances and regulations of the municipality to be obeyed;
Exercise, within the municipality, powers conferred upon sheriffs of counties to suppress
disorders and keep the peace; and
Perform other duties, compatible with the office, which the governing body may require, or
which may be otherwise required by law.
§ 2-1-3. Mayor Pro Tem.
The Council of the municipality shall elect one of its members to serve as Mayor Pro Tem, who, in the
absence of the Mayor, shall perform the duties of Mayor.
§ 2-1-4. Vacancy.
In the event of death, disability, resignation or change of residence from the municipality of the Mayor,
the Council shall appoint by majority vote a qualified elector to fill the vacancy for the unexpired term of
office.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 9/346
[1]
[1]
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
B.
C.
§ 2-1-5. Bond and oath.
The Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem shall take the oath of office as required in NMSA 1978, § 3-10-2.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 2-1-6. Compensation.
The Mayor shall, after having taken the oath of office as required in NMSA 1978, § 3-10-2, receive a
yearly compensation of $5,000. Such compensation shall begin on May 1, 1984 and will be paid at the
first pay period of each month thereafter.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Section 2-2. Legislative Branch: Council
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms as Sec. 2-2 of the 1980
Code, as amended 2-1990. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 2-2-1. Membership; qualifications; powers and duties;
vacancies; oath of office.
The legislative branch of the municipality shall consist of a Council of four Councilors to be elected at
large for staggered terms of four years, with terms of 1/2 of the Councilors expiring at the end of one
two-year period and the terms of the other Councilors expiring at the end of the following two-year
period.
Qualifications. Each member of the Council shall be a resident of the municipality and a qualified
elector thereof. If any Councilor moves from or becomes a nonresident of the municipality during
his or her term of office, he or she shall be deemed to have vacated his or her office upon the
adoption by the Council of a resolution declaring such vacancy to exist.
Power and duties. The corporate authority of the municipality shall be vested in the Council, which
shall possess all powers granted by law, or other municipal powers not conferred by law or
ordinance on another officer of the municipality. The Council shall:
Manage and control the finances and all property, real and personal, belonging to the
municipality;
Determine the time and place of holding its meetings, which shall be open to the public;
Determine the rules of its own proceedings;
Keep minutes of its proceedings, which shall be open to examination by any citizen;
Adopt rules and regulations necessary to effect the powers granted municipalities;
Prescribe the compensation and fees to be paid municipal officers and employees; and
Prescribe the powers and duties of those officers whose terms of office or powers and duties
are not defined by law, and impose additional powers and duties upon those officers whose
powers and duties are prescribed by law.
Vacancies. In case of death, resignation, vacation or removal for cause of any member of the
Council during his or her term of office, the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council,
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 10/346
[1]
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
B.
shall appoint a qualified elector of the municipality to fill the vacancy until the next regular
municipal election, at which time a qualified elector shall be elected to fill the remaining unexpired
term, if any.
Oath of office. Councilors shall take the oath of office required in NMSA 1978, § 3-10-2.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 2-2-2. Procedure.
[Amended 5-2002]
The following shall be observed:
General.
Regular meetings. The governing body shall hold its regular meetings at such time and public
places as it designates and deems necessary to conduct the business of the Village. These
meetings shall follow a regular schedule whenever possible. Notice of these meetings shall
be in accordance with Resolution No. 1 of the Village Council.
Special meetings. The Mayor, or a majority of the members of the Council, may call special
meetings by notice to each member of the Council, personally served, or left at his or her
usual place of residence, and with public notice given in accordance with Resolution No. 1 of
the Village Council.
Quorum. A quorum is necessary for the governing body to conduct business. A quorum is a
simple majority of all the members of the governing body (i.e., three of five members). A
majority of those present may act on behalf of the municipality, except that certain actions
require a majority or more of the entire governing body, such as the passage of ordinances or
resolutions or personnel removal. If only four members of the governing body are present, tie
votes may occur on some actions. Such actions shall be automatically tabled until such time
as the entire governing body is present.
Agenda. All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contracts, documents, or other
matters to be submitted to the governing body shall be delivered to the Clerk at least nine
days prior to each meeting, whereupon the Clerk shall immediately arrange a list of such
matters according to the order of business. Each Councilor, the Mayor, and Village Attorney
will be furnished with a copy of the order of business, together with a copy of the minutes of
the last meeting prior to the Council meeting and as far in advance of the meeting as time for
preparation will permit. Additional items may be added to the agenda by majority consent of
the members of the governing body.
Meeting conduct.
Adherence to rules. It is the intent that a meeting be conducted on as informal basis as is
practicable to expedite Village business. Business will be conducted generally following good
parliamentary procedure at the discretion of the presiding officer. Strict adherence to the
following rules will, however, be invoked at the request of any member of the governing body
at any time on any or all issues.
Rules of debate.
Mayor. The Mayor may not make and second motions, may debate from the chair, and
shall have all privileges of other members, except that he shall only vote when there is a
tie vote.
Councilors. Each Councilor desiring to speak shall address the presiding officer and,
after being recognized, confine himself or herself to debate, avoiding personalities and
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 11/346
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(4)
indecorous language.
Interruption. A Councilor having been recognized shall not be interrupted except to call
him or her to order. If called to order, he or she shall cease speaking until the point of
order is decided, after which he or she may proceed.
Statement in minutes. A member of the Council may request the privilege of having his or
her statement on any subject under consideration entered in the minutes, subject to the
majority consent of the governing body, provided that any member shall have the right to
cause his or her reasons for dissent or protest against the action of the Council entered
in the minutes without majority consent of the governing body.
Issues not covered. Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised shall be used by the Council
in determining any issue not covered by this section. Any member of the governing body
may request that an interpretation of Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised concerning
any issue be made by the parliamentarian, in which case the decision of the
parliamentarian will prevail.
Addressing the governing body.
Written communications. Interested parties or their representatives may address the
governing body by written communication regarding any matter.
Oral address. Taxpayers or residents of the municipality or their authorized
representatives may orally address the governing body on any matter concerning the
business of the municipality, provided that preference shall be given to those persons
who may have notified the Clerk in advance of their desire to speak.
Reading of protests and petitions. Taxpayers or residents of the municipality and their
authorized representatives may address the governing body by the reading of protests,
petitions or communications.
Persons other than taxpayers and residents. Persons other than taxpayers and residents
must receive prior approval before orally addressing the governing body.
Manner of address. Each person orally addressing the governing body shall first seek the
recognition of the presiding officer and, after being recognized, shall stand and give
his/her name and whether or not he/she resides in the Village of Bosque Farms before
proceeding. All remarks shall be addressed to the Council as a whole and not to any
member thereof unless consent of the chair is obtained. No person, other than a
Councilor and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion
without permission of the presiding officer.
Time limit. In order that the business of the municipality may be disposed of in an
expeditious manner, the presiding officer may place a limitation on the length of time any
person may speak.
Decorum.
Mayor. The Mayor shall preserve the order and decorum, decide all questions of order
and conduct the proceedings of the meetings in accordance with the parliamentary rules
contained in Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised unless otherwise provided by
ordinance.
Councilors. While the governing body is in session, the members shall observe order and
decorum and neither delay nor interrupt the proceedings of the Council nor disturb any
member while speaking nor refuse to obey the orders of the Council or its presiding
officer.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 12/346
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(1)
(2)
C.
Public. While the governing body is in session, no person shall act in a disorderly manner
nor, while addressing the governing body, shall any person make any personal,
impertinent or slanderous remarks. The presiding officer may bar anyone acting
improperly from continuing his address to the governing body.
Enforcement. The Chief of Police or such police officer as the presiding officer may
designate shall be the sergeant-at-arms of the governing body and shall carry out all
orders of the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining the order and decorum of
the session. Upon orders from the presiding officer, it shall be the duty of the sergeant-atarms
to place any person who violates the provisions of this section under arrest and
cause him to be prosecuted upon the complaint of the presiding officer in the Municipal
Court, subject to punishment by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment in jail
not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Order of business.
The order of business of the governing body shall be taken up for consideration and
disposition in the following order:
Call to order. The Mayor, or, in his absence, the Mayor Pro Tem, shall call the meeting to
order at the appointed hour.
Roll call. Before proceeding with the order of business, the Clerk or his (her) deputy shall
call the roll of the members, and the names of those present shall be entered in the
minutes.
Reading of the minutes. The minutes of each regular meeting or special meeting of the
governing body shall be read at the next regular meeting unless omission of such reading
is approved by a majority of the voting members.
Reports by officers. Municipal officials and/or committees shall present such reports as
may be required by the governing body.
Old business. The Council shall consider any business that has previously been
considered and which is still unfinished.
New business. The Council shall consider any business not heretofore considered,
including the introduction or reading of ordinances and resolutions.
Petitions. Petitions, remonstrances, communications, and comments or suggestions from
citizens present shall be heard by the Council. All such remarks shall be addressed to the
Council as a whole, and not to any member thereof. Such remarks shall be limited to a
reasonable time, and such determination will be in the discretion of the presiding officer.
No person other than the individual speaking shall enter into the discussion without the
permission of the presiding officer.
Other business. Prior to adjournment, the Council shall, as it deems necessary, consider
such business as is not specifically provided for herein.
The Council may, by majority consent, modify the order of business as listed above in
Subsection C(1)(a) through (h), inclusive.
§ 2-2-3. Ordinances.
All laws of the municipality shall be enacted by the passage of ordinances, all of which shall be
reviewed by the Village Attorney. Ordinances shall be numbered consecutively and shall bear a title
which shall set forth in general terms its subject matter; shall contain an enacting clause; and shall
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 13/346
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
B.
A.
B.
bear the date, signatures of the Mayor and the attesting officer, and the Seal of the Village. The Village
Clerk shall keep a permanent log book in which the original of each ordinance considered, whether or
not adopted, shall be kept.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 2-2-4. Resolutions.
Resolutions shall be used in every case where an ordinance is not required and shall be
appropriate in the following instances:
Entering into a contract;
Adoption of a policy concerning employees, utility services, or equipment;
Granting of a right or privilege to any person when a contract is not required;
Changes in the fire districts of the Village;
Changes in the master plan of the Village;
Authorizing the issuance of bonds; and
Where a full and permanent record must be made and kept of the action of the governing
body.
Resolutions shall be numbered consecutively and shall bear a title which shall set forth in general
terms its subject matter; shall contain a resolving clause; and shall bear the date, signature of the
Mayor and attesting officer, and the Seal of the Village. The Village Clerk shall keep a permanent
log book in which the original of each resolution considered, whether or not adopted, shall be kept.
§ 2-2-5. Notice, publication and effective date of ordinances.
Notice by publication of the title and subject matter of any ordinance proposed for adoption by the
governing body of any municipality must take place at least two weeks prior to consideration of
final action upon the ordinance in open session of the governing body; except that this section
shall not apply to ordinances dealing with an emergency declared by the chairman of the
governing body or the Mayor, as the case may be, to be an immediate danger to the public health,
safety, and welfare of the municipality, or to ordinances the subject matter of which is amending a
Village Zoning Map or the text of the zoning ordinance, provided the amendment to such Zoning
Map has been considered by, and recommended to, the Council by a planning commission with
jurisdiction in the matter. Notice of the proposed ordinance shall be published one time as a legal
advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Copies of a proposed
ordinance shall be available to interested persons during normal and regular business hours of the
Municipal Clerk upon request and payment of a reasonable charge beginning with the date of
publication and continuing to the date of consideration by the municipality's elected Council.
Within three days after the governing body has passed an ordinance, the Mayor must sign it and
mark it approved. The ordinance must also be signed by the Clerk and must bear the Seal of the
municipality. It must then be published as it was passed or by title and summary of the subject
matter. Five days after publication, the ordinance becomes effective.
§ 2-2-6. Committees.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 14/346
A.
B.
C.
[1]
Standing committees. The only standing committee of the Council shall be the committee of the
whole; the Mayor shall be its presiding officer and applicable rules of procedure of the Council
shall be observed.
Special committees. Special committees shall be appointed by the Mayor unless otherwise
determined by the Council.
Reports. Reports of standing or special committees may be made in writing and may be submitted
together with the petition, resolution, account or other paper under consideration. All reports shall
be filed with the Clerk for entry in the minutes.
§ 2-2-7. Compensation.
The Village Councillors shall, after having taken the oath of office as required in NMSA 1978, § 3-10-2,
receive a yearly compensation of $1,200, paid on a monthly basis of $100 per month. Such
compensation shall begin on July 1, 1990, and will be paid at the first pay period of each month
thereafter.
§ 2-2-8. Oath.
All officers, elected or appointed to any municipal office, shall take an oath or affirmation to support the
Constitution of the United States, the Constitution and laws of New Mexico, and to faithfully perform
the duties of the office.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 2-2-9. Removal from office.
Any person elected or appointed to an elective office of the municipality may be removed for
malfeasance in office by the District Court upon complaint of the Mayor or Council of the municipality.
Any such officer shall be entitled to a hearing at a time fixed by the Court after not less than 10 days'
notice of such proceedings by service, as in the case of summons in civil actions, with a copy of the
complaint filed in the proceedings.
Section 2-3. (Reserved)
[Former Section 2-3, Village Attorney, was repealed 5-20-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-04.]
Section 2-4. (Reserved)
[Former Section 2-4, Municipal Clerk, as amended, was repealed at time of adoption of Code
(see Section 1-1). See now Section 2-6, Clerk/Administrator.]
Section 2-5. Municipal Treasurer
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 8-19-1982 (Sec. 2-5 of
the 1980 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 2-5-1. Appointment.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 15/346
[1]
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
The Treasurer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the governing body. This position
shall be separate from that of the Municipal Clerk and may be filled on a part-time basis.
§ 2-5-2. Oath and bond.
[Amended 2-16-1984[1]]
The Treasurer, prior to entering into or performing the duties of the Treasurer, shall take an oath or
affirmation complying with the provisions of NMSA 1978, § 3-10-2. The Treasurer shall within 10 days
after the appointment, furnish a surety bond in an amount determined by the governing body,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the Treasurer and the proper care and
disposition of Village funds. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the Village.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 2-5-3. Functions and duties.
The Treasurer shall supervise the depositing and safekeeping of all money belonging to the
Village and, with the advice and consent of the governing body (Municipal Board of Finance),
designate banks qualified to receive on deposit money entrusted to his/her care.
The Treasurer shall be the finance officer for the municipality unless another officer is directed by
ordinance to be the finance officer. The Treasurer shall:
Receive all money belonging to the municipality;
Keep all accounts and records in the manner prescribed by the governing body;
Keep the money of the municipality separate from any other money in his/her possession;
Expend the money only as directed by the governing body;
Submit monthly, or more often if required by the governing body, a report of the receipts and
expenditures of the municipality; and
Prepare annually, at the close of the fiscal year, a financial report showing the receipts,
expenditures and balances of each fund. A copy of the financial report shall be filed in the
office of the Municipal Clerk as a public document.
The records of the Treasurer shall be open to inspection by any citizen during the regular business
hours of the municipality, subject to any limitations imposed by state statute.
The Treasurer shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and shall be terminated by either:
A majority of all the members of the governing body; or
The Mayor, upon the approval of a majority of all the members of the governing body.
§ 2-5-4. Compensation.
The Treasurer shall be compensated in such amount as may be determined by the governing body.
Section 2-6. Clerk/Administrator
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 2-16-1989 (Sec. 2-6 of
the 1980 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 16/346
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
§ 2-6-1. Purpose; supervision of Mayor.
The purpose of the Clerk/Administrator position is to provide the Village of Bosque Farms with support
services which assist the Mayor in directing and coordinating administrative, personnel, and budgetary
activities necessary to conduct Village business. This position functions under the supervision of the
Mayor. All duties and responsibilities are assigned or removed at the discretion of the Mayor.
§ 2-6-2. Appointment.
The Clerk/Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the governing body.
§ 2-6-3. Oath and bond.
The Clerk/Administrator, prior to entering into or performing duties, shall take an oath or affirmation
complying with the provisions of NMSA 1978 § 3-10-2. The Clerk/Administrator shall, within 10 days
after the appointment, furnish a surety bond in an amount determined by the governing body,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the office of Clerk/Administrator and the
proper care and disposition of Village funds. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the Village.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 2-6-4. Duties and responsibilities.
The Village Clerk/Administrator:
Plans, coordinates and directs all general office operations of the Village to provide complete
coverage and maintenance of typing, filing, mailing, phone coverage, public notice requirements,
community relations and other duties as assigned; develops documents and implements operating
procedures and administrative controls for the operation of Village activities.
Shall prepare or assist in the preparation of all governing body agendas, minutes, ordinances,
resolutions, correspondence, documents, grants or other municipal records; shall assure
safekeeping of such records; shall, in accordance with state laws, make such information available
to the public upon request; and shall maintain all issued Code books in an up-to-date manner.
Is responsible for the assessment, issuance or certification of business registration, itinerant
vendor and liquor licenses; the proper receipt, completion and submission of all required reports,
forms or notices in a timely manner.
Coordinates and/or serves as liaison to the public or other agencies in the development and
implementation of special programs and projects as assigned by the Mayor.
Assists in the development of and provides supervision for the billing and delivery of services
associated with the municipal water system as defined in Village ordinances.
May perform selected duties of the Planning and Zoning Administrator, Treasurer, or Police/Court
Clerk or other Village functions and duties as determined by the Mayor to cover periods of
absence.
Performs duties as required by state law during municipal elections, and maintains a current
notary public and voter registration certification.
Directs the implementation of all actions passed by the governing body.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 17/346
[2]
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
R.
S.
[1]
Serves as personnel manager in the administration of policies and practices associated with the
merit ordinance and Personnel Manual.[2] In this capacity, the Clerk/Administrator will serve as a
resource to the Village Personnel Board.
Editor's Note: See Ch. A1, Personnel Policy Manual.
Oversees the general supervision of Village staff and makes recommendations to the Mayor on
matters relating to hiring, advancement, discipline, and dismissal of employees.
Directs the formulation of budgets, policies, and operating procedures of the Village, and serves
as grant administrator for federal and state funds awarded to the Village, including the
development and submission of grant proposals.
Keeps in custody all minutes, ordinances and resolutions approved by the governing body;
attends all meetings of the governing body; records all proceedings, ordinances and resolutions of
the governing body; and, upon request, furnishes copies of municipal records. The
Clerk/Administrator may charge a reasonable fee for the cost of furnishing copies of municipal
records. Such records shall be open for inspection by any citizen during the regular business
hours of the municipality, subject to any limitations imposed by state statute.
Performs the duties and tasks designated by the Mayor.
Responds to the needs and complaints of Village residents and communicates and informs the
governing body of related activities.
Prepares and submits to the Village Council the annual budget; implements and controls the
approved budget, including accountability for all department receipts, expenditures and
purchases.
Oversees the financial activities of the Village, including the receipt, safekeeping, deposit and
expenditures of all monies belonging to the Village.
Supervises centralized internal services and programs, including office administration,
water/sewer services delivery and billing, recreation facilities, community center, law enforcement,
street and road maintenance, animal control, library services, purchasing, engineering, legal and
the maintenance of public health.
Prepares and submits monthly activity reports to the governing body.
Performs all other duties, keeps all records, and makes all reports that are required by other
provisions of this Code or by the laws of the State of New Mexico.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 2-6-5. Compensation.
The Clerk/Administrator shall be compensated in such amount as may be determined by the governing
body.
Section 2-7. Campaign Finance
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 12-18-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-09. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 2-7-1. Purpose and intent.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 18/346
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
E.
A.
It is the policy of the Village of Bosque Farms that the integrity of municipal government can be
promoted through the full disclosure of campaign contributions in accordance with this code.
§ 2-7-2. Definitions.
As used in this Section 2-7, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CANDIDATE
Any individual who has completed the official declaration of candidacy.
CONTRIBUTION
A loan, gift, forgiveness of indebtedness, pledge, or promise of money or anything of value.
EXPENDITURE
A payment or transfer of anything of value in exchange for goods, services, property, facilities or
anything of value for the purpose of assisting or opposing any public official or candidate.
§ 2-7-3. Campaign treasurer.
[Amended 5-17-2007]
Each candidate shall appoint a campaign treasurer who is a resident of the Village of Bosque
Farms. A candidate may appoint himself or herself as campaign treasurer.
The name, address and telephone number of the campaign treasurer and the name, address and
telephone number of the campaign depository shall be filed with the Village Clerk not later than
five days after filing a declaration of candidacy. Any material change in information previously
submitted to the Village Clerk shall be reported within 10 days of such change.
The campaign treasurer shall keep a true and complete record of all contributions and
expenditures, to include, at a minimum, the following:
The name and address of every contributor whose total contributions exceed $250.
The amount and form of every contribution which individually or collectively from a contributor
exceeds $250.
Records of every expenditure that exceeds $100, reflecting the purpose of each expenditure,
the date and method of payment. The campaign treasurer will be responsible for maintaining
all receipts supporting all such expenditures.
All campaign bank records, records of financial transactions or records of credit purchases.
The campaign treasurer shall not accept anonymous donations over $100. In the event that an
anonymous contribution in excess of $100 is received, the campaign treasurer shall contribute any
amount over $100 to any not-for-profit organization.
All campaign records required under this code shall be maintained for two years following the
election for which the candidacy was declared.
§ 2-7-4. Reporting.
Every candidate shall file campaign reports with the Village Clerk, on a form prescribed by the
Village Clerk.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 19/346
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
E.
[1]
F.
G.
Each campaign report shall identify the items specified in § 2-7-3C(1) through (3).
Each campaign report shall contain a declaration of the campaign treasurer, made under the
penalties of perjury, that the information reflected therein has been prepared with all reasonable
diligence, and that, to the best of the campaign treasurer's knowledge, the information reflected
there is true and complete.
Three mandatory campaign reports shall be filed during the following periods:
The first campaign report shall be filed not later than 28 days prior to the election. The first
campaign report shall contain a listing of all contributions and expenditures made within 365
days preceding the date of the election, whether or not the candidate had during that time
declared his or her candidacy.
The second campaign report shall be filed not later than 12:00 noon two days prior to the date
of the election.
The third campaign report shall be filed not later than 30 days after the election.
A fourth and subsequent report shall be filed every six months following an election as long as any
debt remains unpaid by the candidate. In the event no debt remains unpaid, a declaration
affirming that no debt remains unpaid shall be filed with the Village Clerk.
If any candidate or campaign treasurer files a campaign report after the deadline set forth in this
campaign code, or if the candidate or campaign treasurer files an incomplete report, the candidate
shall pay to the Village, at the time of filing the report, or the completion of the report, the sum of
$100, plus $10 per day for each regular working day after the time required by this code, until the
complete report is filed.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Any candidate who withdraws from an election shall file a campaign report within seven working
days following his or her withdrawal.
§ 2-7-5. Penalty.
Any person violating any provision of this campaign code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Section 2-8. Economic Development Planning
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 5-18-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-03. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 2-8-1. Title.
This Section 2-8 may be cited as the "Economic Development Ordinance."
§ 2-8-2. Authority.
The Economic Development Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the statutory authority conferred upon
municipalities to allow public support of economic development (NMSA 1978, §§ 5-10-1 through 5-10-
13). This Section 2-8 is adopted as part of the Village of Bosque Farms' economic development plan.
§ 2-8-3. Purpose.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 20/346
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
The purpose of the Economic Development Ordinance is to allow public support of economic
projects to foster, promote and enhance local economic development efforts while continuing to
protect against the unauthorized use of public money and other public resources. Further, the
purpose of this Section 2-8 is to allow the Village of Bosque Farms to enter into one or more joint
powers' agreements with other local governments to plan and support regional economic
development projects.
Local Economic Development Act.
Local governments are allowed to provide direct or indirect assistance to qualifying
businesses to implement economic development plans and projects. Furthermore, local and
regional governments have the authority to contribute assets to development projects.
However, the imposition of a tax must be approved by the voters in referendum.
Eligible uses. Municipalities may impose municipal infrastructure gross receipts taxes and
dedicate the revenue for economic development projects. A total of 0.25% tax (in four
increments of 0.0625%) may be imposed.
§ 2-8-4. Definitions.
As used in this Section 2-8, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROJECT
The provision of direct or indirect land, buildings or other infrastructure; public works
improvements essential to the location assistance of a qualifying business and including the
purchase, lease, grant, or construction, reconstruction, improvement or other acquisition or
conveyance of expansion of a qualifying business; and payments for professional services
contracts necessary for local or regional governments to implement a plan or project.
GOVERNING BODY
The Mayor and the Village Councilors.
PROJECT PARTICIPATION AGREEMENT
An agreement between a qualifying entity and the Village of Bosque Farms whereby the Village of
Bosque Farms provides assistance to an economic development project in exchange for the
benefits received as set forth in this Section 2-8.
QUALIFYING ENTITY
An existing or proposed corporation, limited-liability company, partnership, joint venture, syndicate,
association or other person that is one or a combination of two or more of the following:[1]
An industry for manufacturing, processing, or assembling of any agricultural or manufactured
products;
A commercial enterprise for storing, warehousing, distributing, or selling products of
agriculture, mining or industry, but, other than as provided in Subsection D or E of this
definition, not including any enterprise for the sale of goods or commodities at retail or for the
distribution to the public of electricity, gas, water, or telephone or other services commonly
classified as public utilities;
A business in which all or part of the activities of the business involves the supplying of
services to the general public or to government agencies or to a specific industry or customer,
but, other than as provided in Subsection D or E of this definition, not including businesses
primarily engaged in the sale of goods or commodities at retail;
A telecommunications sales enterprise that makes the majority of its sales to persons outside
of New Mexico.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 21/346
E.
[1]
[2]
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
A.
B.
(a)
(b)
(1)
C.
A retail business.
RETAIL BUSINESS
A business that is primarily engaged in the sale of goods or commodities at retail.[2]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 2-8-5. Municipal assistance to economic development projects.
The Village Clerk/Administrator, after approval of the governing body, may assist economic
development projects in any legally permissible manner, including but not limited to provisions of
land, buildings and infrastructure, provided that all the requirements of this Section 2-8 are met.
The Village of Bosque Farms may provide land, buildings or infrastructure it already owns, or it
may build, purchase or lease the facilities needed for an economic development project. The
Village of Bosque Farms, at its discretion, may bear the full cost or contribute a portion of the
costs, including the waiver of applicable fees. The Village of Bosque Farms, at its discretion, may
also contribute to the payment of costs for professional service contracts such as industry
feasibility studies and planning and design services needed to implement a project.
The governing body may consider offering all forms of assistance allowed under this Section 2-8
and any other legally permissible forms of assistance. However, this does not establish any
obligation on the community's part to offer any specific type or level of assistance.
§ 2-8-6. Economic Development Committee.
The governing body assigns the Economic Development Committee the following responsibilities
with regard to the economic development plan for the Village of Bosque Farms:
Reviewing and making recommendations to the governing body on applications for
assistance for economic development projects; and
Reviewing and making recommendations to the governing body on applications for industrial
revenue bonds (IRBs).
The Economic Development Committee shall at all times provide for a Chairman's position for the
Committee. The governing body shall appoint members of the Committee and designate one of
the members as Chairman.
§ 2-8-7. Application requirements.
Any qualifying entity meeting the definition set forth in § 2-8-4 may propose an economic
development project to the Village of Bosque Farms. Meeting the definition of a qualifying entity
does not create any obligation on the part of the Village of Bosque Farms.
Applications from qualifying entities shall be submitted to the Village of Bosque Farms on forms
provided by the Village Clerk.
Applications shall contain the following information for business applicants:
Identification information:
Complete name and address of entity;
Incorporation papers with bylaws;
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 22/346
[1]
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(5)
(6)
A.
List of board of directors and executive director, with addresses; and[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Resumes of all directors and officers.
Evidence of financial solvency:
Financial statements (income statements and balance sheets) for the past three years;
Federal tax number, New Mexico State Taxation and Revenue number and county
business license; and
Projected income statement for at least three years.
Evidence of organizational capacity:
Brief history of the entity;
Organizational chart of the entity; and
Business plans for the entity and proposed project (shall include pro-forma cash flow
analysis).
The project participation agreement and any other pertinent information will be forwarded to
the governing body for final consideration at a public meeting.
§ 2-8-8. Applicable review criteria.
Applications for economic development projects requesting assistance from the Village of Bosque
Farms which meet the policies and objectives of the community's economic development plan
shall receive priority. Examples include, but are not limited to:
Manufacturing firms (including intellectual property such as computer software);
Projects which enhance the exporting capacity of businesses and/or provide goods and
services which currently have to be imported into the Village of Bosque Farms;
Private businesses seeking to build, expand or relocate;
Private businesses which provide facilities or services which enhance the ability of the Village
of Bosque Farms;
Organizations which assist business start-ups or bring small businesses together to increase
their competitive abilities. This must involve a tangible project which will create jobs in the
Village and promote an industry. Examples include, but are not limited to:
Business incubators;
Art incubators or coalitions (e.g., a performing arts coalition seeking construction
rehearsal or performance facilities);
Public markets for farmers, gardeners, crafts, etc.; and
Organizations which foster economic development by promoting workforce development
efforts such as apprenticeships or other job training programs.
Projects in industry clusters listed above are encouraged, but others are eligible to apply as
well. The intention is to retain flexibility in the use of incentives; and
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 23/346
(7)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Qualifying entities with existing contract or projects with the community when this plan is
adopted may propose a restructuring of their projects as an economic development project.
All applications for economic development projects requesting economic assistance from the
community shall submit a cost-benefit analysis. Preparing a cost-benefit analysis will be the
responsibility of the applicant. The Village of Bosque Farms retains the right to specify a format
and methodology for the cost-benefit analysis. The Economic Development Committee shall
review and approve the methodology used. The source and rationale for any multiplier effects
shall be identified. The cost-benefit analysis shall show that the Village of Bosque Farms will at
least recoup the value of its donation within a maximum period of 10 years. The analysis shall
address the following:
The number and type of jobs to be created, both temporary construction jobs and permanent
jobs (by New Mexico Department of Labor job categories);
Pay scale of jobs;
Determination of which jobs are expected to be filled locally and which will be filled by
transfers from other facilities or recruited from outside the Village of Bosque Farms area;
Total payroll expected at start-up and after one year;
Anticipated impact on the local tax base; and
Anticipated impact on local school systems.
All applicants for economic development projects requesting economic assistance from the Village
of Bosque Farms shall require the same review required of industrial revenue bond applications.
This review shall focus on environmental and community impacts of proposed projects. Special
attention shall be given to job training and career advancement programs and policies. Projects
shall demonstrate a strong commitment to providing career opportunities for Village of Bosque
Farms area residents. Cultural impacts of projects shall also be considered.
Any qualifying entity seeking assistance shall prepare and make available a job training and
career development plan for its employees.
All applicants for economic development projects requesting economic assistance from the Village
of Bosque Farms shall clearly demonstrate the benefits which will accrue to the community as a
result of the donation of public resources. The Village of Bosque Farms has considerable flexibility
in determining what is considered as adequate benefits. Benefits such as providing components or
production capabilities, which enhance a targeted industry cluster, or addressing critical
deficiencies in a regional economy, may be recognized. The benefits claimed on any proposal will
receive careful scrutiny. However, it is the intent of this Section 2-8 to be flexible in the evaluation
of these benefits, and to recognize the qualitative as well as quantitative impact of a proposal.
All applicants for economic development projects requesting assistance from the Village of
Bosque Farms shall clearly demonstrate how the qualifying entity is making a substantive
contribution. The contribution shall be of value and may be paid in money, in-kind services, jobs,
expanded tax base, property or other things or service of value for the expansion or improvement
of the economy. The Village of Bosque Farms retains flexibility in defining the "substantive
contributions." The benefits identified in the previous subsections may be accepted as adequate
contributions on their own, or cash donations may be required. Assistance in providing affordable
housing to its employees or the community at large may also qualify. Determination as to what
constitutes an acceptable contribution for a given project shall be at the discretion of the governing
body.
§ 2-8-9. Public safeguards.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 24/346
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
All economic development projects receiving assistance from the Village shall be subject to an
annual performance review conducted by the Economic Development Committee. This review
shall evaluate whether the project is achieving the goals and objectives set forth in the project
participation agreement. This review shall be presented to the governing body for consideration.
The governing body, at a public hearing, may terminate assistance to the economic development
project by provisions set forth in the agreement, which terminates the agreement and specifies the
disposition of all assets and obligations of the project.
The Village of Bosque Farms shall retain a security interest which shall be specific in the project
participation agreement. The type of security interest will depend on the nature of the economic
development project and assistance provided by the Village of Bosque Farms. Types of security
may include, but are not limited to:
Letter of credit in the Village of Bosque Farms;
Performance bond equal to the Village of Bosque Farms' contribution;
A mortgage or lien on the property or equipment;
Pro-rated reimbursement of donation if business reduces work force or leaves the community
before the term agreed to; and
Other security agreeable to both parties.
Should a qualifying entity move, sell, lease or transfer a majority interest in the economic
development project before the expiration of the project participation agreement, the Village of
Bosque Farms retains the right to deny any and all assignments, sales, leases or transfers of any
interests in the economic development project until adequate assurances are made that the
transferee, assignee or lessee is a qualifying entity and that the terms of the agreement will be
satisfied by the transferee, assignee or lessee. At its discretion, the Village of Bosque Farms may
choose to deny said assignment, lease or transfer or may negotiate a new agreement with the
new operator, or the Village of Bosque Farms may reclaim the facility and enter into an agreement
with the new qualifying entity.
Any qualifying entity seeking assistance from public resources shall commit to operate in
accordance with its project participation agreement for a minimum period based on the costbenefit
analysis developed for the project.
§ 2-8-10. Project participation agreement.
The qualifying entity shall prepare with the Village of Bosque Farms a project participation
agreement. This agreement is the formal document which states the contribution and obligation of
all parties in the economic development project. The agreement must state the following items:
The economic development goals of the project;
The contribution of the Village and the qualifying entity;
The specific measurable objectives upon which the performance review will be read;
A schedule for project development and goal attainment;
The security being offered for the Village's investment;
The procedures by which a project may be terminated and the Village's investment recovered;
and
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 25/346
(7)
B.
A.
B.
The time period for which the Village shall retain an interest in the project. Each project
agreement shall have a "sunset" clause after which the Village of Bosque Farms shall
relinquish interest in and oversight of the project.
Each project participation agreement shall be subject to review and approval by the governing
body at a public hearing.
§ 2-8-11. Project monies.
All project monies shall be kept in a separate account by the entity and the Village of Bosque Farms,
with such account clearly identified. These accounts shall be subject to an annual independent audit
paid for by the qualifying entity.
§ 2-8-12. Termination.
The governing body may terminate this Section 2-8 and the Village of Bosque Farms' economic
development plan and any or all project participation agreements undertaken under its authority.
Termination shall be by ordinance at a public hearing or in accordance with the terms of the project
participation agreement. If an ordinance or a project participation agreement is terminated, all contract
provisions of the project participation agreement regarding termination shall be satisfied. Upon
termination of the ordinance or any project participation agreement, any Village monies remaining in
the Village project accounts shall be transferred to the Village of Bosque Farms' general fund.
§ 2-8-13. Joint regional projects.
The Village of Bosque Farms may engage in economic development projects involving one or more
other government entities for projects which encompass more than one municipality or county. In such
instances, the relevant governing bodies shall adopt a joint powers agreement. This agreement will
establish the application criteria and the terms of all project participation agreements. Criteria
established under a joint powers agreement shall be consistent with the provisions of this Section 2-8.
3. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section 3-1. Planning and Zoning Commission
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 2-19-2009 by Ord. No.
99-7, effective 3-2-2009 (Ch. 3-1 of the 1980 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning  See Sec. 10-1.
Subdivision Regulations  See Sec. 10-2.
§ 3-1-1. Purpose.
The Village Council hereby declares that the purpose of this Section 3-1 is to:
Institute a continuing process to provide comprehensive long-range planning for the Village of
Bosque Farms and its legally constituted planning area.
Establish a permanent body for studying the problems of future growth and development in the
Bosque Farms area and to guide and control such development in accordance with adopted
ordinances and regulations.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 26/346
C.
A.
B.
C.
[1]
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
Achieve appropriate land uses within the Village and its planning area in order to protect and
maintain a rural and agricultural environment and the natural resources of the area.
§ 3-1-2. Creation; membership; terms; removal.
There is hereby created a Planning and Zoning Commission of the Village of Bosque Farms,
hereinafter called the "Planning Commission."
Membership. The Planning Commission shall be composed of an odd number of members, not
less than five nor more than nine, who shall be residents of the planning and platting jurisdiction of
the Village of Bosque Farms, and who are not employees or officers of the Village. Administrative
officials of the Village may be appointed ex-officio, nonvoting members of the Planning
Commission.
Appointments. The members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the consent of the Village Council.
Terms. The terms of the members of the Planning Commission shall be two years. A vacancy in
the membership shall be by appointment for the remainder of the unexpired term. Members may
be reappointed for an indefinite number of terms.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Member removal. After a public hearing and for cause stated in writing and filed with the Village
Clerk, the Mayor, with the approval of the Village Council, may remove a member from the
Planning Commission.
§ 3-1-3. Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission shall have such powers and duties as are necessary to fulfill and
perform its functions, promote municipal planning, carry out the purposes of NMSA 1978, §§ 3-19-
1 through 3-19-12, as amended, which sections are herewith incorporated by reference and made
a part hereof.
The Planning Commission shall have those powers and duties necessary to promulgate and
enforce regulations governing the subdivision of land within the planning and platting jurisdiction of
the municipality as outlined in NMSA 1978, §§ 3-19-5 and Section 3-19-7, as amended, which
sections are herewith incorporated by reference and made a part hereof.
The Planning Commission shall have the powers necessary to promulgate and enforce
regulations governing zoning within the planning and platting jurisdiction of the municipality as
outlined in NMSA 1978, §§ 3-21-1 through 3-21-11, as amended, which sections are herewith
incorporated by reference and made a part hereof.
The Village Council may from time to time grant to the Planning Commission such other powers it
deems necessary for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, and moral or general welfare of
the municipality.
§ 3-1-4. Organization; meetings; conflicts of interest.
Officers. The Planning Commission shall elect one of its members Chairman for a one-year term
and create and fill any other offices as it may deem appropriate.
Conduct of business. The Planning Commission shall adopt such rules and regulations for the
conduct of business as seem appropriate to its members, and publish such rules and regulations.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 27/346
C.
D.
E.
F.
(a)
(b)
(1)
[1]
(2)
G.
Meetings. The Planning Commission shall hold regularly scheduled meetings at least once a
month if there is any business to conduct, and such meetings will be open to the public.
Quorum. A quorum of the Planning Commission shall be a majority of the full Commission.
Records. A public record shall be kept of all transactions, findings, resolutions, and determinations
made by the Planning Commission. The records shall be kept available for public inspection at
reasonable times.
Reports. The Planning Commission shall submit each month to the governing body a copy of its
meeting minutes.
Conflicts of interest. A Planning Commission member having any potential conflict of interest on
any policy, decision, or determination before the Planning Commission shall disclose to each of
the other members the nature of his potential conflict, and his disclosure shall be recorded.
Disclosure of such conflict as provided in this subsection shall not disqualify a Planning
Commission member from voting on the issue, unless:
A majority of the remaining members voting on the matter determines that the member
who discloses his potential conflict should not in propriety vote on the issue; or
The member having a potential conflict in the issue voluntarily disqualifies himself.
Penalty. Failure to disclose a conflict of interest shall be considered a misdemeanor and be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both
such fine and imprisonment.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Section 3-2. (Reserved)
Section 3-3. Library Board
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 9-19-2013 (Sec. 3-3 of
the 1980 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 3-3-1. Definitions.
As used in this Section 3-3, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CHILD PORNOGRAPHY
Has the meaning given such term in 18 U.S.C. § 2256. That definition is given as follows:
"child pornography" means any visual depiction, including any photograph, film, video, picture, or
computer or computer-generated image or picture, whether made or produced by electronic,
mechanical, or other means, of sexually explicit conduct, where
(A) The production of such visual depiction involves the use of a minor engaging in sexually
explicit conduct;
(B) Such visual depiction is a digital image, computer image, or computer-generated image
that is, or is indistinguishable from, that of a minor engaging in sexually explicit conduct;
or
(C) Such visual depiction has been created, adapted, or modified to appear that an
identifiable minor is engaging in sexually explicit conduct.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 28/346
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
HARMFUL TO MINORS
Any picture, image, graphic image file, or other visual depiction that:
Taken as a whole and with respect to minors, appeals to a prurient interest in nudity, sex, or
excretion;
Depicts, describes, or represents, in a patently offensive way with respect to what is suitable
for minors, an actual or simulated sexual act or sexual contact, actual or simulated, normal or
perverted sexual acts, or a lewd exhibition of the genitals; and
Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value as to minors.
OBSCENE
Has the meaning given such term in 18 U.S.C. § 1460.
§ 3-3-2. Membership.
The Library Board shall consist of five members who shall be residents of the communities served by
said library and shall include, as far as possible, representatives of the various geographic and ethnic
populations within the area served by the library. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and approval of the governing body. In addition, the following shall serve as nonvoting
members: a member of the governing body, the President or designated representative of the Friends
of the Bosque Farms Library, Inc. (a New Mexico nonprofit corporation established to support the
library activities), and the Librarian.
§ 3-3-3. Terms of office; officers.
Initially, three members shall be appointed for two years and two members for one year.
Thereafter, each member shall serve two years.
The Board shall, at its July meeting, elect from its membership a President, Vice President, and a
Secretary. Officers shall hold office for a term of one year.
§ 3-3-4. Duties and functions.
The Library Board shall:
Advise and recommend to the governing body all aspects of development and implementation of
policies and procedures governing the operation of the library.
Assist in formulating rules and regulations according to established policies and procedures, which
will be made available for public inspection and information upon request.
Recommend to the governing body an annual library budget in sufficient time to be included in the
total budget.
Research and seek out other revenue sources, including, but not limited to, grants, endowments
and other gifts for the exclusive use of the library. Funds solicited on behalf of the library will not
be used to supplant Village appropriations.
Establish short- and long-range priorities in cooperation with library personnel.
Keep the governing body informed of library activities through the Council representative.
Be responsive to the expressed needs of the community in library services.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 29/346
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
M.
A.
B.
C.
[1]
Be knowledgeable of local, state and federal laws, and support legislation that improves and
extends library services.
Know and understand the sources available through the state-wide library development programs,
advantages of participation in such programs, and seek out funding from such programs, where
applicable.
Keep abreast of public library standards and trends.
Encourage attendance at state meetings and workshops. All members of the Library Board shall
serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for all necessary travel expenses incurred
away from the Village of Bosque Farms on library business, in accordance with state statutes.
Uphold the Library Bill of Rights and the Freedom to Read Statement adopted by the American
Library Association.
Establish bylaws in accordance with this Section 3-3. They should include, but not be restricted to:
Recommendations to the Mayor for removal from the Board.
Meetings.
Voting procedures.
Duties of officers.
§ 3-3-5. Resource and property management.
It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to give a fictitious or an incorrect name or address to the
Bosque Farms Library in order to obtain possession of library property.
It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to write on, damage, deface, destroy, or keep Bosque Farms
Library property.
The Children's Internet Protection Act [Pub. L. 106-554 ("CIPA")] provides safeguards for filtering
internet content material that is defined under federal law as obscene, child pornography, or
harmful to minors. Pursuant to the CIPA, as a public place the Bosque Farms Public Library
actively filters and monitors patrons' internet usage. Inasmuch as the Bosque Farms Public Library
cannot filter out all possible content restricted under the CIPA on its library computers, it is
therefore unlawful for anyone to access on library computers material defined under federal law as
obscene, child pornography, or harmful to minors.
§ 3-3-6. Penalty.
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this code or any rules, policies and procedures
established by the Library Board shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned for a period of not more than 90 days, or both.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
4. DEPARTMENTS
Section 4-1. Fire Department
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 30/346
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms as Sec. 4-1 of the 1980
Code, as amended 2-18-1993. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fireworks  See Sec. 5-5.
False alarms  See Sec. 7-1, § 7-1-17.
Open burning  See Sec. 11-3.
§ 4-1-1. Creation and composition.
The Fire Department is the Bosque Farms Volunteer Fire Department, which shall consist of a Chief,
Assistant Chief, and as many firefighters as may be deemed necessary from time to time by the Chief.
§ 4-1-2. Rules and regulations.
The Fire Department shall be operated and managed in accordance with such departmental rules and
regulations as may be adopted by the Fire Department officers and approved by the Council, and not
previously provided for in this Section 4-1. All departmental rules and regulations adopted by the Fire
Department shall not be inconsistent with the rules and regulations relating to the Fire Protection Act
issued by the State Fire Marshal. The Fire Department shall provide the governing body with Fire
Department rules and regulations and any changes thereto for adoption and approval.
§ 4-1-3. Fire Chief.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall be selected at an election by a two-thirds majority of the
members of the Department whenever a vacancy occurs. The name of the person selected shall
be submitted to the Mayor for recommendation to the Council for its confirmation (which requires a
majority approval). An indefinite number of terms shall be allowed. Removal of the Fire Chief from
office shall be accomplished by:
A recommendation by the Mayor to the Council for removal for misconduct, malfeasance, or
criminal activity.
A petition signed by a two-thirds majority of the members of the Department submitted to the
Mayor for recommendation to the Council for its approval. The Mayor shall then call for and
preside over an election to select a successor.
The Fire Chief shall:
Be accountable to the Mayor for the personnel, morale, and general efficiency of the
Department.
Direct the operations of the Fire Department, subject to the rules and regulations thereof.
Supervise the manner of handling fires personally whenever possible in order to minimize
injury to persons and damage to property. During the progress of a fire, the authority of the
Fire Chief in all matters connected with the management or direction thereof, or the
disposition of property endangered by it, shall be absolute. All orders issued by him on such
occasions shall be respected, and any firefighter or citizen refusing to obey the same is guilty
of a misdemeanor.
Conduct suitable drills or instruction in the operation and handling of equipment, first aid and
rescue work, salvage, pre-fire planning and fire prevention, establishment of fire zones, water
supplies and all other matters generally considered essential to adequate fire protection and
safety of life and property from loss by fire.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 31/346
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
Assist the proper authorities in suppressing the crime of arson by investigating or causing to
be investigated the cause, origin, and circumstances of all fires.
Inspect buildings and premises and serve written notice upon the owner or occupant to abate,
within a specified time, any and all fire hazards that may be found. For the purpose of
conducting such inspection, the Chief or Fire Prevention Officer may enter any and all
buildings and premises within the municipality at any reasonable hour. Any person served
with a notice to abate any fire hazard shall comply therewith and promptly notify the Chief of
the remedial measures taken.
Keep complete records of all fires, inspections, apparatus and equipment, personnel, and
other information concerning operations of the Department. He shall furnish the Council with
such information as may be requested, and his records shall be open to public inspection at
all reasonable times.
Make a complete annual report, in writing, to the Council within one month after the close of
the fiscal year, such report to include the information specified in Subsection B(7) above, and
any additions to the rules and regulations requiring Council approval, together with
comparative experience data for previous years with recommendations for improving the
effectiveness of the Department.
Demote, dismiss, or expel any officer or member of the Department for neglect or refusal to
perform departmental duties, subject to the right of any members so demoted, dismissed, or
expelled to appeal to the Council, or as provided by personnel rules and regulations.
Enforce or cause to be enforced all ordinances, laws and regulations of the Village and state,
insofar as they pertain to fire and safety.
Appoint an Assistant Chief and other officers from the membership of the Department as
deemed necessary by the Chief.
§ 4-1-4. Firefighters; insignia for personal vehicles.
A roster of firefighters shall be maintained by the Fire Chief, chosen among applicants of able-bodied
citizens residing within the Village limits. Property owners whose business activities are within the
confines of the Village limits will be given preference. The firefighters shall be subject to supervision by
the Fire Chief and other Fire Department officers, and shall be accountable thereto. Each member of
the Department driving a privately owned vehicle to the scene of an incident or to the fire station shall
have an issued insignia attached to the vehicle.
§ 4-1-5. Authorized entry on property.
It shall be lawful for any firefighters acting under the direction of the Chief or another officer in
command to enter upon the premises adjacent to or in the vicinity of any building or other property that
is on fire, for the purpose of extinguishing such fire, and no person shall hinder, resist or obstruct any
firefighter in the discharge of his duty as hereinbefore provided.
§ 4-1-6. Equipment.
The Department shall be equipped with such apparatus and other equipment as may be required from
time to time to maintain its efficiency and provide adequate fire protection. All equipment of the
Department shall be safely and conveniently housed in such a place or places as may be designated
by the Council. No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private purpose, nor shall
any person willfully take away or conceal any article used in any way by the Department. No person
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 32/346
[1]
[1]
A.
shall enter any place where fire apparatus is housed or handle any apparatus or equipment belonging
to the Department unless accompanied by, or having special permission of, an officer or authorized
member of the Department.
§ 4-1-7. Equipment purchases.
Recommendations for acquisition of necessary equipment and facilities shall be made by the Fire
Chief; and shall be purchased in accordance with the State Fire Marshal's rules and regulations
relating to the Fire Protection Fund Act and to the Procurement Code (NMSA 1978, § 12-1-28 et seq.).
Acquisition of all equipment and facilities shall be made only with prior approval of the governing body
of the Village of Bosque Farms.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 4-1-8. Fire protection outside Village.
The Village is hereby authorized to enter into mutual aid agreements outside the Village limits. The
members of the Fire Department are authorized to render fire-fighting service to communities,
organizations, owners or occupants of premises outside the corporate limits of the Village; such
service shall only be rendered subject to the terms of the agreement or contract entered into by the
Village.
§ 4-1-9. Emergency vehicles.
The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle shall operate such vehicle pursuant to NMSA 1978,
§ 66-7-6.
§ 4-1-10. Fire alarms.
Suitable alarm systems, arrangements or equipment shall be provided for use in turning in an alarm,
and for alerting Department members to report to duty stations. It is unlawful for any person to
maliciously turn in or cause to be turned in a false alarm, as set forth in § 7-1-17 of the Village Code.
The Fire Chief shall provide necessary information to the public for procedures to turn in an alarm.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Section 4-2. (Reserved)
Section 4-3. Emergency Management
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 8-21-1975 (Sec. 4-3 of
the 1980 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 4-3-1. Department of Emergency Management.
There is hereby established under the executive branch of the government of the Village of Bosque
Farms in accordance with NMSA 1978, § 12-10-5, a Department of Emergency Management, which
shall consist of:
A Coordinator of Emergency Management who shall be appointed by the Mayor of the Village of
Bosque Farms with the concurrence of the Village Council and subject to approval by the State
Director of Homeland Security and Emergency Management.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 33/346
B.
C.
[1]
A.
B.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
Such additional professional and administrative staff personnel as may be required to effectively
carry out the emergency management program.
All other Village officers and employees, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them
during periods of emergency, shall be considered as part of the emergency management
organization of the Village of Bosque Farms.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 4-3-2. Purpose.
The purpose of the emergency management organization is to coordinate the efforts of all municipal
agencies and employees and nongovernmental agencies to prepare for and function in the event of
emergencies endangering the lives and health of citizens of Bosque Farms and the private and public
property therein from the effects of natural or man-caused disasters, including acts of war, and to
coordinate the implementation of said plans during periods of emergency. Such plans shall be
coordinated with those of Valencia County, and in consonance with the state emergency management
plans.
§ 4-3-3. Coordinator.
The Emergency Management Coordinator shall be the executive head of the Department of
Emergency Management and shall be responsible to the Mayor for the organization,
administration and operation of the emergency management program of the Village of Bosque
Farms. The Coordinator shall, acting for the Mayor, coordinate the emergency management
activities of all municipal departments and agencies and nongovernmental agencies, and shall
maintain liaison with and cooperate with the emergency management agencies of the federal
government, the State of New Mexico and other political subdivisions therein.
The Coordinator shall have all necessary authority to act for the government of the Village of
Bosque Farms in all matters pertaining to emergency management, including the obligation of
such municipal funds as may be appropriated for emergency management purposes. He shall
develop an organizational structure for the department, subject to the approval of the Village
Council, and is authorized to make appointments to fill the positions established therein.
§ 4-3-4. Funding.
Funds for necessary expenses of the Department of Emergency Management, including salaries
for approved paid positions, may be made available through appropriations by the Village Council
in accordance with NMSA 1978, § 12-10-7.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
The Coordinator shall prepare and submit to the Council an annual proposed budget for
emergency management expenditures, and shall indicate therein those amounts eligible for
matching funds under the federal emergency management assistance programs.
Emergency management funds may be obligated by the Coordinator only in the amounts
appropriated and for the purposes authorized by the Village Council.
5. LICENSES AND TAXATION
Section 5-1. Business Registration or License
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 34/346
A.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 10-15-2015 (Sec. 5-1 of
the 1980 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 5-1-1. Purpose.
This Section 5-1 is hereby enacted to provide for the safety, preserve the health, promote the
prosperity and improve the morals, order, comfort and convenience of the Village and its inhabitants.
§ 5-1-2. Definitions.
As used in this Section 5-1, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUSINESS
The activity of making, buying, or selling goods or providing services in exchange for money; work
that is part of a job; and the amount of activity that is done by a store, company, factory, etc.
§ 5-1-3. Registration required; fee.
Pursuant to NMSA 1978, § 3-38-3, all persons, firms, corporations or associations of any character
engaged in any business, other than those requiring a business license as set forth in § 5-1-5 and not
otherwise exempt by law, shall, before commencing business, and annually thereafter on or before the
16th day of March, secure business registration from the Village of Bosque Farms under the
procedures hereinafter set forth, and shall pay a business registration fee, in advance, at the rate of
$35 per year for each location where such business is conducted. In the event that any business
registration fee due hereunder for renewal shall not be paid by the 16th day of March, or any
applicable business registration fee is not paid before commencement of business, a penalty in the
amount of $10 per year shall be added to the registration fee. The business registration fee will not be
prorated for business conducted for a portion of the year.
§ 5-1-4. License required.
Pursuant to NMSA 1978, §§ 3-38-1 through 3-38-6, all persons, firms, corporations or associations of
any character engaged in any of the various pursuits, businesses or occupations listed in § 5-1-5 and
not otherwise exempt by law shall, before commencing business, and annually thereafter before the
16th day of March, secure a license from the Village under the procedures hereinafter set forth, and
shall pay a license fee, in advance, at the rate set in § 5-1-5 for each location where such business is
conducted. In the event that any license fee due hereunder for renewal shall not be paid by the 16th
day of March, or any applicable license fee is not paid before commencement of business, a penalty in
the amount of $10 shall be added in addition to the registration fee.
§ 5-1-5. License fees.
The following pursuits, businesses or occupations are hereby required to be licensed and the fees set
forth are required to be paid to the Village for each place of business conducted by the same person,
firm, corporation or association:
Itinerant or traveling shows, circuses, carnivals, wrestling or boxing exhibitions, operatic and
theatrical or other public exhibitions, at the rate of $25 per day; provided, however, that if any
shows shall not be operated in a permanent building and shall use locations requiring cleaning
after the conclusion thereof, a deposit of $300 in cash, cashier's check, or other certified funds (no
checks) shall be made with the Village, to be refunded if the Village office certifies that such
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 35/346
B.
C.
D.
E.
temporary location has been satisfactorily cleaned of refuse and debris deposited there as result
of such performance.
Fortune tellers, clairvoyants, palmists, and similar trades, whether the same be a principal
business or pursuit, or incidental to another, at the rate of $25 for the first day and at the rate of
$10 for each succeeding day.
Itinerant vendors of all kinds who sell merchandise or services of any character, whether delivery
be made by them or not, or who shall temporarily bring into the Village stocks of goods, wares, or
merchandise and offer the same at public auction or private sale, or who shall offer to perform
services for a period of time less than two weeks, at the rate of $25 per day for the term of the
license to: (1) traveling salesmen or drummers taking orders for merchandise to be delivered to
retail dealers only; (2) any person selling fruits, farm or garden produce of his own raising; (3)
sales of merchandise or services within markets or flea markets having a single location used as a
market or flea market for three or more vendors on a regular basis; and provided further, however,
that nothing herein shall be construed to be a repeal of Section 7-3-9 of the Code of the Village of
Bosque Farms, which prohibits certain door-to-door sales.
Street stands, except where conducted for charity, at the rate of $50 per year; provided, however,
that this subsection shall not apply to garage sales.
Regulated businesses. Any "regulated business" as defined in Section 10-1, Zoning, § 10-1-11G,
of the Village Code, shall pay a yearly business licensing fee of $1,000.
§ 5-1-6. Application procedure.
It shall be the duty of all persons, prior to engaging in any business described in § 5-1-3 or 5-1-4
herein, to obtain an application therefor from the Village Clerk/Administrator or designated business
license official of the Village of Bosque Farms, which application shall contain information concerning
the name of the person, firm, corporation or association undertaking the business, a complete address,
both in the Village and elsewhere, of such person, firm, corporation or association, together with a
description of the nature of the business to be conducted, which application shall also comply with § 5-
1-8, and contain information sufficient to show compliance with all other ordinances of the Village, and
return said application with all information and payment of the fee imposed in § 5-1-3 or 5-1-4 herein.
§ 5-1-7. Village Clerk/Administrator to provide registration or
license; display.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk/Administrator or designated business license official to provide
suitable business registrations or licenses to be furnished to all applicants, and each business
registration or license shall be prominently displayed at the place of business for which it is issued.
§ 5-1-8. Applicant to provide state taxpayer identification number.
No business registration or license shall be issued hereunder unless the applicant for a business
registration or license shall furnish to the Village Clerk/Administrator or business license official a
current New Mexico taxpayer identification number or evidence of application for a current taxpayer
identification number pursuant to NMSA 1978, § 3-38-4C.
§ 5-1-9. Denial of registration or license.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 36/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
A.
After a person has made application to the Village for business registration or licensure, the application
may be denied for any of the following reasons:
The applicant does not meet the qualifications for business registration or licensure as provided
under this Section 5-1.
For a new application, nonpayment of a returned check for the required registration or license fees
at the time the application is made; for a business registration or license renewal application,
nonpayment of the required registration or license fees plus penalty three months after it is due.
False or incomplete information given on the application.
Noncompliance with any requirement or condition set by the Village governing body, Planning and
Zoning Commission or Clerk/Administrator under a conditional use permit, special use permit,
home occupation permit or other special exception.
Noncompliance with any Village, state or federal statutes or any Health Department regulations
governing the applicant's proposed business.
Any other reason expressly provided for in this Section 5-1.
§ 5-1-10. Revocation of registration or license.
An existing business registration or license may be revoked for any of the following reasons:
The registration or license does not now meet the qualifications for a registration or license as
provided under this Section 5-1;
False or incomplete information given on an application;
Substantial violations of the terms and conditions on which a registration or license was
issued;
The registrant or licensee has violated or is violating any provision of this Section 5-1 or
provision of the ordinances of the Village of Bosque Farms, state or federal statutes or
regulations governing the registrant's or licensee's business;
The registrant or licensee has obtained or aided another person to obtain registration or
licensure by fraud or deceit;
Conviction of infractions of or offenses under such an ordinance or law;
Wrongful behavior of a substantial character and of a public concern in relation to the
registered or licensed activity;
When reasonably necessary in the interests of protection of the public health, safety, peace or
welfare;
The registrant or licensee has failed to pay property taxes, the utility tax or sales tax;
The registrant or licensee has refused to allow authorized representatives of the Village to
make an inspection or has interfered with such representatives while in the performance of
their duty in making such inspection;
The registrant or licensee is not complying with a requirement or condition set by the Village
governing body, Planning and Zoning Commission or Clerk/Administrator under a conditional
use permit, special use permit, home occupation permit or other special exception;
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 37/346
(12)
(13)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
Violation of this Section 5-1 by the agents or employees of the registrant or licensee and
violations of any other laws by the agents or employees committed while acting as an agent
or employee of the registrant or licensee; or
Any other reason expressly provided for in this Section 5-1.
The governing body may revoke any business registration or license issued under this Section 5-1
after it has been issued when any one or more of the following grounds are found to exist:
Illegal issuance of the business registration or license.
Issuance of the business registration or license without authority or power.
Issuance under an unauthorized ordinance or under an ordinance illegally adopted.
Issuance in violation of an ordinance.
When the business registration or license is procured by fraud or false representation of facts.
When the business registration or license is issued through mistake or inadvertence.
When the business registration or license application contains false or misleading statements,
evasions or suppression of material facts.
§ 5-1-11. Enforcement.
The business license official shall have the authority, without a hearing, to deny a registration or
license for the reasons provided for in this Section 5-1.
The business license official shall have the authority to revoke a business registration or license or
an alcohol license, without a hearing, for reasons provided for in this Section 5-1. However, the
revocation shall not take effect until the time period for appealing the decision as set forth in this
Section 5-1 below has passed.
The business license official may, on its own initiative or in response to complaints from the
general public or any Village department or division, investigate and gather evidence of violations
of this Section 5-1 or other circumstances which may give rise to a denial or revocation.
§ 5-1-12. Revocation procedure.
The business license official shall cause written notice to be given, by personal service or registered
mail, to the registrant or licensee of his or her decision to revoke a registration or license, the reason
for such decision, that operation of a business or the sale of alcohol after the effective date of the
revocation is a misdemeanor, the registrant's or licensee's right to appeal the business license official's
decision and the appeal procedure.
§ 5-1-13. Appeal procedure.
Appeals of the business license official's decision to deny or revoke a registration or license may
be made by filing a written notice of appeal with the Village of Bosque Farms within 15 days of
receipt of the notice of denial or revocation.
The notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall set forth with specificity the reason for which the
appeal is taken.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 38/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
[1]
§ 5-1-14. Hearing on denial or revocation.
The hearing on a denial or revocation shall be at a time, place and day set by the governing body
of the Village of Bosque Farms, but not later than seven working days after receipt of the notice of
appeal.
At the hearing, the business license official shall present the reasons for the decision to deny or
revoke the registration or license.
The applicant, registrant or licensee, in person or through his or her attorney, may then present
any evidence showing reasons why the decision was in error.
All witnesses shall be sworn to testify truthfully. Either party is entitled to confront and crossexamine
any witnesses.
Any oral or documented evidence may be received, but the governing body shall exclude all
privileged, irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence.
If the denial or revocation appealed from is based on a finding by the Planning and Zoning
Commission or Administrator, New Mexico Construction Industries Division (NMCID), Fire
Department, Health Department, or Police Department that the business was or would be in
violation of any applicable ordinances or regulations, then that finding shall be conclusive on the
governing body and the governing body's decision may be based only on whether the registration
or license was properly denied or revoked because of the Planning and Zoning Commission's or
Administrator's, NMCID's, Fire Department's, Health Department's, or Police Department's finding.
If the denial or revocation appealed from is based on a determination by the business license
official that grounds existed pursuant to this Section 5-1, the governing body may examine the
factual nature of the grounds and determine whether such grounds are sufficient to sustain the
decision of the business license official.
The governing body does not have the authority to waive compliance with applicable provisions of
this Section 5-1, nor can the governing body extend deadlines set forth in this Section 5-1 or
change the substance or form of this Section 5-1.
§ 5-1-15. Decision of governing body.
The governing body, after hearing all the evidence, shall announce its decision at the time of the
hearing. The governing body may affirm or reverse the decision of the business license official. The
decision shall be in writing and shall be based only upon findings of fact. The business license official
shall cause written notice to be given, by personal service or registered mail, to the appellant of the
findings of the hearing.
§ 5-1-16. Appeal of governing body's decision.
Any decision of the governing body may be appealed by the applicant, registrant, or licensee to the
District Court within 30 days of the written findings of fact. Review by the District Court shall be limited
to the appeal record made before the governing body.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 5-1-17. Registration or licensing after revocation.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 39/346
A.
B.
A person whose registration or license has been finally revoked, after all available hearings, shall
be revoked indefinitely.
Any and all conditional use permits, special use permits, home occupation permits or other special
exceptions shall be revoked or deemed invalid upon revocation of a business registration or
license.
§ 5-1-18. Validity of business registration or license or alcohol
license during appeal.
Throughout the administrative appeal process as outlined above, a registrant or licensee holding a
revoked registration or license may continue to operate his or her business or to sell alcohol in
accordance with federal, state and local laws pending final decision on the appeal, or until the time for
appeal has passed, whichever occurs first.
§ 5-1-19. Penalty.
In addition to the revocation of the business registration or license, any person violating any of the
provisions of this Section 5-1 shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, revocation of a registration or license to conduct
business in the Village of Bosque Farms, or all such fines, imprisonment and revocation of registration
or license. Each subsequent offense after conviction shall be prosecuted and treated as a separate
offense.
§ 5-1-20. Separate registration or license fees.
Separate registration or license fees shall be imposed upon and a separate registration or license
issued for each place of business conducted by the same person, firm, association or corporation.
§ 5-1-21. Transfer of registration or license.
Registrations or licenses issued shall not be transferable without the consent of the governing body
and shall not be transferable in any event unless the stock of merchandise covered thereby shall
remain intact and in the same location within the Village. A proposed transferee must meet all the
requirements set forth herein for registration or licensure.
§ 5-1-22. Refund of registration or license fees; exception.
No registration or license fees paid hereunder shall be refunded except in cases where the registration
or license issued is revoked by the Village of Bosque Farms in furtherance of the public interest, and
only those daily fees which were paid in advance and which were unused at the time of revocation
shall be refunded.
§ 5-1-23. Lien and priority.
The registration or license fee fixed as hereinbefore provided shall be and constitute a lien in favor of
the Village upon the personal property of the person, firm, corporation or business used in connection
with said business, from the time that such registration or license fee is fixed. The lien may be enforced
as provided in NMSA 1978, §§ 3-38-1 through 3-38-6. Such lien shall have priority over any lien or
encumbrance whatsoever, except the lien of state and county taxes, and no property of any person,
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 40/346
A.
firm, corporation or business shall be exempt from levy and sale or execution issued for the collection
of a judgment for any such fee. No sheriff, receiver, assignee, master or other officer shall sell the
property of any person, firm, corporation or business subject to such registration or license fee, under
process for order of court, without first ascertaining from the Village Clerk/Administrator the amount of
any registration or license due, owing or unpaid; it shall be the duty of such officer first to pay the
amount thereof out of the proceeds of such sale before making payment of money to the judgment
creditor or other person at whose instance such sale is had.
Section 5-2. Liquor Licenses
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms by Ord. No. 2008-10
(Sec. 5-2 of the 1980 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Security personnel  See Sec. 5-3.
§ 5-2-1. Title.
These regulations shall be known as the "Liquor License Ordinance of the Village of Bosque Farms,
New Mexico," and shall be referred to herein as "this Section 5-2."
§ 5-2-2. Sale, possession, manufacture and transportation of
alcoholic beverages restricted.
The sale or possession, for the purpose of sale, offering for sale, or the manufacture or transportation
of alcoholic beverages is hereby prohibited within the Village, except on the conditions provided for in
this Section 5-2.
§ 5-2-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Section 5-2, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Distilled or rectified spirits, potable alcohol, brandy, whiskey, rum, gin and aromatic bitters bearing
the federal Internal Revenue strip stamps or any similar alcoholic beverages, including blended
and fermented beverages, dilutions or mixtures of one or more of the foregoing, containing more
than 1/2 of 1% alcohol, but excluding medicinal bitters.
BEER
An alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt
and hops, or other cereals in water and includes porter, beer, ale and stout.
BREWER
A person who owns or operates a business for the manufacture of beer.
CLUB
Any nonprofit group, including an auxiliary or subsidiary group, organized and operated under
the laws of this state, with a membership of not less than 50 members who pay membership
dues at the rate of not less than $5 per year and who, under the constitution and bylaws of
the club, have all voting rights and full membership privileges, and which group is the owner,
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 41/346
(1)
(2)
lessee or occupant of premises used exclusively for club purposes and which group the
Director finds:
Is operated solely for recreation, social, patriotic, political, benevolent or athletic
purposes; and
Has been granted an exemption by the United States from the payment of the federal
income tax as a club under the provisions of Section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986, as amended, or, if the applicant has not operated as a club for a sufficient
time to be eligible for the income tax exemption, it must execute and file with the Director
a sworn letter of intent declaring that it will, in good faith, apply for such exemption as
soon as it is eligible.[1]
DIRECTOR
The Director of the Special Investigations Division of the Department of Public Safety when the
term is used in reference to the enforcement and investigatory provisions of the Liquor Control
Act; and the Director of the Alcohol and Gaming Division of the Regulation and Licensing
Department when the term is used in reference to the licensing provisions of the Liquor Control
Act.
DISPENSER
A person licensed under the provisions of the Liquor Control Act selling, offering for sale or having
in his possession with intent to sell alcoholic beverages both by the drink for consumption on the
licensed premises and in unbroken packages for consumption and not for resale off the licensed
premises.
DISTILLER
A person engaged in manufacturing spirituous liquors.
GOVERNING BODY
The Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms.
HOTEL
An establishment or complex having a resident of New Mexico as a proprietor or manager and
where, in consideration of payment, meals and lodging are regularly furnished to the general
public. The establishment or complex must maintain for the use of its guests a minimum of 25
sleeping rooms.
LICENSED PREMISES
The contiguous area(s) connected by indoor passageways of a structure and the outside dining,
recreation and lounge areas of the structure that are under the direct control of the licensee and
from which the licensee is authorized to sell, serve, or allow the consumption of alcoholic
beverages under the provisions of its license; provided that in the case of a restaurant, including a
restaurant that has operated continuously in two separate structures since July 1, 1987, and that
is located in a local option district that has voted to disapprove the transfer of liquor license into
that local option district, hotel, golf course or racetrack, "licensed premises" includes all public and
private rooms, facilities and areas in which alcoholic beverages are sold or served in the
customary operating procedures of the restaurant, hotel, golf course or racetrack.
LIQUOR CONTROL ACT
Chapter 60, Articles 3A, 5A, 6A, 6B, 6C, 6E, 7A, 7B and 8A, NMSA 1978.
[2]
LOCAL OPTION DISTRICT
A county that has voted to approve the sale, serving or public consumption of alcoholic beverages
or any incorporated municipality that falls within a county that has voted to approve the sale,
serving or public consumption of alcoholic beverages under the terms of the Liquor Control Act or
any former act.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 42/346
[1]
MANUFACTURER
A distiller, rectifier, brewer or winer.
MINOR
A person under the age of 21 years of age.
PACKAGE
An immediate container of alcoholic beverages that is filled or packed by a manufacturer or wine
bottler for sale; any container or receptacle for the purpose of containing any alcoholic beverages,
beer or wine, as marked by the manufacturer or wine bottler to wholesalers.
PERSON
An individual, corporation, firm, partnership, copartnership, association or other legal entity.
PUBLIC CELEBRATION
Includes any state fair, county fair, community fiesta, cultural or artistic performance or
professional athletic competition of a seasonal nature or activities held on an intermittent basis.
RECTIFIER
A person who blends, mixes or distills alcohol with other liquids or substances for the purpose of
making an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of sale other than to the consumer by the drink, and
includes all bottlers of spirituous liquors.
RESTAURANT
An establishment having a New Mexico resident as a proprietor or manager that is held out to the
public as a place where meals are prepared and served primarily for on-premises consumption to
the general public in consideration of payment that has a dining room, a kitchen and the
employees necessary for preparing, cooking and serving meals; provided that "restaurant" does
not include establishments, as defined in rules promulgated by the Director, serving only
hamburgers, sandwiches, salads and other fast foods.
RETAILER
A person licensed under the provisions of the Liquor Control Act selling, offering for sale or having
in his possession with the intent to sell alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages for consumption
and not for resale off the licensed premises.[3]
WHOLESALER
A person whose place of business is located in New Mexico and who sells, offers for sale or
possesses for the purpose of sale alcoholic beverages for sale by the purchaser.
WINE
Includes the words "fruit juices" and means alcoholic beverages obtained by the fermentation of
the natural sugar contained in fruit or other agricultural products, with or without the addition of
sugar or other products, that do not contain less than 1/2 of 1% nor more than 21% alcohol by
volume.
WINE BOTTLER
A New Mexico wholesaler who is licensed to sell wine at wholesale for resale only and who buys
wine in bulk and bottles it for wholesale resale.
WINEGROWER
A person who owns or operates a business for the manufacture of wine.[4]
WINERY
A facility in which a winegrower manufactures and stores wine.[5]
Editor's Note: The definitions of "commission" and "department," which immediately followed this
subsection, were repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 43/346
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Editor's Note: The definition of "spiritous liquors," which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Editor's Note: The definition of "winer," which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at
time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 5-2-4. Club licenses.
In any local option district, a club qualified under the provisions of the Liquor Control Act may
apply for and be issued a club license.
Club licenses shall not be transferred from one owner to another. A club license may be
transferred from one location to another upon compliance with the provisions of the Liquor Control
Act. A club license shall not be leased.
The provisions of Section 35 of the Liquor Control Act (NMSA 1978, § 60-6A-18) shall not apply to
club licenses.
Clubs shall meet the requirements of NMSA 1978, § 60-7A-13, Sales by clubs.
§ 5-2-5. Dispenser's licenses.
In any local option district, a person qualified under the provisions of the Liquor Control Act may
apply for and be issued a dispenser's license for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
A dispenser's license, when issued, shall be used by the person to whom the license is issued and
shall only be used within the licensed premises, pursuant to the provisions of the Liquor Control
Act.
§ 5-2-6. Special dispenser's permits.
In addition to the state fee and if previously provided for by ordinance, the governing body of the
local option district in which the public celebration is held may charge an additional fee not to
exceed $25 per day for each day the permittee dispenses alcoholic beverages. The permittee
shall be subject to all state laws and regulations and all local regulations regulating dispenser's
privileges and disabilities.
Any person holding a dispenser's license may be issued a special dispenser's permit by the
Director allowing the dispensing of alcoholic beverages at a function catered by that business,
provided that the governing body of the local option district has given the person seeking the
permit written approval to dispense alcoholic beverages at the catered function. The permit shall
be valid for no more than 12 hours. To apply for the permit, the holder of a dispenser's license
shall submit a fee of $25, together with such information as the Director may require. The
permittee shall be subject to all state laws and regulations and all local regulations, except that the
permittee shall not be required to suspend the dispensing of alcoholic beverages at the licensed
premises solely because of the issuance of the special dispenser's permit.
The person holding a dispenser's license and his employees shall be the only persons permitted
to dispense alcohol during the function for which the permit was sought. Issuance of the special
dispenser's permit is within the Director's discretion and is subject to any reasonable requirements
imposed by the Director.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 44/346
D.
A.
B.
A.
B.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
Any person holding a dispenser's license in a local option district in which Sunday sales of
alcoholic beverages are not otherwise permitted pursuant to the Liquor Control Act may dispense
beer and wine on Sunday at any public celebration for which it has received a concession from the
governing body in charge of the public celebration, provided that the governing body of that local
option district has by resolution expressly permitted such beer and wine sales on Sunday at that
public celebration in accordance with the provisions of this section.
§ 5-2-7. Restaurant licenses.
At any time after the effective date of the Liquor Control Act, a local option district may approve
the issuance of restaurant licenses for the sale of beer and wine by holding an election on that
question pursuant to the procedures set out in NMSA 1978, § 60-5A-1. The election also may be
initiated by a resolution adopted by the governing body of the local option district without a petition
from registered qualified electors having been submitted.
After the approval of restaurant licenses by the registered qualified electors of the local option
district and upon completion of all requirements the Liquor Control Act for the issuance of licenses,
a restaurant located or to be located within the local option district may receive a restaurant
license to sell, serve or allow the consumption of beer and wine, subject to the requirements and
restrictions of NMSA 1978, §§ 60-6A-4B(1) through (8), 60-6A-4C and D.
§ 5-2-8. Retailer's licenses.
In any local option district, a person qualified under the provisions of the Liquor Control Act may
apply for and be issued a retailer's license for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
A retailer's license, when issued, shall only be used by the person to whom the license is issued
and shall only be used within the licensed premises, pursuant to the provisions of the Liquor
Control Act.
§ 5-2-9. Winegrower's licenses.
Exempt from the procurement of any other license pursuant to the terms of the Liquor Control Act,
but not from the procurement of a winegrower's license, is any person in this state who produces
wine. Except during periods of shortage or reduced availability, at least 50% of a winegrower's
overall annual production of wine shall be produced from grapes or other agricultural products
grown in this state pursuant to rules adopted by the Director; provided, however, that, for purposes
of determining annual production and compliance with the fifty-percent-New-Mexico-grown
provision of this subsection, the calculation of a winegrower's overall annual production of wine
shall not include the winegrower's production of wine for out-of-state wine producer license
holders.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
A person issued a winegrower's license pursuant to this section may do any of the provisions as
set forth in NMSA 1978, § 60-6A-11.
A person issued a winegrower's license must meet the requirements as set forth in Section 10-1,
Zoning, of the Village Code.
§ 5-2-10. Drinking in public establishments; selling or serving
alcoholic beverages other than in licensed establishments.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 45/346
A.
B.
[1]
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
It is a violation of the Liquor Control Act and this Section 5-2 for any person to consume alcoholic
beverages in any public establishment unless the establishment is licensed to sell and serve
alcoholic beverages.
It is a violation of the Liquor Control Act and this Section 5-2 for any person not a licensee to sell,
serve or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages in his public establishment or private club.
It is a violation of the Liquor Control Act for any licensee to sell or deliver alcoholic beverages from
a drive-up window.[1]
Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 5-2-11. Dispensing of alcoholic beverages.
It is unlawful to drink or consume alcoholic beverages, or for any person who is the owner or proprietor
to sell, serve, furnish or permit the drinking or consumption of alcoholic beverages at any public dance,
poolroom, bowling alley, street, state or federal building, or in any other public place or any public or
private club, key club or coffee house, whether operated for profit or not, except establishments having
a license to dispense alcoholic beverages. It is unlawful for any licensee to give any kind of "curb
service" of alcoholic beverages, except in unbroken packages, outside of the building on the premises
at which the licensee's business is operated, except to customers seated at tables.
§ 5-2-12. Limitation on number of licenses.
The maximum number of licenses to be issued under the provisions of NMSA 1978, §§ 60-6A-2
and 60-6A-3 shall be as follows: in an incorporated municipality, not more than one dispenser's or
one retailer's license, including canopy licenses which are replaced by dispenser's licenses as
provided in NMSA 1978, § 60-6B-16, for each 2,000 inhabitants or major fraction thereof.
For the purpose of this section, the number of inhabitants of a local option district shall be
determined by annual population estimates published by the Economic Development Department.
§ 5-2-13. Minors in licensed premises.
Any person licensed pursuant to the provisions of the Liquor Control Act and this Section 5-2 or
any employee, agent or lessee of that person who permits a minor to enter and remain in any area
of a licensed premises that is prohibited to the use of minors is guilty of a violation of the Liquor
Control Act and this Section 5-2.
A minor shall not enter or attempt to enter any area of a licensed premise that is posted or
otherwise identified as being prohibited to the use of minors, except as authorized by regulation or
as necessitated by an emergency. A person who violates the provisions of this subsection is guilty
of a petty misdemeanor and shall be punished pursuant to the provisions of NMSA 1978, § 31-19-
1.
§ 5-2-14. Sale to minors.
It shall be unlawful for any club, retailer, dispenser, bartender, waiter, or servant or employee of
any club, retailer or dispenser, or for any taxi driver, hotel employee or any other person, except
the parent or guardian or spouse of any minor or adult person into whose custody any court has
committed such minor for the time, outside of the actual, visible personal presence of such minor's
parent, guardian, spouse or the adult person into whose custody any court has committed such
minor for the time, to do any of the following acts:
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 46/346
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
[1]
C.
A.
[1]
B.
A.
B.
To sell, serve or give any alcoholic beverage to a minor.
To buy alcoholic beverages for or to procure the sale or service of alcoholic beverages to a
minor.
To deliver alcoholic beverages to a minor.
To aid or assist a minor to buy, procure or be served with alcoholic beverages.
It shall be unlawful for any minor to buy, attempt to buy, receive, possess or permit himself to be
served with any alcoholic beverages except when accompanied by his parent, guardian, adult
spouse or an adult person into whose custody he has been committed for the time by a court, who
is present at the time the alcoholic beverages are bought or received by him or possessed by him
or served or delivered to him.
Any person, not a minor, who deceives another person to believe that a minor is legally entitled to
be sold, served or delivered alcoholic beverages has violated this section.[1]
Editor's Note: Original Subsection D, defining the term "minor," which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 5-2-15. Sales by minors.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any person under the age of 21 years to sell or serve
alcoholic beverages, including wines and beer.
It shall be unlawful for any retailer or dispenser knowingly to employ any person under the age of
21 years in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages. A person holding a dispenser's, restaurant
or club license may employ persons 19 years of age or older to sell or serve alcoholic beverages
in an establishment that is held out to the public as a place where meals are prepared and served
and the primary source of revenue is food, and where the sale or consumption of alcoholic
beverages is not the primary activity, except that a person under the age of 21 years of age shall
not be employed as a bartender.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 5-2-16. Operating hours.
The licenses of retailers of alcoholic beverages shall allow them to sell and deliver alcoholic
beverages, and the licenses of dispensers of alcoholic beverages and club liquor licenses shall
allow them to sell, serve, deliver and permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on their
licensed premises on Mondays from 7:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight, on Tuesdays through
Saturdays from after 12:00 midnight of the previous day until 2:00 a.m., then from 7:00 a.m. until
12:00 midnight, and on Sundays only after 12:00 midnight of the previous day until 2:00 a.m.
Dispenser's, retail and club licensees shall close their places of business during voting hours on
the days of the biennial primary election of each even-numbered year and the biennial general
election held upon the first Tuesday in November of each even-numbered year, and on the days of
Village elections for Village officers, and on the days of such other elections as may be prescribed
by rules and regulations promulgated by the Director of the Department of Alcoholic Beverage
Control.
A dispenser's or restaurant licensee or club may, upon payment of an additional fee of $100,
obtain a permit to sell, serve or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages by the drink on the
licensed premises on Sundays, subject to approval obtained pursuant to the process set forth in
Subsection C of this section. Alcoholic beverages may be sold, served and consumed from 11:00
a.m. until 12:00 midnight as set forth in the licensee's Sunday sales permit, except as otherwise
provided for a restaurant licensee in NMSA 1978, § 60-6A-4. The Sunday sales permit shall expire
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 47/346
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
[1]
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
on June 30 of each year and may be renewed from year to year upon application for renewal and
payment of the required fee. The permit fee shall not be prorated. Sales made pursuant to this
subsection shall be called "Sunday sales."
Sunday sales pursuant to the provisions of Subsection B of this section are permitted in a local
option district that voted to permit them. If in that election a majority of the voters in a local option
district voted "no" on the question "Shall Sunday sales of alcoholic beverages by the drink for
consumption on the licensed premises of licensees be allowed in this local option district?",
Sunday sales are unlawful in that local option district upon certification of the election returns
unless the provisions of NMSA 1978, § 60-7A-1J apply. The question shall not again be placed on
the ballot in that local option district until:
At least one year has passed; and
A petition is filed with the local governing body bearing the signatures of registered qualified
electors of the local option district equal in number to 10% of the number of votes cast and
counted in the local option district for Governor in the last preceding general election in which
a Governor was elected. The signatures on the petition shall be verified by the clerk of the
county in which the local option district is situated.
It is unlawful for any licensed retailer of alcoholic beverages to sell or deliver alcoholic beverages,
or for any licensed dispenser or club to sell, deliver, serve or permit the consumption of alcoholic
beverages, on their licensed premises during hours other than those prescribed by this section.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 5-2-17. Annual license tax.
Municipalities within or composing local option districts may impose an annual, nonprohibitive
municipal license tax upon the privilege of persons holding state liquor licenses under the
provisions of the Liquor Control Act to operate within such municipalities as retailers, dispenser
licensees, restaurant licensees or club licensees.
The annual license tax for the Village is $250.
The license tax imposed by this section shall be paid either in cash or by certified draft to the
Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer as provided prior to the sale by any such licensee of
alcoholic beverages within the Village, such tax to be payable as follows:
In full payment of the aggregate amount of annual license tax due and owing to accompany
any such application for license.
In lieu of full payment, a licensee may elect in writing to pay such annual license tax in equal
semiannual installments payable on or before June 30 and on or before December 31 of each
and every year.
Any person holding a retailer's, dispenser's or club license from the Department of Alcoholic
Beverage Control and desiring to pay the license tax imposed by this section shall file with the
Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer a duplicate copy of the original application filed with and
approved by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. The application shall be accompanied
by cash or a certified draft in full for the annual license fee or, in lieu thereof, if the applicant so
elects to pay by semiannual installments, in a sum equal to 50% of such annual license tax. Upon
the filing of an application as herein provided and payment in full or, the respective pro rata
semiannual installment of annual license tax as shall be due and owing, it shall be the duty of the
Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer to issue a license to such applicant for one year or for
1/2 year as the case may be, evidencing payment of such license tax in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 48/346
E.
[1]
[1]
Upon default in the payment in any such semiannual installment of annual license tax as herein
provided, said license shall be deemed to have expired.
§ 5-2-18. License suspension or revocation.
Licenses may be suspended or revoked in accordance with NMSA 1978, § 60-6C-1.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 5-2-19. Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section 5-2 shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine
not exceeding $500 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Violations continued for a period of 15 days after conviction shall be prosecuted and
treated as a separate offense.
§ 5-2-20. Effect on existing actions.
Adoption of this Section 5-2 shall not affect nor prevent any pending or future prosecution of, or action
to abate, any existing violation of this Section 5-2 if the violations is also a violation of the provisions of
this Section 5-2. The repealer shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or resolution, or part
thereof, heretofore repealed.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Section 5-3. Security Personnel
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms as Sec. 5-3 of the 1980
Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Liquor licenses  See Sec. 5-2.
§ 5-3-1. Legislative intent.
To assist in protecting the public health, welfare, and safety in the Village of Bosque Farms, the
operators of liquor establishments and public dances shall provide security personnel per the
requirements of this code.
§ 5-3-2. Definitions.
As used in this Section 5-3, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated. The present tense
includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular.
LIQUOR ESTABLISHMENT
Any business licensed by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control of the State of New
Mexico for the sale of alcoholic liquors at retail; or any fair or public celebration for which a special
dispenser's permit has been issued per NMSA § 60-6A-12.
OPERATOR
Any person or persons who are responsible for, own, lease, control, or manage any liquor
establishment or public dance.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 49/346
A.
B.
ORGANIZATION
A body organized for some specific purpose as a club, union, society, or other publicly recognized
group.
PATRON
Each patron, customer, guest, invitee, and person present in a liquor establishment or at a public
dance, whether or not he or she is partaking of alcoholic beverages or is dancing. Bona fide
employees or volunteers working for the operator are exempted from this definition.
PUBLIC DANCE
Any dance to which the public generally is invited and any dance limited to members of an
organization, whether or not any charge is made, directly or indirectly, by or for the operator of
such dance.
SECURITY PERSONNEL
A person 21 years of age or older in reasonable health and of good moral character who complies
with and is capable of carrying out the provisions of this Section 5-3.
§ 5-3-3. Number of security personnel required.
The following number of security personnel shall be provided by the operator when the following
number of patrons are present in a liquor establishment:
Number of Patrons Number of Security Personnel Required
0 to 25 None
25 to 75 1
75 to 125 2
125 and up 3
The following number of security personnel shall be provided by the operator when the following
number of patrons are present at a public dance:
Number of Patrons Number of Security Personnel Required
0 to 100 None
100 to 250 1
250 to 400 2
400 to 550 3
550 and up 4
§ 5-3-4. Combining events.
The minimum number of security personnel required as noted in § 5-3-3 above shall not be summed
for "combination" events (such as public dances at liquor establishments), but shall be based on the
number of security personnel required for liquor establishments.
§ 5-3-5. Additional personnel.
When deemed necessary to suitably preserve law and order and protect the public health, welfare, and
safety in the Village, the Mayor and/or the Chief of Police may require security personnel in excess of
the numbers noted in § 5-3-3 above for any event.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 50/346
§ 5-3-6. Duty to uphold laws.
Security personnel shall assist in protecting the public health, welfare, and safety and assist in
upholding the laws of the State of New Mexico and the Village of Bosque Farms at public dances and
liquor establishments within the Village of Bosque Farms when on duty as security personnel.
§ 5-3-7. Obedience and assistance to police officers.
Security personnel shall obey lawful orders and/or directives of police officers and shall assist police
officers when requested.
§ 5-3-8. Non-security duties prohibited.
Security personnel shall have no other duties such as, but not limited to, bartender, ticket taker, etc.,
and shall only be employed to assist in maintaining peace and order on the premises.
§ 5-3-9. Compensation.
Security personnel may either be paid or volunteer.
§ 5-3-10. Responsibility to secure personnel.
Security personnel shall be obtained by the operator of liquor establishments and public dances at the
operator's expense.
§ 5-3-11. Inspections.
Any Village police officer may inspect any liquor establishment or public dance at any time the same is
operating, and if he determines that the required number of security personnel are not present and
performing their duties, he may require the operator to either close the liquor establishment or dance or
to require sufficient patrons to leave the premises to result in compliance with this Section 5-3.
§ 5-3-12. Deputization as police officers.
Security personnel may or may not be deputized as Village police officers by the Chief of Police and
Mayor as deemed necessary and in compliance with state law.
§ 5-3-13. Supervision.
Security personnel shall be under the direct employ and supervision of the operators of the respective
liquor establishments and/or public dances and shall be "on duty" within the establishment or location
of the dance from opening to closing of any specific event or during hours when the number of patrons
are present as noted in § 5-3-3 above.
§ 5-3-14. Hold-harmless clause.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 51/346
[1]
A.
[1]
B.
The operators of liquor establishments and public dances shall hold harmless the Village of Bosque
Farms, Village employees, and Village officials regarding any actions taken by any and all security
personnel employed by or as volunteers working for the operators when the security personnel are
upholding the requirements of this Section 5-3. The operators of liquor establishments and public
dances shall provide suitable evidence of compliance with this Section 5-3 as required by the Village.
The Tort Claims Act of the State of New Mexico, as revised (NMSA 1978, § 41-4-1 et seq.), and other
state and federal laws affecting Village liability shall be considered when reviewing suitable compliance
with this Section 5-3.
Section 5-4. (Reserved)
[Former Sec. 5-4, Business Licenses, as amended, was repealed 5-5-2014.]
Section 5-5. Fireworks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 12-16-2010 (Sec. 5-5 of
the 1980 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 5-5-1. Title.
This Section 5-5 shall be known and may be cited as the "Village of Bosque Farms Fireworks
Ordinance."
Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 5-5-2. Purpose and authority.
The purpose of this Section 5-5 is to provide authorized local enforcement of the New Mexico
Fireworks Licensing and Safety Act (NMSA 1978, §§ 60-2C-1 through 60-2C-11) and to assist in
protecting the public health, welfare and safety of the residents of the Village of Bosque Farms.
This Section 5-5 is enacted pursuant to the State of New Mexico Fireworks and Licensing Safety
Act.[1]
Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 5-5-3. Definitions.
As used in this Section 5-5, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APPLICANT
The person issued a permit and the person responsible to the Village of Bosque Farms as
provided for in this Section 5-5.[1]
CHASER
A paper or cardboard tube venting out the fuse end of the tube that contains no more than 20
grams of chemical combustion and travels along the ground, often producing a whistling effect or
other noise; an explosive composition not to exceed 50 milligrams may be included to produce a
report.
CHEMICAL COMPOSITION
Includes all pyrotechnic and explosive composition contained in a fireworks device, but does not
include inert materials such as clay used for plugs or organic material such as rice hulls used for
density control.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 52/346
CONE FOUNTAIN
A cardboard or heavy paper cone containing no more than 50 grams of pyrotechnic composition
that has the same effect as a cylindrical fountain; when more than one cone is mounted on a
common base, total pyrotechnic composition shall not exceed 200 grams.
COUNCIL
The governing body of the Village of Bosque Farms.
CRACKLING DEVICE
A sphere or paper tube that contains no more than 20 grams of pyrotechnic composition that
produces a flash of light and a mild, audible crackling effect upon ignition, which effect is not
considered to be an explosion; crackling devices are not subject to the fifty-milligram limit of
firecrackers.
CYLINDRICAL FOUNTAIN
A cylindrical tube containing not more than 75 grams of pyrotechnic composition that produces a
shower of colored sparks and sometimes a whistling effect or smoke; the device may be provided
with a spike for insertion into the ground or a wood or plastic base for placing on the ground or a
wood or cardboard handle to be hand-held; and when more than one tube is mounted on a
common base, total pyrotechnic composition shall not exceed 200 grams.
DISPLAY FIREWORKS
Devices primarily intended for commercial displays that are designed to produce visible or audible
effects by combustion, deflagration or detonation, including salutes containing more than 130
milligrams of explosive composition; aerial shells containing more than 40 grams of chemical
composition exclusive of lift charge; and other exhibition display items that exceed the limits for
permissible fireworks.
EXPLOSIVE COMPOSITION
Any chemical compound or mixture, the primary purpose of which is to function by explosion,
producing an audible effect in a firework device.
FIRE CHIEF
The Bosque Farms Fire Chief or his designated representative.
FIRECRACKER
A small, paper-wrapped or cardboard tube containing no more than 50 milligrams of explosive
composition that produces noise and a flash of light; provided that firecrackers used in aerial
devices may contain up to 130 milligrams of explosive composition per report.
FIREWORKS
Devices intended to produce a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration or detonation
and are categorized as "permissible fireworks," "prohibited fireworks," or "display fireworks." The
term "fireworks" shall not include any auto flares, paper caps containing not in excess of an
average of 0.25 of a grain of explosive content per cap and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or
other devices for the use of such caps, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
FLITTER SPARKLER
A narrow paper tube attached to a stick or wire and filled with no more than five grams of
pyrotechnic composition that produces color and sparks upon ignition and the paper at one end of
the tube is ignited to make the device function.
GROUND SPINNER
A small, rapidly spinning device containing no more than 20 grams of pyrotechnic composition
venting out an orifice usually on the side of the tube that, when ignited, produces a shower of
sparks and color. A ground spinner is similar in operation to a wheel, but is intended to be placed
flat on the ground and ignited.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 53/346
HELICOPTER or AERIAL SPINNER
A tube containing no more than 20 grams of chemical composition with a propeller or blade
attached that spins rapidly as it rises in the air, with a visible or audible effect sometimes produced
at or near the height of flight.[2]
ILLUMINATING TORCH
A cylindrical tube containing no more than 100 grams of pyrotechnic composition that produces a
colored flame upon ignition and may be spiked, based, or hand-held; and when more than one
tube is mounted on a common base, total pyrotechnic composition shall not exceed 200 grams.[3]
MANUFACTURER
Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the manufacture of fireworks.
MINE or SHELL
A heavy cardboard or paper tube usually attached to a wooden or plastic base and containing no
more than 40 grams of chemical composition plus not more than 20 grams of lift charge per tube
that individually expels pellets of pressed pyrotechnic composition that burn with bright color in a
star effect, or other devices propelled into the air, and that contains components producing reports
containing a maximum 130 milligrams of explosive composition per report; a mine may contain
more than one tube, but the tubes must fire in sequence upon ignition of one external fuse and the
total chemical composition, including lift charges, of a multiple-tube device shall not exceed 200
grams.[4]
MISSILE-TYPE ROCKET
A device similar to a stick-type rocket in size, composition and effect that uses fins rather than a
stick for guidance and stability and that contains no more than 20 grams of chemical composition.
PERMISSIBLE FIREWORKS
Fireworks legal for sale to and use in New Mexico by the general public.
PORTABLE BUILDINGS
Any structure, tent, trailer or vehicle which is of temporary nature or design which is used
separately or together for the retail sale of fireworks to the general public. Any tent intended for
use as a sales location shall comply with rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal.
PROHIBITED FIREWORKS
Fireworks which are not legal for sale or possession within the Village of Bosque Farms.
PYROTECHNIC COMPOSITION
A chemical mixture that on burning and without explosion produces visible or brilliant displays or
bright lights or whistles or motion.
RETAILER
Any person, firm or corporation purchasing permissible fireworks for resale to consumers.
ROMAN CANDLE
A heavy paper or cardboard tube containing no more than 20 grams of chemical composition that
individually expels pellets of pressed pyrotechnic composition that burn with bright color in a star
effect.[5]
STATUTE
The State of New Mexico Fireworks Licensing and Safety Act (NMSA 1978, § 60-2C-1 et seq.).
STICK-TYPE ROCKET
A cylindrical tube containing no more than 20 grams of chemical composition with a wooden stick
attached for guidance and stability that rises into the air upon ignition and produces a burst of
color or sound at or near the height of flight.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 54/346
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
A.
TOY SMOKE DEVICE
A small plastic or paper item containing no more than 100 grams of pyrotechnic composition that
produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect.
VENDOR
Any person or business engaged in the retail sale of fireworks to the general public. All personnel
involved in sales or dispensing of fireworks shall be 18 years of age or older.
WHEEL
A pyrotechnic device that is made to attach to a post or other surface that revolves, producing a
shower of color and sparks and sometimes a whistling effect and that may have one or more
drivers, each of which contains no more than 60 grams of pyrotechnic composition and the total
wheel contains no more than 200 grams of total pyrotechnic composition.
Editor's Note: The definition of "aerial spinner," which preceded this definition, was repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Editor's Note: The definition of "shell," which immediately followed this definition, was repealed at time
of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 5-5-4. Retail sales permits; operating restrictions; public
displays.
Applications for retail sales permits may be obtained in the office of the Village Clerk. A permit
shall be completed for each location. A vendor must present at the time of application for permit a
notarized agreement for use, rent or lease of land intended for location. A plot plan of the location
of the building on the property and parking provided must be presented and approved by the
Village Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer before the permit will be issued. The Planning
and Zoning Administrator/Officer shall inspect the place of business for compliance with this
Section 5-5.
The permit must be prominently displayed on each place of business at all times.
All state and fire regulations must be adhered to.
The vendor must possess a current Revenue Division taxpayer identification number.
Applications will be accepted between June 1 and June 10 of each year. Vendors and/or
businesses shall provide the Clerk with a copy of the state-issued license or permit for the
sale of fireworks with the application.
Vendors who sell fireworks shall pay $25, with the exception of retail businesses which are
currently licensed.
Businesses which are currently licensed to the Village shall obtain a permit to sell fireworks
and shall abide by all restrictions as indicated in this Section 5-5.
Fireworks shall not be sold in any area other than that which is zoned C-1. Fireworks shall
only be sold between June 20 and July 6 of each year and six days preceding and including
New Year's Day and three days preceding and including Chinese New Year, the 16th of
September and Cinco de Mayo of each year, and sold only between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 10:00 p.m. each and every day.
Portable buildings must have a minimum setback of 30 feet from the property line. No more
than one portable building per permit will be allowed, and portable buildings shall be no more
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 55/346
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
than 250 square feet in size. Portable buildings must be removed within 24 hours after a
permit expires at 10:00 p.m. If not removed by 10:00 p.m., a fee of $25 per day may be
imposed on the vendor.
A vendor must provide a minimum of four designated parking spaces on the premises; such
spaces shall not obstruct public rights-of-way.
No fireworks shall be stored, kept, or displayed within 50 feet of any gasoline pump, refilling
station, or any building in which gasoline or volatile liquids are stored or sold.
No more than one fireworks stand shall be allowed within 1,000 feet of another fireworks
stand. Permanent retail outlets are exempt from this requirement.
Notwithstanding the provisions of the Village Sign Ordinance (Section 10-1, Zoning, § 10-1-
20), one four-foot-by-four-foot sign will be allowed for each vendor permit, which shall be
attached to the business structure.
At all places where fireworks are sold or displayed, the words "No Smoking" shall be printed
in letters at least four inches in height.
Posting of sales and usage of fireworks: Each person who has obtained a vendor's permit
shall post in letters at least two inches high in a prominent place the words "Private use of
legal fireworks shall be limited to the period from June 20 to July 6, six days preceding and
including New Year's Day, and three days preceding and including Chinese New Year, the
16th of September and Cinco de Mayo of each year."
Structures where permitted devices are sold shall be protected by at least one five-gallon
bucket of water and an approved fire extinguisher with at least a ten-pound ABC
classification.
All waste, boxes, etc. must be disposed of properly and shall not be allowed to be stored
outside the building.
Public display. Nothing herein shall prohibit the public display of fireworks, except that any
individual, association, partnership, corporation, organization, county or municipality shall secure a
written permit from the governing body of the county or municipality where the public display is to
be fired and the fireworks shall be purchased from a distributor or display distributor licensed by
the State Fire Marshal and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms at the United States
Department of the Treasury.
§ 5-5-5. Restrictions.
No private individual shall transport, store, detonate, or purchase any devices within the
boundaries of the Village of Bosque Farms other than permitted devices specified in § 5-5-7 of this
Section 5-5.
No person under the age of 16 or any person under the influence of drugs or alcohol shall
purchase, detonate, store, or transport permitted devices. Proof of buyer's age shall be required
by the seller.
All persons under the age of 16 shall be supervised by a parent or guardian over the age of 18
when permitted devices are being properly detonated.
Detonation or ignition of fireworks from a moving or stationary vehicle is prohibited.
Private individual shall be subject to the penalties in § 5-5-11 of this Section 5-5 for violation of this
Section 5-5.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 56/346
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
All persons using fireworks or any kind shall be liable for any personal injury or any loss of
property resulting from the use of fireworks.
No fireworks may be discharged within the Village limits prior to or after the allowable sale dates
and only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.; with the exception of the actual holiday,
when hours are extended until 12:00 midnight.
If the governing body issues a proclamation declaring a condition of extreme or severe drought,
the procedures established in NMSA 1978, § 60-2C-8.1 shall be followed.
§ 5-5-6. Inspection of premises.
The Village Fire Chief or any certified law enforcement officer may, at any reasonable hour, enter and
inspect the premises, building or any structure temporarily or permanently located at the site
designated for the sale, packaging or handling of permitted devices.
§ 5-5-7. Permitted devices.
Permissible devices shall include:
Ground and hand-held sparkling and smoke devices;
Cone fountains;
Crackling devices;
Cylindrical fountains;
Flitter sparklers;
Ground spinners;
Illuminating torches;
Toy smoke devices;
Roman Candles;
Wheels; and
Firecrackers.
§ 5-5-8. Prohibited fireworks.
The following fireworks are prohibited within the Village of Bosque Farms:
Aerial spinners;
Helicopters;
Mines;
Missile-type rockets;
Shells;
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 57/346
F.
G.
A.
B.
A.
B.
[1]
Stick-type rockets; and
Chasers.
§ 5-5-9. Testing of fireworks to be sold; list of approved fireworks.
A testing committee comprised of the Fire Chief or his designee from the Village of Bosque Farms,
Village of Los Lunas, City of Belen and Valencia County shall test all fireworks submitted to be
sold within that year. Testing will take place prior to May 15 of each year.
An approved list of permissible fireworks will be available for permittees prior to June 1 of that
year. Only fireworks on the approved list can be sold.
§ 5-5-10. Seizure of fireworks; revocation of permits.
The Fire Chief or his designee shall inspect the fireworks stands for conformance to this Section
5-5. The Village Fire Chief or his designee shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the
expense of the permit holder all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored or held in
violation of this Section 5-5.
Any vendor convicted of violating this Section 5-5 will not be issued a new permit for a period of
two years from the date of revocation of the previous permit.
§ 5-5-11. Penalty.
Any person who is convicted of violating a provision of this Section 5-5 shall be deemed guilty of a
petty misdemeanor, unless otherwise provided for by state or federal law, and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in Section 1-3 of the Village Code. Each day this
Section 5-5 is violated shall be considered a separate offense.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Section 5-6. Municipal Gross Receipts Tax
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 6-19-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-12. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 5-6-1. Imposition of tax.
There is imposed on any person engaging in business in this municipality for the privilege of engaging
in business in this municipality an excise tax equal to 0.25% of the gross receipts reported or required
to be reported by the person pursuant to the New Mexico Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act
(NMSA 1978, § 7-9-1 et seq.) as it now exists or as it may be amended. The tax imposed under this
Section 5-6 is pursuant to the Municipal Local Option Gross Receipts Taxes Act as it now exists or as it
may be amended (NMSA 1978, § 7-19D-1 et seq.) and shall be known as the "municipal gross
receipts tax."
§ 5-6-2. Definitions, exemptions and deductions.
This Section 5-6 hereby adopts by reference all definitions, exemptions and deductions contained in
the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act as it now exists or as it may be amended.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 58/346
A.
B.
C.
§ 5-6-3. Specific exemptions.
No municipal gross receipts tax shall be imposed on the gross receipts arising from:
Transporting persons or property for hire by railroad, motor vehicle, air transportation or any other
means from one point within the municipality to another point outside the municipality.
A business located outside the boundaries of a municipality on land owned by the municipality for
which a state gross receipts tax distribution is made pursuant to Subsection C of NMSA 1978, § 7-
1-6.4; or
Direct broadcast satellite services.
§ 5-6-4. Dedication.
[Amended 5-19-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-02]
The revenue derived from the municipal gross receipts tax will be used for the following purpose:
general fund.
§ 5-6-5. Effective date.
The effective date of the municipal gross receipts tax shall be January 1, 2009.
Section 5-7. Tobacco and Vapor Use and Sales
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 3-20-2014.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 5-7-1. Title.
These regulations shall be known as the "Tobacco and Vapor Use and Sales Ordinance of the Village
of Bosque Farms, New Mexico."
§ 5-7-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this Section 5-7 to establish stringent restrictions on tobacco/vapor use and sales
within the Village of Bosque Farms and to comply with the Dee Johnson Clean Indoor Air Act (NMSA
1978, § 24-16-1 et seq.) in order to promote healthy public environments, free from the health hazards
of tobacco smoke and smokeless tobacco waste.
§ 5-7-3. Statutory authority.
See the Dee Johnson Clean Indoor Air Act (NMSA 1978, § 24-16-1 et seq.).
§ 5-7-4. Definitions.
As used in this Section 5-7, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 59/346
DESIGNATED SMOKING AREA
An outdoor area where smoking may be permitted that is at least 25 feet away from any entrance,
window, or ventilation system of any public building. The designation must be a location that
prevents secondhand smoke from entering any public building and prevents persons from having
to walk through the designated smoking area to enter/exit any public building.
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE
Any product or device containing or delivering nicotine or any similar substance, to include nonnicotine
substances, intended for human consumption that can be used by a person to simulate
smoking through inhalation of vapor, vapor product or aerosol. "Electronic smoking device"
includes any component part of such product or device, whether or not sold separately, including
but not limited to vapor products. "Electronic smoking device" does not include any product that
has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco
cessation product and is being marketed and sold solely for the approved purpose.
MINOR or MINORS
Persons under 18 years of age. The singular and plural shall include one another.
PUBLIC AREA
The outdoor or enclosed area within any governmental or nongovernmental place to which the
public is invited or in which the public is permitted, regardless of whether work or public business,
meetings, hearings or recreation occur at any given time, including parks and recreational sites.
SMOKELESS TOBACCO
Any nicotine delivery system employing tobacco products within the mouth that is used without
smoking, e.g., chewing tobacco, snuff, etc.
SMOKE or SMOKING
Refers to the carrying or holding of a lighted cigarette, pipe, cigar of any kind, or electronic
smoking device, or any other lighted smoking equipment, or the lighting, emitting or exhaling of the
smoke of a cigarette, pipe, cigar or electronic smoking device of any kind.
VAPOR PRODUCT
Any product or substance that contains nicotine or a similar substance, to include non-nicotine
substances, and is intended for human consumption or is likely to be consumed using an
electronic smoking device. "Vapor product" does not include any product specifically approved by
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product that is being
marketed and sold solely for the approved purpose.
§ 5-7-5. Sale of smoking devices and vapor products to minors
prohibited.
It is prohibited for any person or entity to offer for sale, sell, barter or give any electronic smoking
device and/or vapor product to any minor within the Village limits of the Village of Bosque Farms.
§ 5-7-6. Smoking in public areas restricted.
Smoking, including the use of electronic smoking devices and/or vapor products, by any individual is
prohibited in any public area within the Village limits of the Village of Bosque Farms. Smoking shall
only be permitted in an outdoor designated smoking area.
§ 5-7-7. Penalty.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 60/346
A.
B.
[1]
(a)
(b)
(1)
A.
Prosecution of violations. Any person failing to comply with this Section 5-7 shall be charged with
a petty misdemeanor.
Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section 5-7 shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days,
revocation of license to conduct business in the Village of Bosque Farms, or all such fine,
imprisonment and revocation of license. Each subsequent offense after conviction shall be
prosecuted and treated as a separate offense.
6. MUNICIPAL COURT
Section 6-1. (Reserved)
Section 6-2. Municipal Judge
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms as Sec. 6-2 of the 1980
Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 6-2-1. Term of office; vacancy.
The Municipal Judge shall be elected for a four-year term. Vacancies shall be filled by the Village
Council, by appointment to serve until the next regular municipal election.
§ 6-2-2. Qualifications.
The Municipal Judge shall be a qualified elector residing within the limits of the municipality. No person
is eligible for election or appointment to the office of Municipal Judge unless such person shall have
graduated from high school or has obtained the equivalent of a high school education as indicated by
possession of a certificate of equivalency issued by the State Department of Public Education based
upon the record made on the General Education Development Test.
§ 6-2-3. Oath of office.
Before assuming the duties of municipal judge, the judge shall take the oath of office as required by
NMSA 1978, § 3-10-2. Upon taking the oath of office, said judge shall be covered by the corporate
surety bond covering all municipal officials.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 6-2-4. Alternate municipal judges.
Appointment and duties of alternate municipal judges.
Duties.
Whenever the Municipal Judge determines that he will be, for any reason, temporarily
unable or unavailable to perform the duties of Municipal Judge, his duties shall be
performed by an alternate municipal judge until such time as the Municipal Judge is able
and available to perform his duties.
The requirements of law relating to money collected, monthly reports, itemized
statements and penalties shall apply to alternate municipal judges.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 61/346
(a)
(b)
(c)
[1]
(d)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
[2]
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
Process of naming alternate municipal judges.
The alternate municipal judge shall be qualified to serve in this capacity consistent with
the provisions of § 6-2-2.
One or more alternate municipal judges shall be selected by the Municipal Judge. Upon
selection by the Municipal Judge, the alternate municipal judge shall be administered the
oath of office by the Municipal Judge and shall perform such duties as are assigned to
him by the Municipal Judge and that are consistent with this Section 6-2.
Should the Municipal Judge fail to select an alternate municipal judge within 60 days of a
vacancy occurring in the office of alternate municipal judge, the Mayor, or in his absence,
the Mayor Pro Tem, may nominate a person to serve as alternate municipal judge. Such
a nomination requires confirmation by a majority vote of the governing body prior to that
person acting as an alternate municipal judge.
Should an emergency arise in which the Municipal Judge has failed to select an alternate
municipal judge and the Municipal Judge is unable to serve in his capacity as Municipal
Judge, the Mayor of the Village shall appoint a qualified person to serve as Municipal
Judge. Such appointment shall be subject to ratification by a majority vote of the
governing body.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Removal of alternate municipal judge. The alternate municipal judge, whether appointed by
the Municipal Judge or by the governing body, serves at the discretion of the Municipal Judge
and may be removed for any reason, or for no reason, by the Municipal Judge. Should the
Municipal Judge be unable to remove the alternate municipal judge by virtue of the Municipal
Judge's own unavailability, the alternate municipal judge may be removed upon majority vote
of the governing body.
Term. The alternate municipal judge shall serve for a term coextensive with that of the
Municipal Judge.
Vacancies in the office of Municipal Judge. If the governing body declares a vacancy in the office
of Municipal Judge pursuant to the provisions of NMSA 1978, § 10-3-1, it may appoint an alternate
municipal judge to serve until a successor Municipal Judge has been duly appointed by the
governing body pursuant to NMSA 1978, 35-14-4.
Qualifications of alternate municipal judge. The alternate municipal judge shall be a registered,
qualified elector of the Village of Bosque Farms and shall reside within the corporate limits of the
Village of Bosque Farms. No person is eligible for appointment to the office of alternate municipal
judge unless he or she shall have been graduated from high school or has obtained the equivalent
of a high school education as indicated by possession of a certificate of equivalency issued by the
New Mexico Department of Education based upon the record made on the General Education
Development Test.[2]
Editor's Note: Original Subsection D, Oath of office, which followed this subsection, was repealed
at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Payment of alternate municipal judge.
The alternate municipal judge shall be paid the sum of $35 for all settings, except those
occasions in which the elected Municipal Judge is unable to serve as the Municipal Judge for
a period exceeding 15 consecutive days.
In the event that the elected Municipal Judge shall be incapable of serving as the Municipal
Judge for a period of 15 consecutive days due to medical reasons, and for a period of no
more than 60 days in any calendar year, instead of the payments made in Subsection D(1)
hereof, the alternate municipal judge shall be paid as follows: for the first 60 days following
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 62/346
the 15th day of the absence of the elected Municipal Judge, the alternate municipal judge
shall be paid the sum of $25 for settings which involve solely the performance of
arraignments, $50 for "day court," including such time spent on arraignments or for special
settings, and $75 for "night court," including such time spent on arraignments. The maximum
amount that an alternate municipal judge may receive as payment for services rendered to
the Village during that sixty-day period is $100 per week, notwithstanding the number of
settings at which the alternate municipal judge may preside or the aggregate amount of
payments to which the alternate municipal judge might otherwise be entitled. For any time
thereafter during which the elected Municipal Judge is incapable of serving, the alternate
municipal judge will be paid as set forth in Subsection D(1) hereof.
§ 6-2-5. (Reserved)
§ 6-2-6. Records to be kept.
The Municipal Judge shall keep or cause to be kept a record of every traffic complaint, uniform traffic
citation and other form of traffic charge filed in his court and every official action and disposition of the
charge by his court. Within 10 days after disposition of every charge of violating the traffic code of the
Village, the Municipal Judge shall, upon forms furnished by the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles,
prepare, certify as correct, and forward to the State Department of Motor Vehicles an abstract of the
record. A report need not be made of any conviction involving illegal parking or standing of a vehicle
except when a uniform traffic citation is used. When the uniform traffic citation is issued, the form of the
abstract on the back of the officer's first copy containing the above information shall be used. The
failure or refusal of the Municipal Judge to comply with the provisions of this section is misconduct in
the office and grounds for removal.
§ 6-2-7. Monthly reports and remittances.
The Municipal Judge shall make monthly written reports to the governing body of all money collected
by him. The reports shall be filed and the money collected paid to the municipality not later than the
10th of the month following collection. All required reports shall include an itemized statement showing
the different amounts collected, the purpose of collection, the name of the person paying and date of
payment.
§ 6-2-8. Duties.
In addition to those duties set forth in the laws of the State of New Mexico, the Municipal Judge shall
hold court at regularly scheduled times with a frequency of at least twice a month. The Municipal Judge
shall be available at all reasonable hours for the issuance of warrants and summons.
§ 6-2-9. Jurisdiction.
The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction over all offenses and complaints under ordinance of the
municipality and may issue subpoenas and warrants and may punish for contempt.
§ 6-2-10. Penalty.
Any Municipal Judge violating any provision relating to making reports or remitting money collected is
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 90 days,
or both.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 63/346
[1]
[1]
§ 6-2-11. Salary.
The salary for the Municipal Judge shall be $375 per month.
Section 6-3. Fees
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 8-20-2009 by Ord. No.
01-09. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 6-3-1. Judicial education fee.
The Municipal Court shall impose a judicial education fee in the amount of $3 on anyone convicted in
the Municipal Court of violating any ordinance relating to the operation of a motor vehicle or any
ordinance that may be enforced by the imposition of a term of imprisonment.
7. GENERAL OFFENSES
Section 7-1. Offenses Relating to Public Order and Safety
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms as Sec. 7-1 of the 1980
Code, as amended 9-1996. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 7-1-1. Assault.
It is unlawful for any person, by an unlawful act, threat or menacing conduct, to cause another person
to believe he is in danger of receiving an immediate battery, nor shall any person, by the use of
insulting language toward another, impugn his honor, delicacy or reputation.
§ 7-1-2. Battery.
It is unlawful for any person to beat, strike, wound, inflict violence or apply force to the person of
another, nor shall a person intentionally touch or apply force to the person of another in a rude,
insolent, angry or hostile manner except in connection with an exhibition duly authorized and licensed
under law, or in lawful self defense, or in the line of duty as a duly authorized police officer as
circumstances warrant.
§ 7-1-3. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 7-1-3, Trespass, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 7-1-4. Harassment or stalking.
It is unlawful to harass or stalk another pursuant to NMSA 1978, Chapter 30, Article 3A, § 30-3A-1 et
seq.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 7-1-5. Disturbing the peace.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 64/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
It is unlawful for any person to disturb or aid in disturbing the peace of others by violent, tumultuous,
offensive, or obstreperous conduct, and no person shall knowingly and intentionally permit such
conduct upon any property owned by him or under his control or supervision.
§ 7-1-6. Unreasonable noise.
It is unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made any loud or unusual noise which
either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others.
Unlawful noise includes but shall not be limited to the following:
Radios, phonographs, musical instruments, loud speakers, amplifiers: the use or operation of any
radio, phonograph, musical instrument, tape recorder, loud speaker, sound amplifier, or other
machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound in such manner as to disturb the
peace and quiet of neighbors.
Horns and signal devices: the sounding of any horn or signaling device of any automobile,
motorcycle, truck or other vehicle on any street or public place except as a danger warning; the
creation by means of any such signaling devices of any unreasonable, loud, or harsh sound; the
sounding of such devices for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time other than by
accident or mechanical, electrical or other difficulty or failure; and the use of any such signaling
device where traffic is held up.
Yelling or shouting: yelling, shouting or creating other loud noises which annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort, or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel or residence, or of any persons in the
vicinity.
Schools, courts, churches, hospitals: the creating of any excessive noise on any street or grounds
adjacent to any hospital, school, institution of learning, church or court which interferes with the
workings of such institution or which disturbs or annoys persons therein.
Exclusions. Excluded and exempted form the operation and effect of this section are the following:
Noise which results from the use of properly maintained agricultural and irrigation equipment.
Noise from livestock and fowl.
Noise which results from engaging in the construction or repair of a building between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
§ 7-1-7. Disorderly conduct.
A person is guilty of disorderly conduct if, with a purpose to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or
nuisance, he willfully:
Creates a disturbance of the public order by an act of violence or by any act likely to produce
violence; or
Engages in fighting, or in violent, threatening or tumultuous behavior; or
Makes any unreasonably loud noise; or
Addresses abusive language or threats to any person present which creates a clear and present
danger of violence; or
Causes likelihood of harm or serious inconvenience by failing to obey a lawful order of dispersal
by a police officer, where three or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 65/346
F.
(1)
(2)
G.
H.
I.
[1]
J.
[1]
immediate vicinity; or
Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or property of another so as to create a hazardous,
unhealthy or physically offensive condition; or
Commits a trespass on residential property or on public property. "Trespass" for the purpose of
this subsection shall mean:
Entering upon, or refusing to leave, any residential or business property of another, either
where such property has been posted with "No Trespassing" signs, or where immediately
prior to such entry, or subsequent thereto, notice is given by the owner or occupant, orally or
in writing, that such entry, or continued presence, is prohibited.
Entering upon, or refusing to leave, any public property in violation of regulations promulgated
by the official charged with the security, care or maintenance of the property and approved by
the governing body of the public agency owning the property, where such regulations have
been conspicuously posted, or where immediately prior to such entry, or subsequent thereto,
such regulations are made known by the official charged with the security, care or
maintenance of the property, his agent or a police officer.
Makes a telephone call with the intent to annoy another, whether or not a conversation ensues; or
Assembles together with two or more persons with intent to do any unlawful act with force or
violence against the person or property of another, and who makes any overt act to carry out such
unlawful purpose; or
Maliciously disturbs, threatens, or in any insolent manner intentionally touches any house or
vehicle occupied by any person.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 7-1-8. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 7-1-8, Intoxication, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 7-1-9. Drinking in public.
It is unlawful to consume alcoholic beverages in or on any public place except those establishments
having a license to dispense alcoholic beverages.
§ 7-1-10. Unlawful assembly.
It is unlawful for three or more persons to assemble with intent to do any unlawful act by force or
violence against the person or property of another or to make any overt act to carry out such unlawful
purpose.
§ 7-1-11. Obstructing movement.
It is unlawful to hinder, annoy or molest persons passing along any street, sidewalk, crosswalk or other
public way, or to sit or stand around the entrance of any church, theater, public building, or other place
of public assemblage in any manner so as to unreasonably obstruct such entrance or to place or erect
upon any public way an obstruction of any type except temporary barriers or warning signs placed for
the purpose of safeguarding the public against any hazard.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 66/346
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
[1]
(4)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
§ 7-1-12. Removal of barricades.
It is unlawful to remove, destroy or interfere with any barrier, guard or light placed before or in any
dangerous place near the streets, sidewalks or other public ways of the Village for the purpose of
warning or protecting travelers from injury or danger, provided that removal after the danger has
ceased and temporary removal to allow the passage of a vehicle with immediate subsequent
replacement shall not be considered unlawful.
§ 7-1-13. Deadly weapons.
Deadly weapons defined. "Deadly weapon" means any loaded firearm, or any weapon which is
capable of producing death or great bodily harm, including, but not restricted to, any types of
daggers, brass knuckles, switchblade knives, bowie knives, poniards, butcher knives, dirk knives,
and all such weapons with which dangerous cuts can be given, or with which dangerous thrusts
can be inflicted, including sword canes and any kind of sharp, pointed canes, as well as
slingshots, bludgeons, and any other instrument when used in such a negligent manner, and/or
with intent, that dangerous wounds can be inflicted.
Unlawfully carrying deadly weapons. It is unlawful to carry a deadly weapon concealed in a
manner making it not readily visible on the person, or in close proximity thereto, so that the
weapon is readily accessible for use, except:
In the person's residence or on real property belonging to him as owner, lessee, tenant or
licensee; or
In a private automobile or other private means of conveyance for the lawful protection of his
person or property, or the person or property of another; or
By a peace officer in the lawful discharge of his duties; or
By a person in possession of a valid concealed handgun license issued to him by the
Department of Public Safety pursuant to the provisions of the Concealed Handgun Carry Act
(NMSA 1978, § 29-19-1 et seq.).[1]
Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Exceptions. The provisions set forth in Subsection B shall not be construed to forbid the following:
The carrying of any unloaded firearm; or
Peace officers from carrying, wearing or discharging such weapons as shall be necessary in
the proper discharge of their duties; or
Public or religious ceremonies under the direction or supervision of a police officer.
Negligent use of weapons. It is unlawful for any person to make negligent use of a weapon,
consisting of either:
Discharging a weapon within the Village limits, except in the immediate, emergency protection
of life and/or property; or
Carrying or having within one's reach or immediate grasp a deadly weapon while under the
influence of an intoxicating liquor or other drug; or
Endangering the safety of another or his property by handling or using a firearm or other
deadly weapon in a negligent manner; or
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 67/346
(4)
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
Selling, loaning or furnishing any deadly weapon to a person with knowledge that the person
is under the influence of alcohol or other drug, or that the person is incompetent.
Unlawful possession of switchblades. It is unlawful for any person to either manufacture, cause to
be manufactured, possess, display, offer, sell, lend, give away, or purchase any knife which has a
blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in
the handle of the knife, or any knife having a blade which opens or falls or is ejected into position
by the force of gravity or by any outward or centrifugal thrust or movement.
Sales to minors. It is unlawful to give, sell, trade, barter or exchange for anything of value any
deadly weapon, air rifle, air gun or BB gun or ammunition for any firearm to any person under the
age of 18 years, provided that this subsection shall not be construed to prevent any parent or legal
guardian from purchasing firearms or ammunition for his child or ward.
Forfeiture of deadly weapons. Every person convicted of the violation of this code shall forfeit to
the Village any weapons involved in the violation.
Disposition of forfeited weapons. Every police officer, upon making an arrest or taking a weapon
used in the violation of any section of the Municipal Code, shall deliver same to the Chief of Police
to be held by him until judgment is entered; and upon the finding of guilt the weapon shall be
disposed of as provided in the New Mexico state statutes.
§ 7-1-14. Failure to report treatment of wounds.
It is unlawful for any physician, surgeon or other practitioner of the healing arts licensed by the State of
New Mexico to fail to immediately report to the Village Police Department his treatment of any person
in the Village for a wound inflicted by a deadly weapon of any kind.
§ 7-1-15. Propelling missiles.
Propulsion of missiles defined. "Propulsion of missiles" means shooting, slinging or throwing
snowballs, rocks, stones, pellets, BB shot, or any kind of missile, object, or substance whatsoever
in any manner as to be reasonably likely to cause injury to any person or property.
The propulsion of missiles shall be unlawful within the Village limits, except that this provision shall
not be construed to prohibit target firing when conducted so as to secure safety of persons and
property.
§ 7-1-16. Possession of burglary tools.
It is unlawful to possess any lockpick, skeleton key or key to be used with a bit or bits, jimmy, sledge
hammer, pry bar, cold chisel, dynamite, nitroglycerin, blasting caps or other burglars unless such
possession is for a lawful purpose.
§ 7-1-17. False alarms.
It is unlawful for any person to make, turn in or give a false alarm of fire or of need for police or
ambulance assistance, or to interfere with the proper functioning of an alarm system, or to aid or abet
the commission of such an act.
§ 7-1-18. False reports.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 68/346
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
It is unlawful for any person to make or file with the Police Department any false, misleading or
unfounded report or statement concerning the commission or alleged commission of any crime.
§ 7-1-19. Interference with officers.
It is unlawful to resist, abuse, molest, hinder, obstruct or refuse to obey or assist when called upon to
do so any police officer, fireman or judge while in the discharge of his duty.
§ 7-1-20. Impersonating an officer.
It is unlawful for any person other than a duly commissioned police officer to wear or carry the uniform,
apparel, badge, identification card or other insignia of office, the same, similar or a colorable imitation
of that adopted and worn or carried by duly commissioned police officers unless acting in the course of
regular business and with the permission of the Village without authority to exercise or attempt to
exercise the functions of, or pretend to be, a peace officer or judge.
§ 7-1-21. Unauthorized use of certain words and insignia.
It is unlawful to display on any vehicle or sign the words "police," "police department," "fire
department," or words or insignia of similar import without the authority of the Mayor, provided that
nothing contained herein shall apply to any state or county vehicle.
§ 7-1-22. Escape of prisoners.
Escape from jail or custody. It is unlawful for any person, while a prisoner of the Village or
otherwise in the custody of or confined by the Village, to escape or attempt to escape or to assist
other prisoners to escape or attempt to escape from such custody or confinement.
Assisting escape. It is unlawful for any person to assist, attempt to assist or offer to assist any
person in custody of or confined under the authority of the Village to escape from jail, or a place of
confinement or custody.
§ 7-1-23. Marijuana possession.
Definition of marijuana. "Marijuana" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether
growing or not, the seeds thereof, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or
preparation of the plant or its seeds. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, hashish,
tetrahydrocannabinols extracted or isolated from marijuana, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or
cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt derivative, mixture
or preparation of the mature stalks, fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is
incapable of germination.
Unlawful possession of marijuana. It is unlawful to possess one ounce or less of marijuana which
was not obtained directly from, or pursuant to, a valid prescription, or order of a doctor of medicine
while acting in the course of his professional practice, or as otherwise authorized by law.
Penalties. Whoever unlawfully possesses one ounce or less of marijuana is guilty of violating this
code and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $50 or imprisonment not exceeding 15
days, for the first offense, and a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment not exceeding 90
days for the second and subsequent offenses.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 69/346
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
[1]
A.
B.
§ 7-1-24. Manufacture and distribution of imitation controlled
substances.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE
A substance as defined in Subsection E of NMSA 1978, § 30-31-2, as it may be amended
from time to time.
DISTRIBUTE
The actual, constructive, or attempted transfer, delivery, or dispensing to another of an
imitation controlled substance.
IMITATION CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE
A substance that is not a controlled substance which by overall dosage unit appearance,
including color, shape, size, and marking, or by representations made would lead a
reasonable person to believe that the substance is a controlled substance. In those rare
cases when the appearance of the dosage unit is not reasonably sufficient to establish that
the substance is an imitation controlled substance, for example, in the case of powder or
liquid, the court or authority concerned should consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following factors as related to "representations made" in determining
whether the substance is an imitation controlled substance:
Statements made by an owner or by anyone else in control of the substance concerning
the nature of the substance or its use or effect;
Statements made to recipient that the substance may be resold for consideration greatly
in excess of the market value of the ingredients;
Whether the substance is packaged in a manner normally used for illicit controlled
substances;
Evasive tactics or actions utilized by the owner or person in control of the substance to
avoid detection by law enforcement authorities;
Prior convictions, if any, of the owner, or anyone in control of the object, under state or
federal law related to controlled substances or fraud, provided that this factor alone shall
not be sufficient to support a conviction under this section; and
Whether the physical appearance of the substance is substantially identical to a
controlled substance.
MANUFACTURE
The production, preparation, compounding, processing, encapsulating, tableting, packaging
or repackaging, or labeling or relabeling of an imitation controlled substance.
REGISTERED PRACTITIONER
As defined in NMSA 1978, § 30-31-2, Subsection R, as it may be amended from time to time.
[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Manufacture or distribution of imitation controlled substances. It is unlawful for any person to,
knowingly or under circumstances where a person reasonably should know, manufacture,
distribute, or possess with intent to distribute an imitation controlled substance.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 70/346
C.
D.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
B.
Defenses. In any prosecution for unlawful distribution or possession with intent to distribute of an
imitation controlled substance, it is no defense that the defendant believed the imitation controlled
substance to be a controlled substance.
Immunity. No criminal liability shall be imposed by this section on any person who may lawfully
manufacture or distribute controlled substances under NMSA 1978, § 30-31-12 who
manufactures, distributes, or possess with intent to distribute an imitation controlled substance for
use as a placebo by a registered practitioner, in the course of professional practice or research.
§ 7-1-25. Hunting.
It is unlawful for any person, anywhere, to pursue for food or sport, to manage or take part in the
search for, or to pursue with the intent to capture or kill wild game by use of firearms or any other
deadly weapon.
§ 7-1-26. Drug paraphernalia.
It is unlawful for any person to use or possess with intent to use any drug paraphernalia.
"Drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and materials of any kind that are used,
intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance or controlled substance analog in violation
of the State of New Mexico Controlled Substances Act (NMSA 1978, § 30-31-1 et seq.). It includes
but is not limited to:
Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing
or harvesting any species of plant that is a controlled substance or controlled substance
analog or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing or preparing controlled substances or controlled substance analogs;
Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of
any species of plant that is a controlled substance;
Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the
strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances or controlled substance analogs;
Scales or balances used, intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring
controlled substances or controlled substance analogs;
Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite dextrose, and
lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in cutting controlled substances or
controlled substance analogs;
Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and
seeds from or in otherwise cleaning and refining marijuana;
Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used in compounding controlled
substances or controlled substance analogs;
Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for
use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances or controlled substance analogs;
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 71/346
(10)
(11)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(12)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
C.
Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in storing or
concealing controlled substances or controlled substance analogs;
Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in
parenterally injecting controlled substances or controlled substance analogs into the human
body;
Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as:
Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes, with or without screens,
permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls;
Water pipes;
Carburetion tubes and devices;
Smoking and carburetion masks;
Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana
cigarette, that has become too small to hold in the hand;
Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
Chamber pipes;
Carburetor pipes;
Electric pipes;
Air-driven pipes;
Chillums;
Bongs;
Ice pipes or chillers; and
In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider,
in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following:
Statements by the owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use;
The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of the Controlled
Substances Act or any other law relating to controlled substances or controlled substance
analogs;
The proximity of the object to controlled substances or controlled substance analogs;
The existence of any residue of any controlled substance or controlled substance analogs;
Instructions, written or oral, provided with the object concerning its use;
Descriptive materials accompanying the object that explain or depict its use;
The manner in which the object is displayed for sale; and
Expert testimony concerning its use.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 72/346
D.
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
Violation of this section is a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both.
Section 7-2. Offenses Relating to Property
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms as Sec. 7-2 of the 1980
Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 7-2-1. Destroying, injuring, removing, tampering with or
defacing property.
It is unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously, or wantonly destroy, injure, remove, tamper with or
deface real property or improvements thereto or personal property, either public or private, belonging
to any other person, association, or corporation.
§ 7-2-2. Scattering trash or rubbish.
It is unlawful for any person to throw or permit to be deposited or scattered upon any sidewalk, alley,
street, or public property, or upon the private property of another, any refuse such as rubbish, waste
trash, or other disposed material of any kind.
§ 7-2-3. Petty larceny; conversion; embezzlement; fraud.
It is unlawful for any person to steal, convert, embezzle or acquire by fraud the property of another,
including any money, goods, chattel, bank notes, bonds, promissory notes, bills of exchange, other
bills, orders, certificates or any books of account for or concerning money due or to become due and to
be delivered. If the property stolen, converted, embezzled or acquired by fraud exceeds the value of
$250, the charges shall be filed in the Magistrate Court.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 7-2-4. Receiving stolen property.
It is unlawful to buy, procure, receive, or conceal anything of value knowing or having reasonable
cause to believe the same to have been stolen, converted, embezzled, or acquired by fraud,
unless the property is received, retained or disposed of with intent to restore it to the owner.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
It is unlawful to sell, conceal or purchase any item with the original factory serial number removed
or altered.
§ 7-2-5. Shoplifting.
It is unlawful for any person to willfully take possession of or conceal any merchandise offered for sale
with the intention of converting it without paying for it or to willfully alter any label, price tag or marking
upon any merchandise, or transfer any merchandise from one container to another with the intention of
depriving the merchant of all or part of the value of the merchandise.
§ 7-2-6. Issuing worthless checks.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 73/346
[1]
A.
B.
C.
It is unlawful to issue in exchange for anything of value with intent to defraud any check, draft, or order
for the payment of money in the amount of more than $1 but less than $25 upon any bank or other
depository knowing at the time of such issue that insufficient funds or credit exists with the bank or
other depository for the payment in full by such check, draft or order. Any person convicted of issuing
worthless checks shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days or fined not more than $500, or
receive both such imprisonment and fine.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 7-2-7. Removal of earth.
It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to move, distribute or take away any earth, stone or other
material from any public street, easement, alley, park, or public ground.
Section 7-3. Property Maintenance
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 3-19-2009 (Sec. 7-3 of
the 1980 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning  See Sec. 10-1.
§ 7-3-1. Intent.
The governing body of the Village of Bosque Farms hereby finds that it is necessary to provide for the
abatement of conditions which are offensive or annoying to the senses, detrimental to property values
and community appearance, an obstruction to or interference with the comfortable enjoyment of
adjacent property or premises, or hazardous or injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the general
public; and to provide standards to safeguard life, health and public welfare.
§ 7-3-2. Responsibility for compliance.
The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property in compliance with these
requirements, except as otherwise provided for in this Section 7-3. A person shall not occupy as
owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a sanitary and safe
condition and which do not comply with the requirements of this Section 7-3. All occupants, including
tenants and lessees, of a dwelling are responsible for keeping it in a clean, sanitary and safe condition
in that part of the dwelling or premises which they occupy and control in compliance with the
requirements of this Section 7-3.
§ 7-3-3. Definitions and word usage.
For specific purposes of this Section 7-3, the following terms, whenever used or referred to in this
Section 7-3, shall have the respective meanings assigned to them unless a different meaning
clearly appears from the content. Words not defined here shall be defined by standard dictionary
definitions.
Words stated in the present tense include the future; words stated in the masculine gender include
the feminine and neutral; the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
As used in this Section 7-3, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ABANDONED
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 74/346
(1)
(2)
To intentionally and permanently give up, surrender, or relinquish all interest or ownership in
property.
ANTIQUE VEHICLE
A vehicle which is at least 35 years old.
COLLECTOR
The owner of one or more vehicles that are antique, historic or special interest, who collects,
purchases, acquires, trades, or disposes of these vehicles or parts thereof for his own use in
order to preserve, restore, and maintain a vehicle for hobby purposes.
DWELLING UNIT
Any structure or part of a structure intended for human occupancy and containing one or
more connected rooms and a single kitchen, designed for living and sleeping purposes. A
dwelling unit may include a mobile/manufactured home, a modular housing unit, a site-built
house, or planned residential development.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY
The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or
operators of such premises.
GOVERNING BODY
The Village of Bosque Farms Mayor and Councilors.
GRAFFITI
Letters, numbers, a word or words, writings or inscriptions, symbols, drawings, carvings,
stickers, etchings or any other marking of any nature whatsoever which defaces, obliterates,
covers, alters, damages or destroys the real or personal property of another.
INFESTATION
The presence within or contiguous to a structure or premises of insects, rats, vermin or other
pests to such a degree as to pose a threat to the health or safety of occupants of the structure
or any other contiguous structure or premises.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE
Any motor vehicle which is incapable of being propelled under its own power.
JUNK VEHICLE
Any motor vehicle, other than an antique, historic, or special interest vehicle, which:
Has been continually inoperative for at least 120 days or has been wrecked, dismantled,
partially dismantled, or abandoned; and
Does not meet minimum safety standards for operation on the public streets and
highways of this state.
OCCUPANCY
The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied.
OCCUPANT
Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a
building.
OUTDOOR STORAGE
Storage not contained by four walls and a roof.
OWNER
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 75/346
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the
property; or record in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to
the property; including the guardian of the estate of any such person and the executor or
administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a
court.
PARTS CAR
An antique, historic, or special interest motor vehicle generally in inoperable condition which
is owned by a collector to furnish parts and/or harvest parts that are usually unobtainable from
normal sources, thus enabling a collector to preserve, restore and/or maintain an antique,
historic or special interest motor vehicle.
PERSON IN CHARGE OF PROPERTY
Owner, tenant, lessee, manager, occupant, agent, representative, or employee.
PLANNING AND ZONING ADMINISTRATOR/OFFICER
The Village of Bosque Farms Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer or his designee.
PREMISES
A piece of real estate, house, or building and its land.
REFUSE
Includes, but is not limited to, debris, garbage, litter, rubbish and/or the like.
DEBRIS
Bits and pieces of stone, wood, glass, such as after destruction.
GARBAGE
The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food, not including managed compost.
LITTER
Includes but is not limited to any discarded, uncared for, or worn out manufactured
material, machinery, including parts of motor vehicles (excluding classic or antique), tires,
aircraft, materials, appliances, or unusable scrap metal.
RUBBISH
Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage.
SPECIAL INTEREST VEHICLE
A vehicle, replica or race cars or copy of such vehicle owned as a collector's item and used
for exhibition, educational, historic, or hobby purposes.
STRUCTURE
Anything constructed, placed or erected above ground level which requires location on the
ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground, but not including a tent,
vehicle, vegetation, public utility pole or line, signs or fences. For the purpose of this Section
7-3, a mobile/manufactured home is a structure, with or without wheels, when located on any
lot.
VILLAGE
The Village of Bosque Farms.
WEEDS
All rank, noxious, poisonous, harmful, unhealthful vegetation or any growth whatsoever of an
offensive, unsightly nature.
§ 7-3-4. Weeds.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 76/346
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
E.
Owner/Occupant responsibility.
The person in charge of the real property is required and responsible to take the appropriate
action for the control of weeds in conformance with this section:
On the real property owned or occupied by him;
In the alley and/or public utility easement abutting such real property to its center line;
and
In the area between such real property and the edge of any abutting street.
Each such person in charge of property shall destroy, cut, control, and remove such weeds as
often as the growth and condition of such weeds may require in order to maintain a maximum
height of 12 inches.
Separate offense. Violations continued for a period of 15 days after conviction shall be prosecuted
and treated as a separate offense.
§ 7-3-5. Interior structures.
The interior of a structure shall be maintained free from hazardous conditions, structurally sound and
sanitary so as not to pose a threat to public health, safety or welfare.
§ 7-3-6. Exterior property areas.
Vacant structures and land. All structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained
in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to adversely affect the
public health or safety.
Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe, and sanitary
condition free from refuse.
Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil
and to prevent the continuous and repetitive accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any
structure located thereon and in accordance with Section 10-1, Zoning, § 10-1-5N.
Static display. A "static display" is a public exhibition of stationary objects as part of the
landscaping. This includes agricultural equipment, implements or machinery which promotes or
reflects the rural atmosphere of the Village of Bosque Farms. These displays are exempt from § 7-
3-7; inoperable vehicles are not considered static displays pursuant to this Section 7-3.
Refuse.
Accumulation of refuse. All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure,
shall be free from any accumulation of debris, garbage, litter and rubbish.
Household appliances such as refrigerators, freezers, washers, dryers, dishwashers and
similar equipment not in operating condition shall not be discarded or stored on exterior
property.
Disposal and storage of refuse. The owner of every occupied premises shall comply with
Section 9-1, Solid Waste, of the Village Code.
Hazardous chemicals. Any oil, fluids, solvents and other substances that constitute a fire,
health, or environmental hazard shall be stored, handled and disposed of in accordance with
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 77/346
F.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
D.
state and federal regulations.
Graffiti. The owner of a property within the Village which has any form of graffiti on any building,
structure, or surface without the permission of the owner of the property shall be required to either
restore the defaced surface by removing the graffiti or repainting the defaced surface within 10
business days after notice by the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer.
§ 7-3-7. Antique, historic, special interest, parts, and inoperable
motor vehicles.
It is unlawful for any person to permit or cause to remain in or about his lot an inoperable motor
vehicle, except as set forth in this section.
In order to preserve the residential and/or rural character and appearance of the Village, and to
protect the health and safety of the residents, the accumulation of inoperable motor vehicles is
restricted and shall be regulated as follows:
After written notification of violation, the owner will be given 15 days to make the vehicles
operable;
Proof of activity, including but not limited to invoices dated within the preceding 10 days after
the vehicle has been deemed inoperable or vehicle parts have been ordered and have not
been received, will be grounds to grant an extension by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator/Officer for an additional 60 days. No more than two such extensions shall be
granted on any motor vehicle.
Separate offense. Violations continued for a period of 15 days after conviction shall be
prosecuted and treated as a separate offense.
This section shall not be construed to permit the parking or placing of antique, historic, special
interest, parts or inoperable motor vehicles on any public right-of-way.
Exceptions.
Owners of antique cars, historic, or special interest motor vehicles shall store vehicles,
associated parts cars and replacement parts for those vehicles on their private property,
provided:
Such vehicles and parts cars, and the outdoor storage area, are maintained in such a
manner that they do not constitute a health, safety, or fire hazard; and
Vehicles and parts cars stored outdoors shall be stored within an outdoor storage area
which will effectively screen them from public view year round. The vehicles may be
stored within a solid fence (Section 10-1, Zoning, § 10-1-5G, of the Village Code)
constructed at least six feet high, but not more than eight feet high, and/or shall be
completely obscured from public view by trees or shrubbery; and
Such storage area shall be kept free of weeds, rubbish, garbage, litter, trash and other
objectionable objects; and
Such storage area shall be included in the calculation of impervious surface area on a lot
as set forth in Section 10-1, Zoning, § 10-1-5J. This restriction does not apply in the C-1
Zone; and
Storage area setbacks are subject to the regulations as stated in Section 10-1, § 10-1-5;
and
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 78/346
(f)
[1]
E.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
The storage area shall not be used for any business venture and/or business enterprise.
Outdoor storage of visible parts cars is limited to one, which the property owner shall designate by
a permit from the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer. The property owner shall pay an
administrative fee for such permit in an amount set by resolution of the governing body. The permit
shall be acquired from the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer within two working days of
obtaining the parts car.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 7-3-8. Dangerous building or debris removal.
The Village of Bosque Farms will institute appropriate and lawful procedures pursuant to NMSA 1978,
§ 3-18-5 et seq. to correct or abate violations regarding dangerous buildings or debris removal.
§ 7-3-9. Door-to-door sales.
The practice of solicitors, hawkers, peddlers, itinerant merchants or transient vendors (except
newspapers) going in or upon private premises in the Village, not having been requested or invited
to do so by the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of such private residences, for the
purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or publications, other than
newspapers, or for the purpose of disposing of or peddling or hawking the same, is hereby
declared to be a nuisance, and such practices are prohibited by this Section 7-3 as constituting a
nuisance.
The provisions of this Section 7-3 shall not apply to the sale, delivery or soliciting of orders for
newspaper publications, and the provisions of this Section 7-3 shall not apply to the sale of or the
soliciting of orders for the sale of milk, dairy products, poultry, eggs, and other farm or garden
produce so far as the sale of the commodities named in this section are authorized by law.
§ 7-3-10. Duties and powers of Planning and Zoning
Administrator/Officer.
[Amended 8-20-2015]
Inspections. The Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer has the authority to request an
inspection of buildings, structures, and the use of land to determine compliance with this Section
7-3. This provision does not grant right-of-entry without due process if necessary.
Right of entry. The Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer shall request, with proof of, or basis
for, due cause, to enter the structure or premises at a notified and reasonable time, subject to
constitutional restrictions on reasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not obtained,
the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer is authorized to pursue recourse as provided by
law.
Identification. The Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer shall carry proper identification when
inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this Section 7-3.
§ 7-3-11. Notices and orders.
[Amended 8-20-2015]
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 79/346
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
Notice to person responsible. Whenever the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer determines
that there has been a violation of this Section 7-3 or has grounds to believe that a violation has
occurred, notice shall be given, in the form of a citation as prescribed in Subsection B, to the
person responsible for the violation as specified in this Section 7-3. Notices for dangerous
buildings or debris removal procedures shall comply with NMSA 1978, § 3-18-5.
Form. Such notices and/or citations shall be in accordance with all of the following:
Be in writing.
Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued.
Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the repairs and improvements
required to bring the dwelling unit, structure or property into compliance with the provisions of
this Section 7-3, except as otherwise provided in this Section 7-3.
Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is:
Hand delivered to the property owner or person responsible for the property;
Sent by first-class mail, addressed to the last known address of the property owner or person
responsible for the property; or
If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be
posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure and/or premises affected by such
notice with proof of notice filed with the Village Clerk/Administrator.
§ 7-3-12. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-20-2015]
Prosecution of violations. Any person failing to comply with this notice of violation, citation or order
within 15 days as served in accordance with §§ 7-3-4 through 7-3-8 shall be charged with a petty
misdemeanor. If the citation or notice of violation is not complied with, the Planning and Zoning
Administrator/Officer shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain,
correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy
of the structure in violation of the provisions of this Section 7-3 or of the order or direction made
pursuant thereto. Any action taken on such premises by the authority having jurisdiction shall be
charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and a lien may be placed upon
such real estate. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the legal
officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation,
or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act,
conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure or premises.
Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section 7-3 shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each subsequent offense after conviction shall be
prosecuted and treated as a separate offense.
This provision does not preclude further action as set forth in § 7-3-11A.
§ 7-3-13. Liability.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 80/346
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
The Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer or his designee charged with the enforcement of
this Section 7-3, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not be liable for any damages, fees or costs
accruing to person or property as a result of an act required or permitted in the discharge of official
duties.
Any suit instituted against any official or employee because of an act performed by that official or
employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this Section 7-3 shall be
defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the
proceedings. The Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer shall not be liable for costs in an
action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this Section 7-3. Any
person charged with enforcement of this Section 7-3, acting in good faith and without malice, shall
be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or
omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith.
Section 7-4. Criminal Nuisances
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 3-16-2006 (Sec. 7-4 of
the 1980 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 7-4-1. Findings and intent.
The governing body of the Village of Bosque Farms declares that personal property used for or
involved in criminal or illegal activity, and real property located within the Village limits of Bosque Farms
which on more than one occasion within a one-year period has been the site of illegal or criminal
activity, is injurious to the safety and welfare of the Village, and therefore constitutes a public nuisance
within the meaning of this Section 7-4.
§ 7-4-2. Purpose; applicability.
The purpose of this Section 7-4 is to:
Establish penalties for owners or persons with a legal interest in property who allow the use of
personal or real property to become a public nuisance within the meaning of this Section 7-4.
Establish procedures for the disposition of personal property found to be a public nuisance
within the meaning of this Section 7-4.
Establish procedures for the disposition of real property located within the Village that has
been found to be a public nuisance within the meaning of this Section 7-4.
This Section 7-4 applies to:
All real property located within the municipal limits of the Village, which, on more than one
occasion within a period of one year, has been the site of criminal or illegal activity;
Personal property, wherever located, which has been involved in criminal or illegal activities
committed in the Village; and
Owners or persons with a legal interest in such real or personal property, as that term is
defined in this Section 7-4, who have allowed, negligently, recklessly or intentionally, such
crimes or illegal activities to occur.
This Section 7-4 does not apply to property involved in or used for or the site of the commission of
misdemeanors except as otherwise specified with respect to property made subject by law to the
provisions of the New Mexico Forfeiture Act (NMSA 1978, § 31-27-1 et seq.).
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 81/346
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
This Section 7-4 does not supersede or replace any existing ordinance or statute dealing with the
confiscation, seizure, closure or disposal of property involved in or used for criminal or illegal
activity, but is meant to supplement such existing law, and should be read in conjunction with any
such law.
§ 7-4-3. Definitions.
As used in this Section 7-4, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CLOSURE, CLOSE or TO CLOSE
With respect to property subject to this Section 7-4, to seize that property, remove all owners,
tenants, occupants and other persons and animals from real property, motor vehicle, or personal
property, or any portion thereof, and to lock, board, bar and otherwise prohibit all entry, access,
and use thereof, except such access and use as may be specifically ordered by a court order or
competent authority, for purposes as may be specified by such authority or order, and to vest the
sole right of possession and control of such property in the Village for a limited period of time as
set by court order or by resolution of the governing body. For motor vehicles, "closure" includes
seizure and impoundment.
CRIMINAL OR ILLEGAL ACTIVITY
Any activity defined as such in the criminal ordinances of the Village or Valencia County, as
amended from time to time, or the criminal statutes of the State of New Mexico.
FORFEITURE STATUTE
NMSA 1978, § 31-27-1 et seq. Property made subject to the Forfeiture Statute, as of the drafting
of this Section 7-4, includes the following:
Bows and arrows used in illegal hunting (NMSA 1978, § 17-2-20.1).[1]
Any instrument or vehicle used in violation of the Cultural Properties Act (NMSA 1978, § 18-6-
9.3).
Vehicles used or intended for use in shooting at or from a motor vehicle (NMSA 1978, § 30-3-
8.1).
Firearms used or in possession in violation of the Unauthorized Possession of a Handgun Act
(NMSA 1978, § 30-7-2.3).
Property used in violation of the Unauthorized Recording Act (NMSA 1978, § 30-16B-1 et
seq.).
Mistreated animals (NMSA 1978, § 30-18-1.1).
Property used in violation of the Gambling Act (NMSA 1978, § 30-19-10).
Substances and property used or possessed in violation of the Controlled Substances Act
(NMSA 1978, § 30-31-1 et seq.), the Imitation Controlled Substances Act (NMSA 1978, § 30-
31A-1 et seq.), and the Drug Precursor Act (NMSA 1978, § 30-31B-17).[2]
Any interest in property acquired in violation of the Racketeering Act (NMSA 1978, § 30-42-1
et seq.).
Computer equipment and products used or possessed in violation of the Computer Crimes
Act (NMSA 1978, § 30-45-7).
GOVERNING BODY
The Village of Bosque Farms Council.
MOTOR VEHICLE
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 82/346
A.
B.
A.
B.
[1]
[2]
A.
B.
Any device of conveyance, whether or not currently operational, capable of moving itself or of
being moved from place to place upon wheels or track or by water or air, whether or not intended
for the transport of persons or property, and includes any place therein adapted for overnight
accommodation of persons or animals or for the carrying on of business.
OWNER
Any person who has any interest in property, either legal or equitable, which allows said person to
control the use of said property.
Negligently allowing the criminal or illegal use of one's property is the failure to take such care
to prevent the use being made of said property as a reasonably prudent and careful person
would take under similar circumstances.
Recklessly allowing the criminal or illegal use of one's property is a disregard of, or
indifference to, the consequences of such use of one's property, where the owner knows or
reasonably should know of the use being made of the property.
PERPETRATOR
Of a criminal or illegal activity is a person who commits such act or by whose agency such act is
committed.
PERSON
Includes any individual, group, association, corporation, or entity recognized at law.
With respect to the term "person," as used herein, the singular includes the plural, and
masculine includes feminine, where such applies.
PERSONAL PROPERTY
Includes tangible or intangible personal property.
PROBABLE CAUSE
The existence of facts and circumstances that warrant a person of reasonable caution to believe
that an offense was or is being committed.
REAL PROPERTY
Includes any legal or equitable interest in such property.
VILLAGE
The Village of Bosque Farms.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 7-4-4. Liability for allowing property to be used for crimes or
illegal activities.
A rebuttable presumption arises that an owner of property, even though not himself the
perpetrator, who has been given notice under this Section 7-4 that his personal property has been
used for, or has been involved in, or his real property located within the corporate limits of the
Village has been the site of, a crime or illegal activity, is, for the purposes of this Section 7-4, for
any such activity occurring within one year of such notice, an owner who recklessly, negligently or
intentionally allows such activity.
Any owner of property who, even though not the perpetrator of a crime or illegal activity committed
within the Village, recklessly, negligently or intentionally allows his property to be used for, or
involved in, or the site of such crime or illegal activity, violates this Section 7-4. Every day on which
such violation exists shall constitute a separate violation of this Section 7-4.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 83/346
[1]
C.
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
Any owner of property who violates this Section 7-4 shall, upon conviction, be subject, in addition
to any other penalties prescribed by law, to penalties prescribed by law for violation of an
ordinance of the Village.[1]
Editor's Note: See Sec. 1-3, Enforcement and Penalties.
§ 7-4-5. Disposition of personal property constituting public
nuisance.
Personal property that is subject to the provisions of the New Mexico Forfeiture Act, or which, from
time to time, is made subject to said Act, shall be disposed in accordance with that Act.
Personal property not specifically made subject to the provisions of the New Mexico Forfeiture Act
shall be disposed of as follows:
Motor vehicles or other property found to be a public nuisance within the meaning of this
Section 7-4, and not made or adapted solely for the commission of the criminal or illegal
activity giving rise to such finding, may, at the discretion of the Chief of Police or his designee,
be seized and impounded if not already in police custody as a result of arrest. Within five
business days of any such seizure, the Chief of Police shall inform the Village Attorney of
such seizure and the grounds therefor. The Village Attorney shall, within 30 days of such
notice, either file an action in the appropriate court against the perpetrators of said crime or
illegal activity, retaining said property for use in judicial proceedings as deemed necessary, or
release the property to the owner. Release of said property shall not of itself bar any future
filing of any action with respect to the crime or illegal activity within any applicable statutory
period of limitation. If retained for use at trial or other legal proceeding, said property shall
remain in Village custody unless the owner posts a bond, effective until judgment is rendered
in such trial or otherwise ordered by the court or agreed to by the Village Attorney:
Payable upon default to the Village.
In the sum of $15,000 or such amount as acceptable to the Village Attorney to insure the
property's availability for trial or proceeding.
With sureties acceptable to the Village Attorney.
Conditioned that the property be made available as necessary for trial or other legal
proceedings as required by the Village Attorney, and that the property will not be used or
permitted to be used for any criminal or illegal activity that would violate this Section 7-4.
Personal property retained for use at trial or other legal proceeding shall be disposed of in
accordance with the judgment rendered or by other order of the court. In any such trial or
legal proceeding, the Village Attorney may demand, as part of any judgment, that said
personal property be closed for a period of at least six months from the date of judgment
unless a bond be posted payable to the Village in an amount equal to the estimated value of
the property as determined by the Village Attorney, or $15,000, whichever is greater, payable
upon default to the Village, effective for the period of closure, and conditioned that the
property not be used for or involved in any further activity in violation of this Section 7-4.
Any personal property released to its owner or any holder of an interest in the property,
pursuant to the judgment of court, decision of the Village Attorney, or agreement, shall require
that all towing, storage and maintenance fees incurred by the Village during the closure of the
property have been paid, that any judgment rendered in favor of the Village for fees and costs
associated with the legal proceedings have been paid, and that a complete and unconditional
release of the Village and all its employees and agents for or associated with the closure of
said property be executed. In the event that the owners and holders of legal or equitable
interests, or any of them, fail, neglect, or refuse to notify the Village of their intent to meet the
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 84/346
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
(1)
C.
requirements of release herein stated within 30 days of receiving notice of the final judgment
of the court and the availability of the property for release, and who fail to redeem the property
within 90 days of such notice of intent to redeem, then the property shall be declared
abandoned and shall be disposed of in accordance with the Village ordinances relating to
abandoned property.
Personal property made, adapted or intended solely for use in the commission of criminal or
illegal activities, as determined by the Chief of Police, although not covered by the New
Mexico Forfeiture Act, shall be closed and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of
that Act.
Nothing in this Section 7-4 shall require the Village to release property lawfully obtained by
the Village Police Department as part of a pending criminal investigation or prosecution.
§ 7-4-6. Disposition of real property constituting public nuisance.
Notice.
Owners of real property within the corporate limits of the Village that is the site of criminal or
illegal activity other than prostitution, if not the perpetrators of such activity, shall be given
notice by the Chief of Police that:
A crime or illegal activity has occurred on or at said property; and that, if appropriate, a
citation has been issued against the occupants and perpetrators of said activity;
That the acts committed constitute grounds to declare the property a public nuisance
within the meaning of this Section 7-4 if any recurrence of criminal or illegal activity
occurs within one year of notice; and
That declaration of public nuisance against the property may result in penalties as
provided by law against said owners and possible destruction or closure of the property,
as provided herein.
A copy of this Section 7-4 will be provided with any such notice. A citation against owners of
property who are perpetrators satisfies the requirements of notice under this subsection.
No action shall be taken against any real property located within the municipal limits of the Village
unless and until the Chief of Police, in consultation with the Village Attorney, has established that
probable cause exists that the property has been the site, on more than one occasion within a
one-year period, of criminal or illegal activity, except prostitution, and thus constitutes a public
nuisance within the meaning of this Section 7-4. The Chief of Police and the Village Attorney may,
without limitation, utilize citations issued to the occupants of said property, verified complaints,
reports of other municipal agencies, information from other law enforcement agencies, prior
indictments or convictions of the occupants of said site, or police surveillance, or any other lawful
means to establish probable cause, and shall, as a part of such procedure, determine the owners
of said property, as that term is defined herein, using any reasonable means to establish same.
Real property which has been established to be a public nuisance within the meaning of this
Section 7-4, other than a house of prostitution, shall be disposed of as follows:
The residents and owners will be given notice by the Chief of Police that the named property
is a public nuisance within the meaning of this Section 7-4. Such notice will require that the
owners must immediately take steps voluntarily to abate such use and that the owners detail
in writing within 30 days an abatement plan itemizing: (a) the actions taken and to be taken to
abate and insure continued abatement of such public nuisance; (b) the time frame within
which the abatement will occur; and (c) the name, address and telephone number of the
person supplying the said information. In addition, any plan must include a provision for the
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 85/346
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(5)
(6)
posting of a performance bond in an amount equal to the estimated value of the property, but
in no case less than $25,000, made payable upon default to the Village, with sureties
acceptable to the Village, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the abatement
plan as finally accepted. The Chief of Police and the Village Attorney will determine jointly the
suitability and reasonableness of any such abatement plan and inform the owner or his
representative of such decision. If the proposed abatement plan is unsuitable, the Chief of
Police and the Village Attorney jointly will detail actions that must be taken or time frames that
must be observed, or both if appropriate, to make the plan acceptable and so notify the
owner. A denial of suitability will require an immediate resubmission addressing the
requirements outlined. A second denial or failure to resubmit will be treated as a nonresponse
and dealt with under Subsection C(4) below.
If the plan is determined to be acceptable, the owner will be so notified, and surveillance will
continue to monitor adherence to the accepted plan. Nonrecurrence of criminal or illegal
activity at or on the property for a period of one year following the completion of an approved
abatement plan will constitute fulfillment of the abatement plan and remove the property from
further obligation under this Section 7-4 and release the performance bond.
Failure to perform the plan as accepted during the period of the plan and the one-year period
following completion will constitute a breach of the plan allowing forfeiture of the bond. In
addition, the property will be made subject to the provisions of Subsection D(4) below.
Failure of the owner or his representative to respond within the time allowed, or failure of the
owner to address satisfactorily the requirements of abatement provided to him following a
notice of unsuitability of a proposed abatement plan, or any breach of an approved abatement
plan prior to its fulfillment, following review and concurrence by the Village Attorney, shall be
reported to the governing body by the Chief of Police, with a request that civil in-rem legal
proceedings against the property be initiated.
Civil in-rem legal proceedings shall be initiated, at the direction of the governing body, by the
Village Attorney in accordance with the procedures contained in the New Mexico Statutes and
Rules of Court for proceedings against real property. The suit shall be against the property
and any owner seeking a judgment that the property is a criminal public nuisance within the
meaning of this Section 7-4 and shall include a demand that the property be closed during the
pendency of the suit, subject to a release bond satisfactory to the Village. Upon judgment by
the court that the property is a criminal public nuisance, in addition to any other remedy, the
court shall either: (a) order the destruction of buildings or other structures or appurtenances
causing the property to be a public nuisance, with any cost of destruction to be paid by the
owners of said property or be a lien against the property; or (b) order the closure of the
property for a period of not less than one year or more than three years from the date of
judgment, unless a bond is posted effective for the period of closure:
Payable to the Village.
In a sum equal to the estimated value of the property, but not less than $25,000.
With sureties acceptable to the court.
Conditioned that the property will not be used or permitted to be used for any crime or
illegal activity that would violate this Section 7-4.
Further conditioned that any breach of the terms of the bond will allow closure of the
property, with no provision for bond, for the remaining period of closure included in the
judgment.
Any legal proceeding against the property subject to this subsection shall include a
requirement that the defendants, during any closure imposed in said proceeding, whether
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 86/346
(7)
(8)
A.
B.
before or after judgment, shall provide for the full maintenance of said property, including any
animals, livestock, vegetation, sanitation, utilities, insurance, and security.
At the end of any such closure period, the real property shall be released to the owners only
upon the payment of all expenses incurred by the Village for or associated with its closure,
and the payment of any civil judgments awarded to the Village for its legal fees and costs. In
addition, the property shall only be released upon the execution by all holders of any interest
in and to said property of an unconditional release of the Village, its employees and agents for
any liability for or associated with the closure of the property.
In addition to the remedies provided in this subsection, the Village shall have a lien against
the real property involved for any civil judgment awarded in favor of the Village, including any
costs, fees, and maintenance and upkeep expenses incurred during the period when such
property was under the control of the Village.
§ 7-4-7. Disposition of property deemed house of prostitution.
Property that is found to be a house of prostitution, as that term is denied in NMSA 1978, § 30-9-1
et seq., shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of NMSA 1978, § 30-8-8.1.
The owners of property which has been found to be a house of prostitution, and who are not
themselves the operators of said house, shall be made aware of the provisions of NMSA 1978,
§ 30-9-9 regarding the owners' remedies against lessees conducting such activities.
Section 7-5. Multi-Use Path
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms as Sec. 7-5 of the 1980
Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 7-5-1. Title.
This Section 7-5 shall be known as the "Multi-Use Path Ordinance."
§ 7-5-2. Path established.
The multi-use path constructed on the outer perimeter of Bosque Farms Loop is hereby declared to be
for the health, recreation, and welfare of the residents of the Village of Bosque Farms.
§ 7-5-3. Applicability.
This Section 7-5 shall govern the use of the multi-use path.
§ 7-5-4. Definitions.
As used in this Section 7-5, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated. "Shall" is
mandatory; "may" is permissive.
CLERK/ADMINISTRATOR
The Village of Bosque Farms Clerk/Administrator.
FENCE LINE
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 87/346
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The beginning of the public or private property on the exterior of the multi-use path.
MULTI-USE PATH
The path constructed on the outer perimeter of Bosque Farms Loop.
§ 7-5-5. Permissible use.
The multi-use path may used for those activities which promote the health, welfare, or recreation
of the residents of the Village of Bosque Farms. Such uses include, but are not limited to: walking,
jogging, bicycle riding, roller skating and roller blading.
The multi-use path may be used for walking leashed pets. Owners of such pets shall immediately
remove any animal waste excreted on or near the multi-use path.
Persons using the multi-use path shall utilize it in a reasonable manner, giving consideration to
weather conditions, time of day, obstructions, and the condition of the path.
§ 7-5-6. Prohibited use.
The multi-use path shall not be used for any form of motorized transportation, including, but not
limited to: motor vehicles, motorcycles, and motor scooters.
This prohibition does not extend to physically disabled persons who utilize motorized
transportation such as a motorized wheelchair as their primary means of transportation.
This prohibition does not extend to vehicles owned and operated by the United States Postal
Service.
This prohibition does not extend to emergency vehicles as defined in NMSA 1978, § 66-1-
4.1F.
This prohibition does not extend to service vehicles owned and then being operated by the
Village of Bosque Farms.
No person shall knowingly obstruct the permissible use of the multi-use path.
Equines such as horses or donkeys are not permitted on the multi-use path except when
traversing the multi-use path.
Vehicles owned and operated by a utility company such as the Public Service Company of New
Mexico or Waste Management, Inc. are not permitted to obstruct the multi-use path without the
express prior permission of the Village's Clerk/Administrator. Such permission must be acquired
on each day such an obstruction occurs.
No person shall park a motor vehicle, trailer, mobile home, cart, wagon, or other conveyance
between the edge of the multi-use path and the fence line.
§ 7-5-7. Rules governing permissible use.
The Village Clerk/Administrator shall, from time to time, make such rules and regulations as he or she
deems necessary for the safe and efficient use of the multi-use path. Those rules and regulations,
upon adoption by the Village Council, shall be incorporated into this Section 7-5 as if set forth herein.
§ 7-5-8. Penalty.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 88/346
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Any person violating any provision of this Section 7-5, or any rule or regulation governing the use
thereof adopted by the Village Council, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and on
conviction thereof shall be fined a sum not to exceed $500 or imprisonment not to exceed 90
days.
In addition to such penalties, the Village Attorney shall have the authority to apply to the District
Court for the purpose of obtaining an order restraining any person from violating any of the
provisions of this Section 7-5, and to apply to the District Court for any costs incurred by the
Village in initiating and prosecuting such an action.
§ 7-5-9. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, phrase or other portion of this Ordinance shall be declared
invalid for any reason whatsoever by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such decision shall not
effect the validity or enforceability of the remaining portions of this ordinance.
8. ANIMALS AND FOWL
Section 8. Animal Control
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 6-18-2015.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning  See Sec. 10-1.
Article I. General Provisions
§ 8-1-1. Title.
This Section 8 shall be known and may be cited as the "Village of Bosque Farms Animal Control
Ordinance" and shall be referred to elsewhere herein as "this Section 8."
§ 8-1-2. Authority.
This Section 8 is created pursuant to the enabling authority set forth in NMSA 1978, § 3-18-3.
§ 8-1-3. Purpose.
It is the intent of this Section 8 to establish procedures that will:
Protect residents from immediate threat to health and safety.
Regulate, restrain and prohibit the running at large of any animal within the boundary of the
Village.
Provide for the impounding and disposition of animals found running at large.
Regulate and control animals within the Village.
Protect animals from neglect, abuse and cruelty.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 89/346
F.
[1]
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Promote responsible animal ownership.
Support the Right to Farm Act (NMSA 1978, § 47-9-1 et seq.) and Animal Welfare Act.[1]
Editor's Note: See NMSA 1978, § 30-18-1 et seq.
Promote a rural and animal-friendly character within the Village.
Assist in providing control of animals not under the jurisdiction of the New Mexico Livestock Board
and the New Mexico Department of Game and Fish.
Enforce state statutes concerning rabies control and reporting animal bites.
Establish fees related to this Section 8.
Prescribe penalties for violations of this Section 8.
Article II. Definitions
§ 8-2-1. Word usage.
Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, words used in the present tense include the future tense,
and words used in the future tense include the present tense; the singular includes the plural, and the
plural includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive, and the words "shall," "will" and "must" are
mandatory, subject to specific exceptions allowed by this Section 8.
§ 8-2-2. Terms defined.
As used in this Section 8, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ABANDONED ANIMAL
Any animal that has been:
Intentionally or knowingly released from the owner's or custodian's control with the apparent
intention to withdraw protection, support or care with further intent of never again claiming
right to or interest in the animal; or
Left at any location without acknowledgement and consent of the owner or occupant of the
property; or
Left in the care or custody of any person other than the owner for a specified period of time,
after which the owner or custodian fails to reinstate care and custody beyond the specified
time, and the custodian does not wish to continue to care for the animal; or
Impounded or otherwise placed under the temporary control of animal control, and the person
having been deemed to be the lawful owner or custodian of the animal refuses to claim or
properly reclaim the animal.
ADOPTION
To legally assume the responsibility for proper care in accordance with this Section 8.
ANIMAL
Any dog, cat or exotic animal.
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY
A law enforcement officer, animal control officer or designee authorized to enforce this Section 8.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 90/346
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
ANIMAL CONTROL CENTER or ANIMAL CONTROL SHELTER
Any pound, lot, premises or building maintained by the Village or its contractor for the care,
custody and disposal of animals.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER
The employee(s) of the Village who has the primary responsibility for enforcement of this Section
8 under the supervision of the Village Clerk/Administrator.
ANIMAL FOSTER HOME
Any private facility used for the temporary housing and care of animals for the primary purpose of
public adoption, working in cooperation with a recognized animal rescue or animal sanctuary.
ANIMAL RESCUE OR ANIMAL SANCTUARY PREMISES
An organization recognized by the State Corporation Commission to be nonprofit, for the short- or
long-term care and custody of animals, which may include lost pets, owner-released pets, cruelty
cases, rescued animals and/or permanent retirement candidates.
BITE
The puncture or tear of the skin or wound inflicted by the teeth of an animal.
BREEDER
One who permits the intentional breeding of animals which produces offspring.
COMMERCIAL BREEDER PREMISES
A facility or premises licensed and operated as a business, operated by a person involved in the
controlled breeding of animals and who may offer those animals for sale.
COMMERCIAL CATTERY/KENNEL PREMISES
Any establishment, appropriately zoned, operated as a business, where dogs and/or cats are
boarded or maintained under controlled conditions and for boarding, grooming, training, showing,
or related activities for profit.
COMPANION ANIMAL
Any animal which is normally bred and sold to be kept as a domestic pet.
CONFINE
Restriction of an animal to a proper enclosure to ensure the safety of the public, itself and/or other
animals.
CRATING
Confining an animal in an area large enough for the animal to comfortably stand, turn around and
lay down.
CUSTODIAN
A person who has control, custody, or possession of an animal or is caring for it on behalf of its
owner or legal agent.
DANGEROUS DOG
A dog that caused a serious injury to a person or domestic animal; however, a dog shall not be
declared dangerous or a potentially dangerous dog if:
The dog was used by a law enforcement official for legitimate law enforcement purposes.
The threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person or domestic animal who was:
Trespassing upon premises occupied by the owner of the dog; or
Provoking, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or had repeatedly, in the past,
provoked, tormented, abused or assaulted the dog; or
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 91/346
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
A.
B.
Committing or attempting to commit a crime.
The dog was:
Responding to pain or injury; or
Protecting itself or its offspring; or
Protecting or defending a human being or domestic animal from attack or assault.
(Also see "potentially dangerous dog" as defined in this Section 8.)
EXIGENT CIRCUMSTANCES
A situation that demands unusual or immediate action to preserve the evidence of a crime, save a
life, or prevent undue suffering of an animal.
EXOTIC ANIMAL
Any vertebrate animal, excluding man, wild animals, livestock and companion animals.
GOVERNING BODY
The Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms.
HOBBY BREEDER PREMISES
A premises operated by person(s) involved in the controlled breeding of dogs and/or cats, that
produces and may offer for sale 18 puppies or kittens or three litters, whichever is less, per
calendar year.
INTACT ANIMAL
An animal that has not been sterilized.
LITTER PERMIT
A permit to sell puppies or kittens.
LIVESTOCK
All domestic or domesticated animals that are used or raised on a farm or ranch and includes, but
is not limited to, horses, asses, mules, cattle, sheep, goats, swine, bison, poultry, ostriches, emus,
rheas, camelids and farmed cervidae, but does not include companion animals. Livestock is
excluded from this Section 8.
NUISANCE ANIMAL
Any animal that unreasonably disturbs humans, endangers the life or health of other animals or
humans, or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens, other than their owners or
custodians, to the enjoyment of life and property.
OWNER
A person that controls, maintains custody of, has legal title to or interest in, harbors, feeds or
permits an animal(s) to remain in, on or about his/her premises or, if that person is under the age
of 18, that person's parent or guardian.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG
A dog that may reasonably be assumed to pose a threat to public safety as demonstrated by the
following behaviors:
[Added 3-17-2016]
Causing an injury to a person or domestic animal that is less severe than a serious injury;
Chasing or menacing a person or domestic animal in an aggressive manner and without
provocation; or
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 92/346
C.
A.
B.
Acting in a highly aggressive manner within a fenced yard or enclosure. (Also see "dangerous
dog" as defined in this section.)
PROPER ENCLOSURE
Secure confinement indoors or outdoors, such as in a fenced yard, pen or other structure, that is
designed to prevent the animal from escaping the confined area.
QUARANTINE
The detaining and strict isolation of an animal for the purpose of observation and for required
periods of time as set forth by state statute and/or this Section 8.
RUNNING AT LARGE
An animal neither confined by enclosure nor physically restrained by a leash when off the
premises of its owner or custodian.
SERVICE/THERAPY ANIMAL
An animal trained and certified by a recognized institution engaged in such training to assist
impaired persons and in the company of the person the animal was trained to assist.
SHADE
A thorough and continuous protection from the sun and heat.
SOLID FLOOR
The surface upon which an animal is confined is of sufficient gauge and mesh to prevent the
animal's pads and toes from injury. Any porous surface must not allow waste to fall upon an
animal confined in an enclosure below.
STRAY
An animal beyond the boundaries of the owner's premises and free from the owner's restraint or
control, and includes all animals that are running at large, abandoned or have no known owner.
TETHER
To attach an animal to an object. This does not include an animal being walked on a leash.
VACCINATION
An immunization to prevent a specific disease.
VETERINARIAN
A person with a veterinary medicine degree licensed to practice veterinary medicine in New
Mexico.
VILLAGE
The Village of Bosque Farms, New Mexico.
Article III. Administration
§ 8-3-1. Rules and procedures.
The Village Clerk/Administrator is responsible for the administration of this Section 8.
Enforcement of this Section 8 may be delegated and/or shared with other counties, municipalities,
or other entities defined in the form of a joint powers agreement.
§ 8-3-2. Animal Control Officer; issuance of citations.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 93/346
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
The Animal Control Officer(s) is given the primary responsibility for the enforcement of this Section
8 and is directed to investigate, upon reasonable cause, any alleged violation of this Section 8. In
the event of the Animal Control Officer(s) not being on duty, a police officer(s) on duty may
assume primary enforcement responsibility of this Section 8.
The Animal Control Officer(s) shall have the authority to issue citations for violations of this
Section 8 and to perform such other duties as are prescribed herein. All citations will be on a form
approved by the Village.
§ 8-3-3. Schedule of fees and fines.
The Schedule of Fees and Fines shall be adopted, approved or amended only by resolution and
are attached in Resolution No. 839-15.
Payment of any and all fees and other assignable costs shall be made to the Village in a method
acceptable to the Village and become due within 10 working days of notice.
Owners or custodians of animals impounded as stray, nuisance, or quarantined animals shall pay
all fees and fines related to such impoundment.
§ 8-3-4. Animal control.
Any Animal Control Officer(s) is hereby authorized as permitted by law to enter upon any private
premises.
Except in cases of imminent danger to either the public or an animal(s), the Animal Control
Officer(s) shall make reasonable efforts to obtain the permission of the property owner/occupant. If
the Animal Control Officer(s) is unable to obtain the permission of the owner/occupant, the Animal
Control Officer(s) may seek a court order or warrant to enter a premises as provided by law.
Animal Control may impound any animal running at large. Animal control authority may have the
right of ingress and egress on private property when immediate danger and/or exigent
circumstances exist to the animal running at large.
Animal control authority shall, consistent with state law, impound or destroy an animal in the act of
pursuing, wounding, or killing livestock or poultry or attacking a human. If the animal is
impounded, the animal control authority shall attempt to identify and notify the owner or custodian.
There shall be no liability on the part of the animal control authority or the Village for damages for
such destruction of the animal.
The owner or custodian of an impounded animal shall be liable for any fees incurred due to
impoundment.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, resist or oppose the animal control authority in the
lawful performance of its duties.
When acting in the course and scope of employment, the animal control authority is hereby
authorized to carry, on its person or in Village vehicles, and use on animals, loaded tranquilizer
guns approved by the Village Clerk/Administrator.
§ 8-3-5. Impounded, seized and found animals.
Impounding animals. An animal shelter shall be provided for the purpose of boarding and caring
for animals that have been impounded under the provisions of this Section 8. It shall be the duty of
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 94/346
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
the animal control authority to pick up and impound, or cause to be impounded, any stray animals
and/or any animals found to be running at large within the Village.
Seizure of animals.
If the animal control authority reasonably believes that the life, mental or physical health of an
animal is endangered due to cruel or inhumane treatment, or that the animal has been
deemed to be dangerous and cannot be sufficiently controlled by the owner or custodian, the
animal control authority shall apply to the Municipal Court for a warrant to seize the animal.
Under exigent circumstances, when the animal control authority witnesses a situation, and in
its judgment determines that an animal's life is in jeopardy and requires immediate action to
protect the animal's health or safety, the animal control authority may impound the animal
without warrant or notice to the pet owner.
The animal control authority and the Village are not liable for any damages resulting from a
seizure under this section.
Any known owner or custodian of an animal that is impounded pursuant to this section shall be
given written notice thereof.
Retention of animals running at large/found animals. Any person who holds or retains possession
of any animal running at large shall make reasonable efforts to locate the owner of the animal,
including notification of such retention to the Village Office.
§ 8-3-6. Recordkeeping.
The Animal Control Officer(s) shall create and maintain a record of all animals that have been
impounded, seized or found, whether dead or alive. The Village Office shall maintain these public
records for not less than one year. The records shall contain at least the following information:
The manner and date of impoundment, seizure or of being found.
A complete description of the animal, including species, predominate breed, sex, color,
approximate age and weight.
The location of the animal.
The date and disposition of the animal.
The name, address and phone number of the person reclaiming or adopting the animal.
All fees and/or fines received by the Village.
§ 8-3-7. Disposition of impounded animals.
The owner or custodian of an impounded animal may be allowed to reclaim his animal as provided
by this Section 8 or any other provisions of law.
The owner or custodian shall be responsible for payment of any related fees, fines, and/or
penalties owed to the Village and/or Valencia County.
Article IV. Owner's Duties
[Amended 10-15-2015]
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 95/346
A.
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
§ 8-4-1. Animals as personal property.
Dogs, cats and other animals shall be deemed and considered personal property.
§ 8-4-2. Animals running at large.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, possessor, or keeper to allow or permit any animal(s) to run at
large as defined in § 8-2-2, or on any street, alley, sidewalk, vacant lot, public property, other
unenclosed place in the Village or private property without the permission of the owner thereof.
Any such animal(s) permitted to be at large is in violation of this section and is hereby declared to
be a nuisance and menace to the public health and safety.
Every fierce, dangerous or vicious animal(s), when running at large upon the streets or in any
other public place, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. An animal(s) shall be deemed
fierce, dangerous or vicious if it runs after, chases or attempts to bite any person or other
animal(s).
§ 8-4-3. Confined and tethered animals; care and maintenance.
Violations of the following requirements will constitute an act of neglect or cruelty and will subject
the animal to immediate impoundment and penalties to the owner.
Confined animals.
Exterior enclosures shall be constructed of chain link or other secure materials. The structure
shall be structurally sound and kept in good repair. The enclosure shall be of sufficient height
or be covered to prevent the animal from escaping. The enclosure shall be of sufficient size to
allow the animal full freedom of movement. An enclosure for a cat that provides 12 square
feet of surface space and a minimum of 18 inches in height is presumptively sufficient. An
enclosure for an untethered dog weighing less than 40 pounds that provides 72 square feet
and 48 inches in height is presumptively sufficient.
When confined in an exterior enclosure, shelter must be provided to allow the animal to
remain dry and protected from the elements. The shelter shall be fully enclosed on four sides,
roofed, and have a solid floor (a solid dirt floor is acceptable). The shelter shall be large
enough for the animal to rest comfortably and be in sound and good repair.
Animals may be crated within a reasonable manner that is not detrimental to the health,
safety and welfare of the animal.
Tethered animals.
Dogs and other animals (excluding cats) are permitted on public roadways and public areas in
the Village only if on a secure leash. This provision does not apply when the animal is in a
bona fide animal show or other competition.
The tether must be affixed to the animal by use of a nonabrasive, comfortable, fitted collar or
harness with a swivel at both ends.
The chain or cable must not allow the animal to pass beyond the owner's/custodian's
property. The tether must not be obstructed by objects which might cause the animal to
become entangled.
Only one animal may be attached to each trolley or tether and each must be separated to
prevent entanglement with the other(s).
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 96/346
(5)
(6)
(7)
D.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
The tethered animal must be able to sit, walk, and lie down. The chain or cord must be strong
enough to restrain the animal, but not so heavy as to restrict normal movement.
An animal shall not be tethered with a lead that exceeds 1/8 of the dog's body weight or by a
tow or log chain.
The tethered animal is to be tethered with a lead that measures, when rounded to the nearest
whole foot, at least 10 feet in length.
Care and maintenance. It shall be unlawful for any person to neglect to provide any confined or
tethered animal with proper nutritious food, drink, necessary shade or shelter, or to keep an animal
under unsanitary or unhealthy conditions so as to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
animals and residents. Animal waste, spoiled food and trash must be removed on a regular basis.
Adequate drainage must be maintained.
§ 8-4-4. Confinement during estrus.
Any female companion animal in a stage of estrus (heat) shall be confined to a secure enclosure so
that contact with a male animal will be prevented except for intentional breeding purposes. Owners or
custodians who do not comply with this section may be required to place such animals in a boarding
kennel or veterinary hospital at the owner's or custodian's expense.
§ 8-4-5. Rabies control.
It is the duty of every person keeping a dog, cat, or ferret over the age of three months to have
such animals vaccinated against rabies as required by state law. Any unvaccinated dog, cat, or
ferret brought into the Village shall be securely confined by the owner or custodian until vaccinated
against rabies, which shall be administered within one week of entry into the Village. Any rabies
vaccination performed by a veterinarian in another county, state or country must conform to the
requirements of the State of New Mexico to be valid within the Village.
Quarantine. Any dog, cat or other animal determined by the state as requiring the rabies
vaccination and which has bitten or otherwise exposed a person or another animal to the rabies
virus shall be quarantined by confining it immediately and observing it in confinement for a period
of 10 days from the date of the bite, at the owner's expense, at a place and in a manner
designated by the Animal Control Officer. Upon the conclusion of the observation period, the
animal shall be:
Released in accordance with all other applicable provisions of this Section 8 if the animal
does not show signs of infection with the rabies virus; or
Destroyed and its head sent to an appropriate laboratory for rabies testing if the animal shows
signs of infection with the rabies virus; or if the animal shows signs of infection during the
required period of confinement and observation, the animal shall be destroyed and sent for
testing at that time.
Home or boarding kennel quarantine. Any dog, cat, or ferret determined by the Animal Control
Officer to have bitten a human, or which has been bitten by a known rabid animal, may be granted
home or boarding kennel quarantine privileges by the Animal Control Officer. Any such home or
boarding kennel quarantine is subject to approval by the Animal Control Officer and may be
refused for any reason. Home or boarding kennel quarantines will be subject to a minimum
standard, as per state regulations and as stated on the home and boarding kennel quarantine
agreement form. On the final day of the observation period, the animal shall be presented to the
Animal Control Officer for examination. The quarantine shall not be concluded until the Animal
Control Officer has confirmed that such examination has been done.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 97/346
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
§ 8-4-6. Nuisance animals.
It is unlawful for an owner or keeper to allow any animal(s) to persistently bark, howl or make
noise or to be kept or maintained in such numbers as to disturb by noxious or offensive odors or
be kept in runs or kennels which are not maintained so as to disturb by noxious or offensive odors,
to otherwise endanger the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the Village of Bosque Farms.
Any person who has been notified in writing by the animal control authority and who owns,
maintains, keeps, or harbors a nuisance animal shall take immediate steps to alleviate the
nuisance. The nuisance must be alleviated within the time stated in the notice provided by the
animal control authority or the animal control authority may issue a citation.
All complaints filed pursuant to this section shall be filed in writing with the Animal Control Officer
or Bosque Farms Village Office and shall include the name and address of the complainant and
name and address of the person(s) permitting the nuisance to occur and to continue.
§ 8-4-7. Cruelty to animals.
An animal carried in an open bed of a truck when on public property must be crated or restrained
so it cannot fall or jump from the truck or be strangled, or bite or molest passersby. An animal may
be carried in a truck with an enclosed bed. An animal must have room in the crate or bed of the
truck to stand or lie down within the enclosed area of the truck bed.
It shall be unlawful for any person to confine, or allow to be confined, any animal in a motor
vehicle or trailer under such conditions or for such a period of time as to endanger the health or
well-being of the animal.
Any animal showing evidence of cruelty or abuse shall be impounded until a Municipal Court
hearing is conducted. Unless an owner or custodian is willing to surrender an animal for
impoundment under this section, the animal control authority shall seek a warrant from a judge or
court of competent jurisdiction and a complaint shall be filed for seizure of the animal. No warrant
shall be necessary under exigent circumstances.
Any person found guilty of cruelty or abuse of an animal shall be responsible for all expenses
incurred for the animal while impounded. Should the person be found not guilty of cruelty or
abuse, the animal shall be returned to the owner or custodian.
It is unlawful for any person to recklessly, willfully, maliciously or negligently kill, maim, disfigure,
torture, beat with a stick, chain, club or other object, mutilate, burn or scald with any substance or
otherwise cruelly harm any animal, except that reasonable force may be employed to drive off
vicious animals. Injury to an animal resulting from the animal control authority's reasonable
attempt to capture, subdue or impound that animal shall not be deemed cruelty.
It is unlawful to poison a domestic animal or to distribute poison or toxicants in any manner with
the intent of poisoning a domestic animal.
It is unlawful for an owner or custodian to abandon any domestic animal.
§ 8-4-8. Dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs.
[Amended 3-17-2016]
It shall be the right of the owner or custodian of the killed or injured animal(s) to kill the aggressing,
attacking animal(s) while it is upon property controlled by said owner or custodian.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 98/346
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
The animal control authority may impound or destroy an animal if it is witnessed in the act of
pursuing or wounding any other animal(s) or attacking humans. There shall be no liability of the
officer in damages or otherwise for such destruction of the attacking animal(s).
Dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs must be registered with the Village.
§ 8-4-9. (Reserved)
§ 8-4-10. Public access for service/therapy animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or maintaining any place for public accommodation, public
entertainment or amusement, a restaurant, or who operates a public transportation facility to exclude
any animal which has been trained to assist the impaired, provided that such animal is in the company
of the impaired person whom it was trained to assist.
§ 8-4-11. Hobby breeding.
A hobby breeder shall not allow any animal to leave the breeder's premises, other than for
veterinary care, before the age of eight weeks of age, and the breeder must provide proof of first
vaccinations, except in exigent circumstances.
A hobby breeder shall not advertise for sale any animal within the Village unless the hobby
breeder permit has been obtained and the permit number is prominently displayed legibly in any
advertisement, including but not limited to print, internet or other media. The breeder shall furnish
the hobby breeder permit number to anyone requesting the number.
Animals shall not be sold other than on the premises of the breeder, whether intentionally or
unintentionally bred, except by a 501(c)3 animal rescue organization.
Hobby breeder premises shall follow the regulations set forth for a "hobby kennel" in Section 10-1,
Zoning, of the Village Code.
Article V. Penalties
§ 8-5-1. Penalty.
Any person who is convicted of violating a provision of this Section 8 shall be deemed guilty of a petty
misdemeanor, unless otherwise provided for by state or federal law, and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in this Section 8. Each day this Section 8 is violated shall
be considered a separate offense unless otherwise specified in Resolution No. 839-15 establishing the
fees and fines.
9. HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section 9-1. Solid Waste
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms as Sec. 9-1 of the 1980
Code, as amended 10-21-2010. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance  See Sec. 7-3.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 99/346
§ 9-1-1. Title.
This Section 9-1 shall be known as the "Solid Waste Ordinance."
§ 9-1-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this Section 9-1 is to preserve the health, safety, comfort and convenience of the
inhabitants of the Village and to preserve, protect and improve the environmental quality of the Village.
§ 9-1-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Section 9-1, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
ASHES
The residue from burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials.[1]
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT
All structures, other than residences, together with the surrounding premises, in which any person
produces or generates solid waste.
FRANCHISED COLLECTOR
The person to whom the Village has granted an exclusive franchise to collect all solid waste within
the Village.
GARBAGE
Putrescent animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food.
HAZARDOUS WASTES
Solid waste that is deemed hazardous under federal statutes, rules or regulations.[2]
LANDFILL
An area of land or an excavation in which solid wastes are placed for disposal and that employs
an engineered method that minimizes environmental hazards and meets the requirements of the
New Mexico Solid Waste Management Regulations.
PERSON
Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, cooperative, association or any other entity owning,
operating, controlling or inhabiting any house, residence, shop, establishment or other premises
with the corporate limits of the Village.
PREMISES
Any property within the Village corporate limits adaptable for human occupancy and shall also
mean, but not be limited to, business places, apartment houses, offices, theaters, hotels,
residences, cafes, restaurants, eating places, tourist facilities, hospitals, schools, vacant lots and
any other places or locations within the Village limits where solid waste accumulates.
RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION
Solid waste collected from single-family residential homes.
RESIDENCE
A home, trailer, mobile home, or other freestanding structure used or capable of use as a human
habitation, together with the surrounding premises, in which any person produces or generates
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 100/346
[1]
[2]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
[1]
solid waste; a single-family residence may include a guesthouse and other outbuildings on the
same premises that are not continuously inhabited.
SANITATION OFFICER
The Village Clerk/Administrator or his or her designee, and is the person responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this Section 9-1.
SOLID WASTE
Any garbage, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air
pollution control facility and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained
gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural operations and
from community activities, but does not include those items excluded as a solid waste by the Solid
Waste Management Regulations adopted by the Environmental Improvement Board of the State
of New Mexico.
SPECIAL WASTES
Types of solid wastes that have unique handling, transportation or disposal requirements to assure
protection of the environment and the public health and safety, as defined by the New Mexico
Solid Waste Management Regulations.
Editor's Note: The definition of "code enforcement officer," which immediately followed this definition,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Editor's Note: The definition of "infectious waste," which immediately followed this definition, was
repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 9-1-4. Administration; Sanitation Officer.
The Sanitation Officer is responsible for the administration and enforcement of this Section 9-1.
It shall be the duty of the Sanitation Officer to oversee the handling and collection of all solid waste
in the Village and disposal thereof. He/She shall have the authority to enforce this Section 9-1 and
to adopt regulations to implement this Section 9-1.
The Sanitation Officer shall monitor all franchisees' compliance with the terms of the franchise and
monitor compliance with the terms of this Section 9-1.
The Sanitation Officer shall hear and decide complaints brought by the franchisee or persons
served by the franchisee concerning the franchisee's or person's compliance with the terms of any
applicable franchise or the terms of this Section 9-1, subject to the rights of appeal set forth in § 9-
1-18.
The Sanitation Officer shall notify persons whose containers are not in conformity with the
requirements set forth in this Section 9-1.
The Sanitation Officer shall also:
Notify persons using commercial containers if unsanitary conditions exist and order additional
service if necessary.
Resolve disputes regarding the placement of solid waste receptacles.
§ 9-1-5. Accumulation of solid waste.
No person shall allow any solid waste to accumulate upon premises or real property owned, leased or
occupied by him during intervals between collections thereof, except in the manner provided by this
Section 9-1.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 101/346
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
§ 9-1-6. Collection franchise; compulsory collection.
The Village shall provide and maintain suitable equipment and personnel sufficient to collect solid
waste within the Village and shall provide adequate areas for the disposal of solid waste. To
achieve those purposes, the governing body may enter into an exclusive franchise for the
collection and disposal of solid waste, including residential, commercial, and any other types of
solid waste.
At the end of a franchise term and renewal term, the Village may elect not to renegotiate or renew
the franchise. In order to provide collection and disposal after the franchise term has expired, the
Village may:
Itself provide collection and disposal;
Contract or franchise with a person authorized to do business within the state and the Village;
or
Arrange for collection in any other manner allowed by law.
Every person owning or controlling an occupied residence or commercial establishment within the
Village is required to arrange for and receive the solid waste collection service provided by the
franchised collector and to pay the solid waste collection fee established by the Village. Fees shall
be billed by the franchised collector. The franchised collector shall have exclusive rights to all rolloff
work, including construction debris.
§ 9-1-7. Residential, commercial and construction debris
collection.
Residential collections.
Residential container required; maintenance required. Every person owning, leasing, or
occupying a single-family residence within the Village shall provide or cause to be provided
on his premises mechanically handled containers obtained from the Village's authorized
franchised solid waste collector.
Mechanically handled containers provided by the franchisee shall remain the property and
responsibility of the franchisee. Containers shall be maintained in mechanically sound
condition by the franchisee.
The franchisee shall be entitled to seek restitution from third parties for all maintenance,
repairs or loss occasioned by the negligent or intentional acts of such responsible third
parties.
The combined weights of the containers and contents shall not exceed 150 pounds when
placed for collection.
Containers will be loaded by residents in such a manner that they will self-empty when
inverted.
Containers placed for collection by residents shall be placed roadside with lids closed. Any
container deemed to be overloaded, which would cause spillage in the process of loading into
the truck, will not be serviced.
The owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of each premises shall store the containers in such a
manner as to keep the container from being overturned or upset and scattered in any manner.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 102/346
[1]
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
Times and location. All residential containers, other than at the premises of a qualified
physically disabled resident, shall be placed for pickup no later than 7:00 a.m. on the regularly
scheduled day, but no earlier than 7:00 p.m. the evening prior to pickup, unless otherwise
authorized by the Sanitation Officer. Except where special circumstances warrant otherwise
and where approved by the Village, all collections made by the franchisee for other than a
qualified physically disabled resident shall be made at roadside and containers must be no
farther than three feet from the driving surface of the street. Containers shall be clearly visible
and accessible to collection vehicles and with three feet of clearance from any obstructions,
including but not limited to trees, shrubbery, walls, fences and vehicles. If more than one
container is being used by a resident, there should be a three-foot clearance between each
container placed out for collection. All emptied containers shall be removed from the road
area by 12:00 midnight of the collection day.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Frequency. Solid waste from all residential premises shall be collected and disposed of once
per week. Collection will start no earlier than 7:00 a.m. of the collection day.
Reloading. A resident may request service of a reloaded container, at an additional charge.
Seasonal additional volumes. A resident may utilize an additional cart checked out from
Village Hall, at an additional charge.
Commercial collection.
It is the responsibility of the owner of the premises to arrange for commercial containers with
the franchisee. It is also the responsibility of the owner of the premises to contact the solid
waste franchisee concerning any relocation of container, change of service or change of
business.
Commercial or business establishments and multiple-family dwellings with more than two
dwellings on a single site are required to have a commercial container unless granted an
exemption by the Sanitation Officer. The container shall be kept, by the owner of the
premises, in a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times.
The size and specifications of a commercial container shall be based on the volume and type
of solid waste produced by the particular commercial or business establishment or multifamily
dwelling. In cases of disputes or disagreements concerning the appropriate size of a
container or the frequency of collection, the Sanitation Officer may order a change in the size
of the container or frequency of collections.
The franchised collector shall collect all solid waste, except special or hazardous wastes,
which is contained inside the approved receptacle to be serviced for that premises. The solid
waste shall not exceed the receptacle capacity and the container's lid must be closed when
not in use. The owner shall not place any solid waste in any area other than in the solid waste
container.
All solid waste receptacles shall be kept in a clean condition by the user and kept in good
condition by the franchisee. The franchisee will perform or cause to be performed all
maintenance and repairs upon solid waste containers in order to keep them in proper
operating order. The franchisee shall maintain, repair or repaint a container upon the order of
the Sanitation Officer. The franchisee shall be entitled to seek restitution from third parties for
all maintenance, repairs or loss occasioned by the negligent or intentional acts of the
responsible third parties.
The commercial container shall at all times be located in a manner so as to be readily
accessible for removing and emptying. Criteria for placement shall include consideration of
accessibility to the container by the collection vehicle and safety. In cases of disputes or
complaints arising from or concerning the placement of a container, the Sanitation Officer
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 103/346
(7)
(8)
(9)
(a)
(b)
(10)
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
A.
B.
shall designate the location of containers, taking into consideration, among other things,
safety in providing the service, convenience to the customers, convenience to collection
crews, and hazardous conditions such as electrical wires.
No commercial container shall be placed on any premises zoned R-1, street or alley without
prior approval of the Sanitation Officer.
Collection times. Commercial containers shall be serviced between the hours of 4:00 a.m.
and 8:00 p.m. on the regularly scheduled pickup days.
Container size and frequency of service. It shall be the responsibility of the franchisee and the
commercial user to determine the cubic yard size and number of pickups per week for
commercial containers. The minimum number of pickups shall be one time per week. If, in the
opinion of the Sanitation Officer, unsanitary premises are being maintained, written notice of
this fact shall be sent by registered or certified mail or hand delivered to the user. The notice
shall state if the Sanitation Officer will require the user to increase the size of the container or
to increase the frequency of collection service to maintain sanitary conditions. If within 10
days after mailing or delivery of the notice the premises are not being maintained in a sanitary
manner, the user shall be in violation of this Section 9-1 and shall be subject to citation.
Fees for commercial containers.
The fees for commercial collection include collection and disposal.
For commercial, business, other nonresidential establishments or premises where a
commercial container is used to serve two or more establishments, the fees provided
may be prorated. In the event of a conflict, the pro-ration shall be as determined by the
Sanitation Officer.
Construction debris.
All construction sites shall have a method of containment for construction debris to prevent
the debris from blowing or scattering upon the site or adjacent property and streets. The
method of containment shall meet with the approval of the Sanitation Officer.
The producer of construction debris shall arrange with the franchisee for its collection and
removal, except that the producer may personally collect the debris and transport it to a statepermitted
landfill. Transportation shall be in a vehicle which will prevent the debris from
spilling, blowing or in any other manner from being deposited on any street, roadway or
property. No third-party contractor may be used other than the franchised collector for the
Village.
Any commercial roll-off container placed in the Village limits, other than that of the franchised
solid waste collector, may be confiscated by the Village with the approval of the Sanitation
Officer.
§ 9-1-8. Prohibited wastes.
Flammable or explosive materials. Highly flammable or explosive materials shall not be placed in
residential or commercial containers. The producers of such solid waste shall provide a disposal
plan for approval by the Village.
Hot ashes; other combustible material. No person shall deposit the following materials into a solid
waste receptacle for collection: hot ashes, cinders, or smoldering coals likely to ignite other
materials unless the hot ashes, cinders, or smoldering coals have been cooled for at least 72
hours prior to the time of scheduled collection. No other oily, greasy materials or combustible
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 104/346
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
A.
B.
substances may be placed in a collection container unless they have been placed into the waste
receptacle in a metal or other noncombustible container.
Special and hazardous waste. It shall be unlawful to place or cause to be placed in any container
for collection any special or hazardous waste of any kind. Any special or hazardous waste will be
removed from the Village to an approved site at the owner's or producer's expense. Upon request
of the generator and for a fee, the contractor shall remove and transport special or hazardous
waste to an appropriately approved facility.
§ 9-1-9. Removal of dead animals.
Any person in possession, charge or control of any carrion or dead animal or who owns, controls or
occupies any premises upon which the same may be located shall cause the same to be removed and
disposed of. No dead animal shall be placed in a solid waste receptacle.
§ 9-1-10. Disturbing solid waste receptacles.
It is unlawful to disturb or scatter solid waste or the contents of a solid waste receptacle.
§ 9-1-11. Burning or burying solid waste.
It is unlawful for any person to burn or bury any solid waste, except nothing in this section shall be
construed to prohibit:
The disposal of solid waste by the normal or usual use of a garbage disposal unit or sanitary
sewer facilities.
The normal use of home fireplaces.
Composting.
Open burning of vegetative matter authorized by a permit from the Village of Bosque Farms.
§ 9-1-12. Prohibited scattering or disposal.
It is unlawful to throw, place or deposit waste in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, gutter, public
thoroughfare, driveway or any occupied or unoccupied premises within the Village, except in those
places and in the manner specified in this Section 9-1.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 9-1-13. Collection, transport and disposal.
Solid waste shall be collected and disposed of only by the franchised collector, except that:
Construction debris may be collected and hauled from the premises involved by those engaged in
construction, remodeling or demolition. No third-party hauler may collect and haul except for the
franchised collector.
Tree and yard trimmings accumulated by persons engaged in the business of gardening or
landscaping may be collected and hauled from the premises where such trimmings have
accumulated.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 105/346
C.
D.
E.
A.
(1)
[1]
(2)
B.
The owner, occupant, or person in control of commercial establishments may haul occasional
loads of excess solid waste.
The owner, occupant, or person in control of a residence may haul occasional loads of excess
solid waste.
Clean sawdust, rotted manure for fertilizer or farm debris may be collected and hauled by any
person.
§ 9-1-14. Failure to deposit refuse in proper receptacles;
authority of Village to remove; assessment.
If any person shall permit any solid waste to be thrown, left, or deposited in or upon real property
owned or controlled by such person, other than in proper solid waste receptacles as provided in § 9-1-
5, and fails to remove the solid waste or to place it in proper solid waste receptacles within 48 hours
after the solid waste is deposited, the Village Mayor or the Village Clerk may order the franchised
collector to remove the solid waste from the real property and to bill the person owning or controlling
the property from which the solid waste is removed the actual cost of the removal or a reasonable fee
per half hour, whichever is greater. A separate assessment shall be made for each such removal.
§ 9-1-15. Unauthorized dump sites.
It is unlawful to dump refuse at any place except at the designated landfill unless specifically approved
in writing by the Village.
§ 9-1-16. Collection rates; increases and fees.
Collection rates for all classes and types of service shall be available for inspection at the office of
the Village Clerk and at the office of the franchised contractor.
Rates shall only be changed in the following manner:
Consumer price index (CPI) adjustments. Collection rates shall be adjusted administratively, if
requested by the contractor, On RESIDENTIAL, commercial, roll-off and any other rates
outlined in the rate sheets. CPI adjustments will become effective August 1 in years in which
a request has been made. CPI increases shall be adjusted by 50% of the amount of the
National Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) for the preceding May-to-
May period.
Petition for unusual or extraordinary costs. The franchisee may petition the Village, at any
time, for rate adjustments on the basis of unusual changes in the costs of operations, such as
future, revised or new interpretations of laws, ordinances or regulations; changes in disposal
fees; differences in the cost of fuel; changes in the scope of services; redirection of solid
waste, by the Village, to an alternative site; increases in the costs of licenses, permits and
Village taxes; or for other good reasons. The Village shall have the right to demand
inspections by it, or authorized representatives or independent auditors, of pertinent records
or documents that demonstrate the basis for an adjustment to the rates. The Village shall not
unreasonably withhold approval of a rate adjustment pursuant to this section. The Village
shall conclude all action regarding the franchisee's request within 60 calendar days from the
receipt of a petition. Failure to conclude action with 60 calendar days from the receipt of the
petition may be deemed by the franchisee as approval of the franchisee's petition.[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Franchise fee, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 106/346
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
§ 9-1-17. Compulsory collection and service fees.
The owner or owner's agent of the property being served shall make the necessary arrangements
for collection service. The owner or agent shall be the responsible party for billing and payment
purposes. Owners of property shall be responsible for any unpaid bills left by tenants. Such
persons shall pay to the franchisee the fees established and set forth by the Village, whether or
not the solid waste collection service is actually used. Failure to comply is a violation of this
Section 9-1, in accordance with NMSA 1978, §§ 3-48-1 through 3-48-7, as amended. Failure to
pay solid waste collection charges is punishable under § 9-1-20.
If any person owning or controlling real property fails or refuses to pay the fees chargeable to such
person for solid waste collection, the amount of such unpaid fees may be made an assessment
against the real property from which the solid waste is collected or removed. The franchised
collector may seek penalties including, but not limited to, court proceedings or lien foreclosures as
provided by state law.
If any customer fails to pay the quarterly bill within 45 days after the bill has been mailed, the
franchised collector may send no more than two collection letters per month and may add a
charge per mailing to cover the expense of postage and handling as follows:
Residential account: $1 per mailing, plus a late fee of $5 per month per container for each
month the account is past due.
Commercial account: a penalty of 1.25% of the outstanding bill that is 30 days or more in
arrears, with a minimum of $10, plus $5 per month per container for each month the account
is past due.
The franchised collector shall notify the Village in writing of any account/customer delinquent over
45 days; and the Village shall issue a written warning to the customer that the service may be
temporarily suspended if the account is not promptly made current, and appropriate legal action
may be taken as provided herein.
In addition to its other rights and remedies, the franchised collector may bring civil suit against the
debtor in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Vacated premises shall continue to receive charges unless the owner or agent of such premises
makes an application in writing to the franchised collector stating the date of vacated premises
and expected date of reoccupancy. The collector may not stop charges until such application is
made or the collector documents the vacancy through contact with the tenant or the owner. No
credits shall be given for charges on vacant premises prior to receipt of such application or
documentation. All charges are on a monthly basis and credit shall not be prorated. Premises
vacated for less than two weeks will not receive a credit. Any person making a false statement
upon any application or request pursuant to this Section 9-1 shall be guilty of a violation of this
Section 9-1.
§ 9-1-18. Grievance procedure; withholding payment; delinquent
payments.
If a person served by a franchised collector has a grievance, that person shall file a written
complaint with the Sanitation Officer. The Sanitation Officer shall notify the collector of the
complaint and give the collector five days to either correct the problem or respond to the complaint
in writing. The Sanitation Officer shall schedule a hearing on the complaint within 15 days and
send notice of the hearing to all parties by registered or certified mail no less than 15 days prior to
the scheduled hearing date. The Sanitation Officer shall hear the evidence and grant the
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 107/346
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
[1]
appropriate relief, including ordering the collector to change its practices, ordering adjustment of
amounts paid to the collector or any other remedy that is appropriate.
Any person dissatisfied with the decision of the Sanitation Officer may, within 10 days of the
adverse decision, notify the Village Clerk/Administrator of his or her intent to appeal the decision
of the Sanitation Officer. The appeal will be to the Village Council, which shall hear the appeal at a
time set in its discretion. The decision of the Village Council shall be final.
Persons shall not withhold payment owed to the franchised collector.
Failure of a person to pay appropriate statements or to bring current his or her delinquent account
will entitle the franchisee to pursue its legal remedies either under the franchise agreement or as
afforded by applicable laws.
§ 9-1-19. Proper receptacles; failure to use Village service.
The Village may remove or order its franchisee to remove any solid waste from any real property
or any premises if:
Any person owning, occupying or controlling real property or premises allow solid waste to be
deposited or accumulated upon his property other than in the proper receptacle and fails to
remove solid waste or to place the solid waste in the proper receptacle within 48 hours after
notice from the Sanitation Officer.
The person owning, occupying or controlling real property or premises refuses to use the solid
waste collection service provided by the Village.
After the removal of solid waste, the franchisee shall bill the person the charge allowed under this
Section 9-1 for the removal. Failure to pay the charge is a violation of this Section 9-1.
§ 9-1-20. Penalty.
Violation of this Section 9-1 is a petty misdemeanor unless otherwise provided for by state or federal
law, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in the Village
ordinances regarding petty misdemeanors.[1] Each instance this Section 9-1 is violated shall be
considered a separate offense.
Editor's Note: See Sec. 1-3, Enforcement and Penalties.
Section 9-2. Water
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers  See Sec. 9-3.
Zoning  See Sec. 10-1.
Subdivision regulations  See Sec. 10-2.
Article I. Water Service
[Adopted as Sec. 9-2-1 through Sec. 9-2-22 of the 1980 Code, as amended 7-1-2011]
§ 9-2-1. Title.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 108/346
A.
B.
This article shall be known as the "Water Service Ordinance."
§ 9-2-2. Water utility established.
The Village water system is hereby declared to be for the health, safety and welfare of the Village of
Bosque Farms for the purposes of operation, management, accounting, billing and collection.
§ 9-2-3. Applicability; authorized use of private wells.
This article shall govern production, supply and use of water within the Village of Bosque Farms,
New Mexico for domestic, commercial or industrial purposes.
Private wells are permitted to be drilled and only used for irrigation and agricultural purposes by
water consumers supplied with municipal water.
[Amended 9-15-2016]
§ 9-2-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APPLICANT
Any person who has applied to the Village office for a connection to the service.
COMMERCIAL CONSUMER
A service unit not qualifying as a residential consumer, including any residence or apartment
accommodating two or more families, each having separate kitchen facilities or available to
transient or permanent public, rooming house, hotel cottage, camp, cabin camp, motel, motor
court, trailer park, or sports field, church, school, and any other institution or place where
professional services are offered or any commercial enterprise or business activity is conducted.
CONSUMER
Any person who is receiving the service.
GOVERNING BODY
The governing body of the Village of Bosque Farms, New Mexico.
MULTI-USER MASTER METER WATER CONSUMER
Any commercial consumer who supplies water in any way, by sale, gift, or otherwise, to any
consumer through one meter connection to the Village water system with specific approval by the
Village Council.
OCCUPIED
Actual use and possession of a structure and/or area for the purpose for which it is designed.
PERSON
Individuals, partnerships, corporation, associations, societies, clubs, and any other firms, and shall
be construed to include both the masculine and feminine gender.
PRIVATE WELL
Any water well in existence before water service becomes available or in the future which is used
for irrigation or agricultural purposes only.
[Amended 9-15-2016]
PROPERTY OWNER
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 109/346
[1]
The person who legally owns the property as registered with the Valencia County Assessor's
office.
RENTAL UNIT
A structure and/or an area within a structure used by a tenant for which a periodic payment is
made.
RESIDENTIAL CONSUMER
A single-family residence or dwelling place, including an individual apartment or each unit of a
duplex residential dwelling, where service is utilized only for domestic purposes.
SERVICE
The sale or supply of water by the Village to property owners or consumers.
SERVICE UNIT
Each location requiring service that is under separate ownership, occupancy, or lease, including
each owner, tenant or occupant utilizing a portion of a single building or location.
STAND-BY CONSUMER
A service unit qualifying as a residential consumer, commercial consumer, or multi-user master
water consumer who has paid for stand-by service in full but is not connected to the Village water
system.
SYSTEM
The municipal water system owned and operated by the Village of Bosque Farms, New Mexico.
VILLAGE
The Village of Bosque Farms, New Mexico.
§ 9-2-5. Utilities Director.
The Mayor shall appoint a Utilities Director, which, in addition to his/her other duties, may be the
Village Clerk, as Utilities Director of the system. It shall be the duty of the Utilities Director to supervise
and manage the system. The Utilities Director shall be charged with the enforcement of this article and
with the construction, maintenance, repair, and replacement of the system. The Utilities Director shall
be responsible for all connections to the system. The Utilities Director shall perform such other duties
in connection with the operation of the system as the governing body may prescribe from time to time.
§ 9-2-6. Management, rules, regulations and specifications;
connection required.
The Village of Bosque Farms shall make and enforce such rules and regulations as it may deem
necessary for the safe, efficient, and economical management of the system. Any construction and
hook-up to the Village water system shall be in compliance with the Village planning and zoning
regulations,[1] specifications, and the design handbook which is incorporated into and made a part of
this article. Effective March 1, 1997, mandatory connection to the system is required of all new
construction.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 10, Land Use.
§ 9-2-7. Connection permit required.
No owner, agent or occupant shall be allowed to connect any property, building or installation to the
system. All connections shall be made only by the Village and only upon receipt of a written application
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 110/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
signed by the owner or agent and accompanied by payment of all required fees. Connection without
payment is a criminal offense subject to prosecution and imposition of all penalties shown in §§ 9-2-20
and 9-2-21.
§ 9-2-8. Water service connections for existing lines or new
construction; fees.
[Amended 7-16-2015]
Individuals desiring a single service within 75 feet of the existing water distribution lines will be
issued a connection permit upon proper application and payment of a connection fee according to
meter size.
Individuals will be responsible for installing their own service line from their property line to the
service units, including a shut-off valve on their service line as close to the meter as possible prior
to the Village installing the meter and water connection.
When service is made available to existing real property, the Village shall install all meter
connections for a residential consumer, commercial consumer, and multi-user master consumer at
the following rates after payment of said fee:
Size of Meter
(inches) Water Connection Fee
3/4 $1,000
1 $1,085
1 1/2 $1,740
2 $2,040
A customer who installs a master meter to serve more than one living unit or more than one
commercial unit or combination of living unit and commercial unit shall pay an amount equal to the
number of units multiplied by the tap fee.
The water connection fee includes the service line from the tap in the distribution line to the
property line of the consumer up to 75 feet, meter box and meter, and miscellaneous fittings and
valves to install the meter in the meter box. The connection fee is subject to price increases from
time to time as meter cost, meter box, service line, and miscellaneous fitting prices increase.
A stand-by consumer who requests stand-by installation of service shall pay the hook-up fee in full
prior to the termination of the construction phase. An additional administrative fee of $200 shall be
assessed the stand-by consumer prior to connection to the municipal water system. The
administrative fee of $200 and the meter deposit of $25 shall be paid in full prior to the water
meter being installed.
An additional refundable deposit of $25 shall be paid the Village for the water meter. The deposit
shall be held by the Village of Bosque Farms and shall be returned upon notice of water
disconnection and full payment of the consumer's water bill.
§ 9-2-9. Transfer of domestic right to use water.
The property owner shall assign the necessary domestic right to use water to the Village as per
the Change Point of Diversion Agreement with the Village of Bosque Farms. If the domestic right
to use water cannot be diverted, the property owner will be required to purchase the necessary
water rights. The property owner may elect to have the Village of Bosque Farms purchase water
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 111/346
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
C.
D.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
E.
rights for said individual at a rate established by the Village of Bosque Farms. The rate will be
based upon user needs and requirements at a minimum charge of $800 per 1/4 acre foot.
Charges will be based on water use estimate.
The Village water system is for domestic use only in Zone Districts A-R, R-1, R-1A and C-1 being
utilized as a conventional dwelling unit [§ 10-1-11D(5)]. All outside property use in Zone Districts
A-R, R-1, R-1A and C-1 being utilized as a conventional dwelling unit will require a private well.
Zone District C-1 not being utilized as a conventional dwelling unit may utilize the Village water
system for domestic and property use.
[Amended 9-15-2016]
§ 9-2-10. Monthly water service rates.
[Amended 4-16-2009] [Rates effective 7-1-2019]
Usage.
Residential meter with a usage of less than 5,000 gallons per month will be a minimum
charge of $30.62 per month.
[Amended 5-17-2018; 7-1-2018; 7-1-2019]
Water usage between 5,001 gallons and 7,000 gallons will be an additional $3 per 1,000
gallons.
Water usage of 7,001 gallons or more will be an additional $4 per 1,000 gallons.
On July 1 of each year, the minimum monthly charge contained in this article shall be
adjusted automatically to reflect a two-percent cost-of-living increase.
Availability. Water service under this monthly rate schedule is available within the corporate limits
of the Village.
Applicability. Service under this schedule is applicable to individually metered service units for all
normal water users.
If a leak in an outside line is evident and confirmed by the Utility Department, the Village will bill
the consumer for the amount of water used by that consumer in the same period the previous year
plus actual water production cost per gallon over that usage. If the consumer does not take timely
steps to repair the leak by the following month, the consumer will be billed for all of the water
consumption in that month and no discount for the leak in subsequent months will be considered.
Credit card, direct pay and Autopay administrative fees.
[Amended 8-20-2009]
When paying for monthly water service by use of a credit card or direct pay through a bank,
the Village shall be paid the following administrative fee for each transaction:
[Amended 5-17-2018]
Visa, Mastercard or Discover: $2.
Bank payment: $1.
If the customer is enrolled in the Autopay feature through Xpress Bill Pay, no administrative
fee will be assessed.
§ 9-2-11. Billing; time frame for connecting to Village system;
deposit for renters.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 112/346
A.
B.
C.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
D.
A.
B.
C.
The Utilities Director shall establish a system by which the water meter of each consumer shall be
read no less often than monthly. Monthly water statements shall be furnished to each consumer,
based upon the rates established in this article. Water bills shall be due and payable not later than
20 days after the date of mailing. The Utilities Director shall establish a proper system of
accounting for receipts from water charges and expenditures of the system and shall furnish a
monthly report to the governing body of the receipts and expenditures of the water system.
Once a water meter has been installed, residents shall have seven days to hook up to the Village
water system. The Village water billing cycle will begin seven days after water service is available.
If the seventh day falls after the first of the month, the resident will not be billed that month but the
monthly billings will commence the following month to ensure the resident has a full 30 days
usage of water.
If a consumer requests to be hooked up to the Village water service and fails to have water
services connected within the seven days allowed, the consumer shall be billed for the amount of
the minimum allowable monthly water charge for water usage less than 5,000 gallons.
New residents will be required to fill out an application for a new resident and place a refundable
deposit prior to the change of billing name. The deposit shall be returned upon notice of water
disconnection and full payment of consumer's final water bill.
[Amended 4-20-2017]
All new accounts must provide a deposit as follows:
Residential/commercial owners: $25.
Real estate contracts: $75.
Renters: $100.
Closing papers, real estate contracts and lease or rental agreements will need to be
presented at the time of application.
§ 9-2-12. Delinquencies and disconnections.
[Amended 3-20-2003; 7-16-2015]
If any consumer fails to pay the monthly water charges within 20 days after the date of mailing of
the monthly bill, a charge of 10% of the monthly water billing shall be assessed to the unpaid,
delinquent amount to cover the associated costs and charges in maintenance and administrative
costs for the delinquent account.
The Village may cause water service to be disconnected and may discontinue service to the
service unit if any charge provided herein remains unpaid 40 days after the date of mailing the
monthly bill. In order to discontinue service, a notice that water service will be cut off in 10 days
will be mailed to the property within the time period specified hereinabove, along with the name
and telephone number of the Clerk, who shall hear any appeal or complaint about the delinquent
bill and decide whether or not service will be continued. Notification will be posted to the property
in the event the disconnect notice is returned by the postal service.
When water/sewer service has been disconnected due to delinquent payment, water/sewer
service shall not be restored to the property and/or consumer until all arrears in charges have
been paid, together with a processing fee of $50. Once the charges have been paid, water/sewer
service will be restored during regular business hours. In the event a consumer relocates within
the Village of Bosque Farms leaving a delinquent water/sewer bill at his/her previous residence,
water/sewer service at his/her new location will not be provided until the delinquent charges from
service at his/her previous address have been paid.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 113/346
D.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Tampering with or the removal of a lock on a meter that has been disconnected due to delinquent
payment will result in a fine of $150 assessed to the water consumer.
§ 9-2-13. Termination of service; fee.
[Amended 7-16-2015]
In the event any consumer desires to terminate the water service, notice to that effect must be filed by
the consumer with the Village Clerk on or before the 19th day of the month, or the minimum charge will
be made for the entire following billing month. If a consumer desires to temporarily terminate the water
service, there will be a turn-off/turn-on fee of $15 each.
§ 9-2-14. Extension of main line for new construction.
Service requests at a distance greater than 75 feet from an existing distribution line will require
extension of the distribution mains. The extension of the distribution main shall be the responsibility of
the consumer or consumers. Extension shall comply with the following provisions:
Line standards. The maximum line diameter of the main shall be as required to serve the
consumers; and the Village, at its option, may require an engineering analysis of the system to
verify such line diameters.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Approval of plans. Drawings of the proposed main line extension layouts shall be submitted to the
Village for approval before any construction is started. The drawings shall show the location and
size of all mains and service lines, the location and size of all appurtenances, including valves, fire
hydrants, and meters. All new construction shall comply with Village specifications. Spacing of fire
hydrants shall be no more than 500 feet apart.
Right-of-way. No installation will be made that is not within the Village right-of-way or within the
limits of a right-of-way permit which is held in the name of the Village. It shall be the responsibility
of the customer or customers extending the main to obtain all right-of-way and utility permits. The
Village, at its option, may require the customer to obtain a right-of-way certification from a qualified
attorney.
Approval of acceptance. In the event that the consumer installs the main line extension, the
Village will inspect it for conformance to the standard drawings and specifications and may require
such tests and other evidence it deems necessary to ensure compliance with said standard
drawing specifications.
Ownership. Upon completion and acceptance by the Village of the water or sewer main and
appurtenances, all material within the public right-of-way or a utility easement shall become the
property of the Village.
§ 9-2-15. Authority to determine size and location of facilities;
separate connections required; compliance with state law.
The Utilities Director shall have the final authority to determine the size and location of all water
facilities used in connection with the system, and in particular shall have the final authority to determine
the sizes of water and main lines and water meters which are to be utilized for making any connection
to the system. A separate connection and water meter shall be required for each consumer within the
Village system. All fixtures and facilities connected to the system shall be installed in compliance with
statutes and regulations imposed by the State of New Mexico.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 114/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
§ 9-2-16. Inspection of hookup.
All hookups to the system shall be inspected to ensure proper installation and hookup and that there is
no piping arrangement or connection by which an unsafe substance may enter the municipal system.
§ 9-2-17. Emergency shutoff to repair system.
[Amended 7-16-2015]
The Utilities Director shall have the right at any time, without notice, to shut off water in the system for
the purpose of necessary repairs. In that event, the Village shall not be liable for any damages
occasioned by the interruption of water service.
§ 9-2-18. Damage to system.
[Amended 9-19-2013; 7-16-2015]
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully or negligently remove, break, damage,
uncover, deface or tamper with, by any means, any structure, apparatus, equipment or any part of the
system, including the water meter, or to remove, obstruct or damage any fire hydrant or valve box. This
includes any attempts at turning the water on or off at the water meter. Any damage to the system will
result in the consumer being billed for repairs or replacement of parts that were damaged. It is also
unlawful for any person to excavate any street, alley or sidewalk without first obtaining the permission
of the Utilities Director and notification of New Mexico One Call.
§ 9-2-19. Termination for misconduct.
[Amended 9-19-2013; 7-16-2015]
The Village may cause the water service to be disconnected and discontinued for any damage to the
system as stated in § 9-2-18 or for any of the following activities by the consumer or property owner:
Tampering with the water meter or connection so as to prevent proper registering of the amount of
water actually consumed.
Unauthorized connection to a water distribution line.
Failure to permit the Utilities Director or his agent reasonable access to the meter or connection.
Blocking access with a vehicle will result in the vehicle being towed at the owner's expense. Any
person or persons who block, obstruct, interfere with and/or fail to remove any obstruction and/or
prevent the Village from gaining access to the water meter or connection will also be issued a
criminal citation to appear before the Village of Bosque Farms Municipal Court. Any person found
guilty for violating this section shall be subject to the misdemeanor fines and penalties of the
Village of Bosque Farms Municipal Court as provided by law.
Use of service or operation of equipment so as to interfere with the quality, safety or continuity of
service furnished by the utility to others.
Willful waste of water through improper or faulty piping, equipment or other means.
Willful violation of any section of this article.
§ 9-2-20. Penalty.
[Amended 9-19-2013]
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 115/346
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
on conviction thereof shall be fined a sum not to exceed $500 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days.
In addition to such penalties, the Village Attorney shall have the authority to apply to the District Court
for the purpose of obtaining an order restraining any person from violating any of the provisions of this
article.
§ 9-2-21. Additional remedy.
Any charge by this article shall be payable either by the owner or by the occupant of the premises to
which service is furnished. In addition to any other remedy which may be authorized by this article, the
Village shall have a lien upon the tract of land being served by the system for delinquent charges. The
lien shall be imposed and enforced in the manner provided in NMSA 1978, §§ 3-35-1 through 3-35-5.
Exceptions to this section are provided in NMSA 1978, § 3-23-6C.
Article II. Conservation
[Adopted 12-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-14]
§ 9-2-22. Statement of policy.
The governing body has determined that wasted water unnecessarily depletes the water supply,
results in the loss of a valuable natural resource, causes soil erosion and degrades streets, and
may create public safety hazards.
Water waste is prohibited as a condition of receiving service from the municipal water utility. Water
waste within the Village of Bosque Farms is prohibited even if the water is not provided by the
municipal water utility.
§ 9-2-23. Enforcement and administration.
The Village Administrator or designee shall be responsible for the enforcement of this article. The
governing body may prescribe policies, rules, or regulations to carry out the intent and purposes of this
article.
§ 9-2-24. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DRIP IRRIGATION
Low-pressure, low-volume irrigation applied slowly, near or at ground level.
FUGITIVE WATER
The pumping, flow, release, escape, or leakage of any water from any pipe, valve, faucet,
connection, diversion, well, or any facility for the purposes of water supply, transport, storage,
disposal, or delivery onto adjacent property or the public right-of-way. Fugitive water shall not
include:
Stormwater runoff;
Flow of water resulting from temporary water supply system failures or malfunctions;
Water applied to prevent or abate health, safety, or accident hazards when alternate methods
are not available (The washing of outdoor eating areas and sidewalks is not included in this
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 116/346
D.
E.
F.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
A.
exemption.);
Flow of water resulting from vandalism, weather conditions, or emergencies;
The occurrence of unforeseeable or unpreventable failure or malfunction of plumbing or
irrigation system hardware; and
The flushing of fire hydrants.
GRAY WATER
Untreated household wastewater that has not come in contact with toilet waste. Gray water also
does not include water from kitchen sinks or dishwashers.
HARVESTED WATER
Precipitation or irrigation runoff collected, stored and available for reuse for irrigation purposes.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
Dedicated public land for the use of the public for the movement of people, goods, vehicles, or
stormwater. For purposes of this article, "public right-of-way" shall include curbs and streets.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY
The owner, manager, supervisor, or person who receives the water bill; or the person in charge of
the property, facility, or operation during the period of time the violation is observed.
SPRAY IRRIGATION
The application of water to landscaping by means of a device that projects water through the air in
the form of small particles or droplets.
SUBSURFACE IRRIGATION
Low-pressure, low-volume irrigation applied slowly, below ground level.
WATER WASTE
Any water, other than natural precipitation, that substantially flows from a property to the
public right-of-way or adjacent private property. Water waste is a nonbeneficial use of water.
Nothing in this ordinance shall contradict contents of Section 10-1, Zoning, of the Village
Code.
Nonbeneficial uses include but are not limited to:
Landscape water applied in such a manner that it overflows the landscaped area being
watered and runs onto adjacent property or the public right-of-way;
Landscape water which leaves a sprinkler, sprinkler system, or another application
device in such a manner as to spray onto adjacent property or the public right-of-way;
Washing of vehicles, equipment, or hard surfaces such as parking lots or driveways when
water is applied in sufficient quantity to flow from that surface onto adjacent property or
the public right-of-way; and
Water applied in sufficient quantity to cause ponding on impervious surfaces on nonmunicipal-
owned property.
§ 9-2-25. Water waste restrictions.
No person, firm, corporation, or government facility or operation shall cause, or permit to occur
any water waste or the flow of fugitive water onto adjacent properties or the public-right-of-way,
whether served by the Village water system or by a private well.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 117/346
B.
C.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
A.
B.
A.
Additional scheduling or restrictions may be applied pursuant to Article III below.
The water waste restrictions do not apply to nonprofit car washes held as fund-raisers, if vehicles
are washed using hand-held buckets and hoses equipped with shut-off nozzles.
§ 9-2-26. Violations and penalties.
Any responsible party who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to
progressively higher penalty fees until the violation ceases, or a variance is granted, or an appeal
is initiated in accordance with the provisions of this article.
A written notice of violation with a penalty assessment shall be sent to the responsible party by
certified mail within three days following the discovery of a violation of this article. The responsible
party must correct the violation or may request an extension of time in accordance with this article
within 15 days following the receipt of the notice of violation. If the violation is not corrected within
the time allowed by this article, then the assessed penalty fee must be paid within 30 calendar
days following the date of receipt of the original certified mail notification.
The assessment of penalty fees for violations defined by this article shall be as follows:
First observed violation: written warning (no penalty fee).
Second observed violation: $50.
Third observed violation: $100.
Fourth observed violation: water service discontinued.
For purposes of assessing penalty fees, any previous violation after the effective date of this
article shall not be considered if a period of two years has elapsed since the violation
occurred, or the property has been transferred to a new owner.
§ 9-2-27. Extension of time for compliance.
The Village Administrator may grant an extension of time to allow the responsible party to take
corrective measures, provided that the general intent of this article has been met but compliance
with this article will cause practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship.
An extension of time may be granted for a period not to exceed one year and shall stipulate both
short-term corrective measures and a schedule for completion of long-term corrective measures.
A time extension may be renewed on an annual basis if long-term corrective measures cannot be
completed within one year.
Article III. Water Emergencies
[Adopted 12-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-15]
§ 9-2-28. Findings; purpose; determination of need for
conservation.
The governing body has determined that the public health, safety, and welfare requires maximum
beneficial use of its available water resources to the extent to which it is capable, and that the
conservation and most efficient use of water is in the best interest of the community.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 118/346
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
The purpose of this article is to provide a means for the governing body to implement measures to
manage water use in response to emergencies or catastrophic events that may disrupt the
municipal water supply system.
As a basis for initiating actions pursuant to this article, the governing body finds that water
shortages may exist due to one or more of the following conditions:
A general water supply shortage due to a sudden increase in demand or a reduction or
limitation at the source of supply;
The distribution system or storage facilities of the water utility are inadequate to meet the
current or anticipated demands of the water service customers;
The water supply system is unable to maintain the minimum water quality standards in
accordance with all applicable laws and regulations; or
A mechanical or structural breakdown of the supply, storage and/or distribution facilities of the
water supply system.
§ 9-2-29. Definitions.
Definitions as contained in Article II, Conservation, of this Section 9-2, shall apply to this article (see
§ 9-2-24).
§ 9-2-30. Authority to declare emergency and take action.
The governing body is authorized to determine and declare that a water emergency exists within
the municipal water service area and, upon such determination, to promulgate regulations, rules
and conditions relative to the use of water in order to relieve the water shortage.
The Village Administrator, following public notice, is authorized to implement the emergency water
shortage plan through the applicable provisions of this article.
§ 9-2-31. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all persons, customers and property served by the
municipal water utility system. With the exception of temporary water emergency surcharges,
these provisions shall also apply to all water users within the corporate limits of the municipality.
All domestic wells within the jurisdiction of the municipality shall be governed by this article as
authorized by state law (NMSA 1978, §§ 3-53-1, 3-53-1.1 and 3-53-2).
§ 9-2-32. Water emergency stages.
Any of the following water emergency stages may be declared by the governing body following a
determination regarding the severity of conditions leading to a water shortage. Such determination
shall be based on the best available information and data regarding the water supply and
distribution system.
There are three water emergency stages which are triggered by an impending shortage of water
estimated to occur during a specified period of time in the immediate future. If the severity of the
water emergency lessens, the governing body may downgrade the water shortage to a lower
stage or discontinue the water emergency. The water use restrictions and regulations of each
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 119/346
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
[1]
(i)
(j)
(k)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
stage are added to all higher level stages, unless the higher stage has more stringent
requirements.
Stage 1: Water Shortage Advisory - Voluntary Compliance. Whenever the estimated demands
on the water system exceed the estimated supply such that it appears that there will be a
substantial shortage of water over the next twelve-month period, a Stage 1 Water Shortage
Advisory will be declared. The following requirements shall be in effect and, unless otherwise
noted, are voluntary but strongly encouraged:
The Village Administrator or designee shall make public announcements through the
local news media that an impending water problem exists, explaining the water
conservation requirements of the Stage 1 Water Shortage Advisory.
All residents are encouraged to minimize indoor water use by utilizing high-efficiency
fixtures and appliances, decreasing water use for eating and cleaning purposes, and
eliminating all on-site water leaks.
Restaurants and banquets are requested to discontinue serving non-bottled drinking
water, except upon request.
Hotels and motels are urged to implement water conservation measures, including less
frequent changing of towels and bed linens during short stays, except upon request.
All watering shall be strongly discouraged between 12:00 noon and 6:00 p.m. daily from
the first day of May to the last day of August of each calendar year.
The use of potable (drinking) water for dust control and washing down sidewalks,
driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios, or other paved areas shall be strongly
discouraged.
Routine fire hydrant flushing shall be curtailed except to alleviate specific complaints.
Commercial and industrial water users are urged to implement water conservation plans
for their facilities and decrease water consumption.
All municipal facilities will go on reduced water budgets and outdoor watering of parks,
landscaping, and recreational areas shall implement nighttime water schedules.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
The use of harvested (stored) rainwater and household gray water for outdoor watering is
recommended and encouraged.
All domestic well operators are urged to reduce water use to the minimum levels of
absolute necessity.
Stage 2: Water Shortage Alert - Mandatory Compliance. Whenever the estimated demands
on the water system exceed the estimated supply such that it appears that there will be
substantial shortage of water over the next six-month period, a Stage 2 Water Shortage Alert
will be declared. The following mandatory requirements, in addition to the requirements of the
Stage 1 Water Shortage Advisory, shall be in effect:
The Village Administrator shall make public announcements through the local news
media that an immediate water problem exists, explaining the water conservation
requirements of the Stage 2 Water Shortage Alert.
With the exception of hand watering, drip or subsurface irrigation, use of reclaimed or
gray water, all landscape spray irrigation shall be prohibited between 12:00 noon and
6:00 p.m. daily. Landscape watering will be limited to no more than three days a week
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 120/346
[1]
[2]
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(3)
according to the following schedule; the last number of the street address shall determine
watering days:
Odd numbers may water only on Sunday, Wednesday or Friday.
Even numbers may water only on Tuesday, Thursday, or Saturday.
No new in-ground landscaping shall be planted except for xeriscapes which utilize drip or
subsurface irrigation.
The use of potable (drinking) water for dust control and washing down sidewalks,
driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios or other paved areas shall be prohibited.
The use of potable (drinking water) for washing of vehicles, equipment, trailers, or boats
shall be prohibited, except by use of a hand-held bucket or hoses with shut-off nozzles.
A temporary water emergency surcharge shall be instituted as an overlay onto the
existing water rate structure on the first billing cycle following declaration of a Stage 2
Water Shortage Alert or a Stage 3 Water Shortage Emergency. A water emergency
surcharge for residential customers shall be applied at a rate of $5 for every 1,000 gallon
increment above 12,000 gallons. All industrial and commercial users will be surcharged
$1 per 1,000 gallons for all water billed during the Stage 2 Water Shortage Alert or Stage
3 Water Shortage Emergency.
Stage 3: Water Shortage Emergency - Mandatory Compliance. Whenever a major failure or
disruption of the municipal water supply system occurs, or whenever the estimated demands
on the water system exceed the estimated supply such that it appears that there will be a
substantial shortage of water over the next two-month period, a Stage 3 Water Shortage
Emergency will be declared. The following mandatory requirements, in addition to the
requirements of the Stage 1 Water Shortage Advisory and the Stage 2 Water Shortage Alert,
shall be in effect:
The Village Administrator shall make public announcements through the local news
media that a severe water shortage problem exists, explaining the water conservation
requirements of the Stage 3 Water Shortage Emergency.
Subject to certain exceptions, outdoor watering of any lawn, garden, or landscaped area
shall be prohibited. Watering performed with a drip irrigation system, subsurface
irrigation, reclaimed or gray water is exempt from these requirements. Using a hand-held
bucket or hose to water trees, shrubs, and containerized plants is also permitted. (Public
facilities for the use of residents and youth of Bosque Farms shall be excluded.)
Nurseries watering container plant stock shall be exempt from the restrictions of this
article.
Fire hydrant flushing shall be prohibited except for fire fighting or emergency potable
water supply for human or animal consumption.
Use of potable water for recreational or aesthetic purposes such as water slides,
fountains, or yard play shall be prohibited.
All commercial and industrial water users shall implement a water conservation program
to reduce water use to the minimum levels of absolute necessity.
Depending on the expected severity of the water emergency situation, the governing
body shall not be limited to the defined requirements of this article. Should the water
emergency be of such magnitude to demand more stringent action such as closure of the
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 121/346
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
facilities and services, the governing body shall have the authority to impose more severe
restrictions or action.
§ 9-2-33. Violations and penalties.
The Village Administrator or designee shall be responsible for the enforcement of this article. The
governing body may prescribe policies, rules, or regulations to carry out the intent and purposes of
this article.
Following a determination by the Village Administrator that a violation of any mandatory
requirement of this article has occurred, the responsible party shall be issued a written warning to
abate such violation immediately.
After written notification, should any responsible party continue to violate the state mandatory
requirement, that party shall be cited into Municipal Court by the Village Administrator. Upon
conviction of a violation of this article, the party shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each
violation of any mandatory requirement of this article shall be considered a separate offense.
Water service may be suspended for repeat violators.
Section 9-3. Sewer Service
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms as last amended 6-18-
2015. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water  See Sec. 9-2.
Zoning  See Sec. 10-1.
§ 9-3-1. Title.
This Section 9-3 shall be known as the "Sewer Service Ordinance."
§ 9-3-2. Sewer utility established.
The Village sewer system is hereby declared to be established for the health, safety and welfare
of the Village of Bosque Farms, New Mexico for the purposes of operation, management,
accounting, and for the billing and collection of user fees, connection fees and other charges.
The completion of the sewer system and the availability of service is subject to the availability of
funding for the design and construction of the system.
§ 9-3-3. Applicability.
This Section 9-3 shall govern the collection and disposal of sewage and polluted water within the
Village of Bosque Farms, New Mexico.
Service shall only be provided within the Village's municipal boundaries except as otherwise
provided in this Section 9-3.
On a case-by-case basis approved by the governing body to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the Village, service may be provided to customers outside the Village at terms and fees
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 122/346
established by the Village.
§ 9-3-4. Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable whenever the defined term is used in this Section 9-3.
"Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
APPLICANT
Any property owner or agent who has submitted an application for service.
APPLICATION
The application a customer submits to the Village for service. An application includes required
attachments and supplemental information.
BOD
Five-day biochemical oxygen demand as determined by Standard Methods.
CLERK/ADMINISTRATOR
The Village of Bosque Farms Clerk/Administrator.
COD
Chemical oxygen demand as determined by Standard Methods.
COMMERCIAL CUSTOMER
Any customer who is not a residential customer.
CONTROL PANEL
The grinder pumping unit's electrical disconnect panel, alarm device, and wiring from the control
panel to the grinder pumping unit.
CUSTOMER
Any person receiving service.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE
Wastewater normally generated in, and normally disposed of in, bathrooms, rest rooms and
residential kitchens. Also included in domestic sewage is wastewater normally generated in
cleaning and maintaining homes and commercial and institutional facilities and normally disposed
of in interior building wastewater drainage systems, provided such wastewater does not contain
any prohibited sewage.
DOUBLE GRINDER PUMPING UNIT
A grinder pumping unit having two grinder pumps.
DRAINAGE WATER
Any water draining from roofs, patios, driveways, parking areas, areas outside buildings or areas
flooded by stormwater. Also included is any groundwater which is pumped by the customer but not
used for normal domestic uses in a building or any groundwater that may seep into the customer's
gravity sewer service line.
EASEMENT
The easement granted by an applicant/customer to the Village for installation, operation and
maintenance of the grinder pumping unit and pressure service line.
GOVERNING BODY
The governing body of the Village.
GRAVITY SEWER SERVICE LINE
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 123/346
The customer's gravity sewer service pipe which transmits the customer's sewage to the grinder
pumping unit.
GREASE TRAP
A Utilities-Director-approved, customer-provided and -maintained device designed to remove
grease and oil from the customer's wastewater.
GRINDER PUMPING UNIT
The Village's sewage grinder pumping unit, including grinder pump(s), tank, control panel and
appurtenances.
HEALTH OFFICER
Any person or his authorized representative appointed by the Village as the Health Officer (or the
Utilities Director if a Village Health Officer has not been appointed) or any New Mexico
Environment Department representative charged with approval or inspection of public or private
sewage facilities.
OCCUPIED
The use and possession of a structure for the purpose for which it is designed.
ORDINANCE
The Sewer Service Ordinance.
OTHER PERMITTED SEWAGE
Wastewater normally generated in commercial or institutional kitchens, laundries or car washes
which has passed through the customer's grease trap and/or sand trap, provided such wastewater
does not contain any prohibited sewage.
OUT-OF-POCKET COSTS
All direct costs incurred by the Village for a particular effort, including, but not limited to, materials,
contracts, engineering, legal services, land, easements, salary for Village employees, plus 10% of
all of these costs. Salary costs shall include all statutory and customary benefits and burdens.
PERSON
Individuals, partnerships, corporations, associations, societies, clubs, churches, institutions and
public bodies, and includes both the masculine and feminine gender.
pH
The logarithm to the base 10 of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter in
solution.
PRESSURE SERVICE LATERAL
The Village's pressure pipe within the public right-of-way from the pressure service line at the
customer's property line to the pressure sewer line.
PRESSURE SERVICE LINE
The Village's pressure pipe from the grinder pumping unit to the pressure sewer line, including
associated valves and appurtenances.
PRESSURE SEWER LINE
The Village's pressure sewer collection and transmission pipelines into which sewage is received
from pressure service lateral and through which sewage is transported to the Village's wastewater
treatment facility. "Pressure sewer line" includes valves and appurtenances on these lines.
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL UNIT
A privately owned sewage disposal facility which meets all the requirements of the New Mexico
Environment Department and serves a property/facility which is in compliance with the Village's
zoning regulations.[1]
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 124/346
PROHIBITED SEWAGE
Any wastewater containing prohibited substances, or characteristics prohibited by this Section 9-3.
PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES
Any substance, material, chemical or compound the discharge of which to the sewer system is
prohibited by this Section 9-3, or any substance, material, chemical or compound in the
customer's wastewater in concentrations greater than those allowed by this Section 9-3.
RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER
Any customer receiving service for a single-family residence or single-family dwelling unit with a
single kitchen facility which is receiving water from a Village water meter which only serves that
single-family residence/single-family dwelling unit or from its own independent water supply.
SAND TRAP
A Utilities-Director-approved, customer-provided and -maintained device designed to remove
sand, grit and mud from the customer's wastewater.
SEPTAGE
Any contents or material from a septic tank, cesspool, leach field, privy or vault privy.
SERVICE
A customer is connected to the sewer system or a building/property could be connected to the
sewer system.
SEWAGE
All domestic sewage and other permitted sewage.
SEWER SYSTEM
The sewage collection and disposal system owned and operated by the Village, including grinder
pumping units.
SINGLE GRINDER PUMPING UNIT
A grinder pumping unit having one grinder pump.
SLUG
Any customer discharge of wastewater to the sewer system which in concentration of any given
constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes five
times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flow from that customer.
STANDARD METHODS
The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Works Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation.
TDS
Total dissolved solids as determined by Standard Methods.
TSS
Total suspended solids as determined by Standard Methods.
UTILITIES DIRECTOR
The individual hired by the governing body to that position. If an individual has not been, or is not
currently hired to the position, the Clerk/Administrator shall be the Utilities Director. "Utilities
Director" also means his/her agents or designated representatives.
VILLAGE
The New Mexico incorporated municipality of the Village of Bosque Farms.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 125/346
[1]
A.
B.
[1]
A.
B.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
WASTEWATER MASTER PLAN
The Bosque Farms Wastewater Facilities Plan dated July 1995.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY
The Village's facility which receives sewage from pressure sewer lines and treats such sewage.
Editor's Note: See Sec. 10-1, Zoning.
§ 9-3-5. Utilities Director.
The Utilities Director shall serve under the direction of the Clerk/Administrator.
The Utilities Director shall supervise and manage the sewer system, including construction,
installation, operation, maintenance, repair, replacement, ordinance enforcement, and other duties
in connection with the sewer system as the governing body and Clerk/Administrator may prescribe
from time to time.
§ 9-3-6. Management, rules, regulations and standards.
The Village shall make and enforce such rules, regulations and standards as it may deem necessary
for the safe, efficient and economical management of the sewer system. Any construction and
connection to the sewer system shall be in compliance with the requirements and standards of this
Section 9-3 and with the Village's planning and zoning regulations, which are incorporated into and
made part of this Section 9-3.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 10, Land Use.
§ 9-3-7. Unauthorized disposal.
Except as specifically provided hereinafter in this Section 9-3, it is unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended for the disposal of
sewage or prohibited sewage.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet, to the ground or to groundwater any sewage,
prohibited sewage or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this Section 9-3.
§ 9-3-8. Private sewage disposal.
Private sewage disposal may be used for a building prior to the connection of such building to the
sewer system being required under subsequent provisions of this Section 9-3.
Private sewage disposal shall be accomplished with a private sewage disposal unit. The owner of
a private sewage disposal unit shall operate and maintain the unit in a sanitary manner at all
times.
When a property served by a private sewage disposal unit is connected to the sewer system,
within 90 days of the connection to the sewer system the private sewage disposal unit shall:
Have its contents removed and disposed of in accordance with state requirements; and
Be removed from the property; or
Be filled with uncontaminated sand or gravel, in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code
or Village standards.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 126/346
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
The provisions of this Section 9-3 for private sewage disposal shall not limit or be construed to
interfere with any reasonable requirements that may be imposed by a Health Officer.
§ 9-3-9. Connection required.
The owner of each lot or parcel of real property within the Village limits shall connect to the sewer
system if the sewer system is within 200 feet of the lot or parcel and if one of the following
conditions occurs:
A new building or structure is constructed on an undeveloped lot and use of the new building
or structure generates wastewater;
An existing building or structure, which is served by an existing private sewage disposal unit,
is removed from the property or demolished and is replaced by a new structure that is
required to be placed on a permanent foundation and which generates wastewater;
An existing private sewage disposal unit has failed and needs repair or replacement as
determined by the New Mexico Environment Department; or
An existing building or structure, which is serviced by a private sewage disposal unit, is
remodeled or repaired in such a manner that the drain field would have to be expanded, as
required by the New Mexico Environment Department. In such a case, the entire structure
would have to be served by the sewer system.
The owner of such a property must:
Submit an application with payment.
Connect to the sewer system within 90 days of the date of the sewer grinder pump
installation.
Right-of-way. No installation will be made that is not within the Village right-of-way or within the
limits of a right-of-way permit which is held in the name of the Village. It shall be the responsibility
of the customer or customers extending the main to obtain all right-of-way and utility permits. The
Village, at its option, may require the customer to obtain a right-of-way certification from a qualified
attorney and/or surveyor, such right-of-way to be dedicated and accepted by the Village of Bosque
Farms prior to any type of utility installation.
Ownership. Upon completion and acceptance by the Village of the sewer main and
appurtenances, all material within the public right-of-way or a utility easement shall become the
property of the Village.
§ 9-3-10. Application for connection.
An application from an applicant shall be from all applicants. An application shall include:
For all applicants:
Completed application form;
All required fees; and
Easement documentation.
For applicants who will be commercial customers:
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 127/346
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
(1)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
A.
Other information deemed necessary by the Utilities Director so the Utilities Director can
determine:
The acceptability of the anticipated sewage.
The type and number of grinder pumping units required.
Other requirements for providing service, including, but not limited to, the need for grease
traps and sand traps.
For multiple buildings receiving water from a single Village water meter, the application shall be
submitted by the person responsible for the water service.
The Utilities Director may undertake such investigations and require such information from an
applicant about the applicant's facilities and proposed discharges to the sewer system as the
Utilities Director deems reasonably necessary to:
Verify compliance with this Section 9-3 and Village's standards;
Verify appropriateness of the applicant's requested location for the grinder pumping unit,
control panel and pressure service line;
Verify that any special requirements such as, but not limited to, grease traps or sand traps are
installed by the applicant and are operational; and
Determine service is available.
§ 9-3-11. Sand traps and grease traps.
Grease traps shall be installed and maintained in the gravity service lines leading to all double
grinder pumping units with the following exception:
Grease traps shall not be required for double grinder pump units, which only serve multiple
single-family residential dwelling units.
Sand traps shall be installed and maintained in the gravity service lines leading to grinder pumping
units serving car washes, schools, day-care facilities, commercial laundries and laundromats.
Should the Utility Director's inspection of a grinder pumping unit indicate excessive grease, oil,
sand or mud, the Utility Director shall give the customer notice and the customer shall install the
new and/or additional sand traps and/grease traps required by the Utilities Director within 60 days
of the notice.
Customers shall operate and maintain grease traps and sand traps to prevent any accumulated
grease, oil, sand or mud from being discharged to the sewer system.
The Utilities Director shall periodically inspect grease traps and sand traps to verify compliance
with this Section 9-3. Customers shall allow reasonable access to grease traps and sand traps for
inspection and monitoring.
§ 9-3-12. Responsibility for making connections.
For properties where the building was served by a private sewage disposal unit prior to connection
to the sewer system:
Applicants shall be responsible for:
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 128/346
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(j)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
(a)
(3)
Submitting an application.
Selecting the location for the grinder pumping unit, pressure service line, control panel
and wiring between the control panel and the grinder pumping unit, subject to the
concurrence of the Utilities Director.
Uncovering the gravity sewer line that will be connected to the grinder pumping unit so
the Village can determine the orientation for the grinder pumping unit's gravity service
line connection point.
Precisely locating and marking horizontally and vertically any customer-owned buried
water pipes or other buried improvements prior to the Utilities Director installing the
grinder pumping unit and the pressure service line.
Removing and replacing any fencing required to allow the Utilities Director access for
installation of the grinder pumping unit or the pressure service line.
Restoring landscaping, ground surface material and any other customer-owned
improvements required as a result of the Village's installation of the grinder pumping unit
or pressure service line.
Selecting the applicant's licensed electrician (or obtaining a homeowner's permit from the
state for the required electrical work).
Having the applicant's licensed electrician (or accomplished by the applicant under a
state homeowner's permit) install the control panel and associated wiring from the control
panel to the grinder pumping unit in accordance with applicable codes and Village
standards (requires state inspection).
Selecting the applicant's licensed plumber (or obtaining a homeowner's permit from the
state for the required plumbing work).
Having the applicant's licensed plumber (or accomplished by the applicant under a state
homeowner's permit):
Connect the gravity service line to the grinder pumping unit in accordance with
applicable codes and Village standards (requires state inspection).
Arrange for the Utilities Director to activate the grinder pumping unit.
Provide additional efforts as necessary if the grinder pumping unit cannot be
activated when planned.
The Clerk/Administrator shall be responsible for:
Preparing the application forms and giving them to the Utilities Director.
Billing the applicant or customer for any special charges incurred in installation of the
grinder pumping unit or pressure service line.
Beginning monthly billing to the customer when the application is returned, indicating the
customer is connected to the sewer system, or 90 days after the grinder pumping unit
has been installed, whichever comes first.
The Utilities Director shall be responsible for:
Verifying that the applicant's proposed locations for the grinder pumping unit, control
panel and pressure service line are in conformance with this Section 9-3 and Village
standards.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 129/346
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
[1]
[2]
(g)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
B.
Installing the grinder pumping unit, pressure service line and pressure service lateral.
Connecting the pressure service line to the grinder pumping unit, connecting the
pressure service line to the pressure service lateral, and connecting the pressure service
lateral to the pressure sewer line.
Determining if any special charges are to be paid by the customer for installation and
informing the Clerk/Administrator of such charges.
Verifying the grinder pumping unit and control panel are operating properly.
Verifying any water meters, grease traps, sand traps or other facilities required by this
Section 9-3 or as a condition of providing service are installed and operating properly.
For properties where the building was not served by a private sewage disposal unit prior to
connection to the sewer system:
Applicants shall be responsible for:
Submitting an application.
Having the building designed and constructed to allow installation of a grinder pumping
unit, control panel and pressure service line in accordance with Village standards and
applicable codes.
Selecting the location for the grinder pumping unit, pressure service line, control panel
and wiring between the control panel and the grinder pumping unit, subject to the
concurrence of the Utilities Director.
Selecting the applicant's licensed electrician (or obtaining a homeowner's permit from the
state for the required electrical work).
Having the applicant's licensed electrician (or accomplished by the applicant under a
state homeowner's permit) install the control panel and associated wiring from the control
panel to the grinder pumping unit in accordance with applicable codes and Village
standards (requires state inspection).
Selecting the applicant's licensed plumber (or obtaining a homeowner's permit from the
state for the required plumbing).
Having the applicant's licensed plumber (or accomplished by the applicant under a state
homeowner's permit):
Connect the gravity service line to the grinder pumping unit in accordance with
applicable codes and Village standards (requires state inspection).
Arrange for the Utilities Director to activate the grinder pumping unit.
The Clerk/Administrator shall be responsible for:
Preparing the application forms and giving them to Utilities Director.
Billing the applicant/customer for any special charges incurred for the grinder pumping
unit provided by the Village or for the inspection of the installed grinder pumping unit,
pressure service line or control panel.
Beginning monthly billing to the customer when the application is returned, indicating the
customer is connected to the sewer system, or 90 days after the grinder pumping unit
has been installed, whichever comes first.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 130/346
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
The Utilities Director shall be responsible for:
Verifying that the applicant's proposed locations for the grinder pumping unit, control
panel and pressure service line are in conformance with this Section 9-3 and Village
standards.
Installing the grinder pumping unit and installing the pressure service lateral and
connecting to the pressure sewer line unless such was provided by the subdivision
developer under the terms of this Section 9-3.
Determining if any special charges are to be paid by the applicant/customer for
installation and informing the Clerk/Administrator of such charges.
Verifying the grinder pumping unit and control panel are operating properly.
Verifying any water meters, grease traps, sand traps or other facilities required by this
Section 9-3 or as a condition of providing service are installed and operating properly.
§ 9-3-13. Customer's continuing responsibilities.
The customer shall continue to be responsible for:
Removing and replacing any fencing required to allow the Utilities Director access for repair or
replacement of the grinder pumping unit or the pressure service line.
Restoring landscaping, ground surface material and any other customer-owned improvements
required as a result of the Utilities Director's maintenance, repair or replacement of the grinder
pumping unit or pressure service line.
Preventing damage to the installed grinder pumping unit and pressure service line.
Providing electricity for the operation of the grinder pumping unit and maintaining customer-owned
wiring up to the control panel.
Monitoring the grinder pumping unit's alarm device and notifying the Village of all alarms.
Observing the grinder pumping unit for visible or other noticeable indications of unit failure,
improper operation or damage and notifying the Village of such indications.
Maintaining site grading, drainage and irrigation so surface water does not accumulate within four
feet of the grinder pumping unit.
Maintaining landscaping so the control panel and grinder pumping unit are easily visible and
assessable.
Complying with this Section 9-3.
§ 9-3-14. Requirements for new land subdivisions.
These requirements apply to all subdivisions which do not have final plat approval prior to July 1, 1998.
The subdivision plat shall include dedication of an easement for each lot.
The subdivision shall be designed and constructed so the requirements subsequently given in this
Section 9-3 for new buildings can be readily accomplished.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 131/346
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
A.
B.
A.
B.
(1)
C.
The subdivision developer shall install all pressure sewer lines and all pressure service laterals
within the subdivision required to serve all lots and dedicate such lines to the Village upon the
Village's acceptance. The installed pressure sewer lines and pressure service laterals shall
include required appurtenances, shall be constructed in accordance with the Village's standards,
shall be constructed in accordance with engineered construction drawings approved by the
Utilities Director, and shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the Utilities Director.
The subdivision developer shall prepay the Village for 120% of the estimated out-of-pocket costs
the Utility Director estimates the Village will incur in designing and installing all pressure sewer
lines outside of the subdivision required to serve the subdivision. When installation of the lines is
completed by the Village, the Village will reimburse the developer for any portion of the
prepayment not incurred by the Village or the developer shall pay the Village for any costs
incurred above the prepayment.
The location and size of all pressure sewer lines shall be in accordance with the Wastewater
Master Plan if indicated therein. If the location and size of the pressure sewer lines is not indicated
in the Wastewater Master Plan, the Utilities Director shall determine the size and location to serve
all future customers that could be served by the lines. The Utilities Director shall be the final
authority in making such determination.
§ 9-3-15. Requirements for new buildings.
These requirements apply to buildings for which building permits are not issued prior to July 1, 1998.
Buildings shall be designed and constructed so:
The control panel is installed (or can be installed if not installed prior to building being
occupied) within 50 feet of the grinder pumping unit and so it is visible from the adjacent
pressure sewer line to which the building is (or will be) connected.
The building's gravity service line can be connected to a grinder pumping unit at an invert
elevation so that for:
A single grinder pumping unit, the gravity service line shall not be more than 35 inches
below the finished ground surface where the unit will be installed.
A double grinder pumping unit, the gravity service line shall not be more than 50 inches
below the finished ground surface where the unit will be installed.
On a case-by-case basis, the Utilities Director may modify these requirements if the application
would be impractical for a particular building. If so modified, the customer shall reimburse the
Village for any additional out-of-pocket costs the Village incurs in allowing the modification. Such
out-of-pocket costs shall include costs associated with allowing gravity service line depths deeper
than indicated above. The Utilities Director shall be the final authority as to what modification, if
any, to allow.
§ 9-3-16. Sewage characteristics.
No person shall discharge anything but sewage into the sewer system.
No person shall discharge any drainage water, prohibited sewage or prohibited substances into
the sewer system.
Prohibited sewage is wastewater which:
Contains prohibited substances.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 132/346
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
D.
Has a pH less than 5.5 or greater than 9.5.
Has a corrosive property capable of causing damage to any portion of the sewer system.
Is discharged as a slug.
Includes unpolluted waters.
Has a temperature higher than 150° F.
Causes interference with the wastewater treatment facility.
Has been diluted to reduce the concentration of toxic materials or prohibited substances.
Prohibited substances include:
BOD greater than 300 milligrams per liter.
COD greater than 400 milligrams per liter.
TSS greater than 300 milligrams per liter.
TDS greater than 200 milligrams per liter more than the TDS found in the Village water
system.
Fats, grease, wax or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter.
Any of the following metals in concentrations greater than 115% of the concentration found in
the Village water system: antimony, arsenic, barium, beryllium, bismuth, boron, cadmium,
chromium (hexa and tri), cobalt, copper, iron, lead, manganese, mercury, molybdenum,
nickel, rhenium, selenium, silver, strontium, tellurium, tin, uranyl ion, zinc.
Gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil, diesel fuel or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or
gas.
Motor oil.
Antifreeze.
Herbicides or pesticides.
Septage.
Toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases (in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction
with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any wastewater facility, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the wastewater
treatment facility's receiving water or residuals disposal methods).
Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the
flow in grinder pumping units, pressure service lines or pressure sewer lines or causing
interference with the proper operation of the sewer system. These substances include, but
are not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, whole blood, manure, hair, entrails, paper dishes, paper cups, milk containers,
plastic eating utensils, and straws, either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
Substances, which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° F. and
150° F.
Garbage that has not been properly shredded.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 133/346
(16)
(17)
(18)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
A.
Garbage from any shredder or grinder larger than those normally manufactured and sold for
residential and noncommercial use or from more than one shredder or grinder discharging to
a grinder pumping unit.
Substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment
facility such that the treated water or residuals do not meet applicable legal or regulatory
requirements.
Water or wastes from vehicle repair facilities, industrial facilities, equipment repair facilities, or
from any other commercial or institutional facility or operation which could generate any
process, spill or wash-down wastewater, with the exception that strictly domestic sewage
and/or permitted sewage can be discharged from such facilities if the customer's facilities and
drainage arrangements provide positive physical protection so other water or wastes cannot
reach the customer's gravity service line.
§ 9-3-17. Damage to sewer system; excavations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or damage any part of the sewer system, or to
excavate any street, alley, sidewalk or easement without the permission of the Utilities Director.
The sewer system is hereby classified as "high profile," which requires an excavation permit and
line exposure when working within five feet of the sewer system.
Any person or utility company is required to obtain an excavation permit from the Village for all
work requiring an excavation of any kind. The Village shall provide the permit on the same day
that the actual excavation will occur. The utility company shall notify the Village when a crew is on
its way to allow the Village Utility Department personnel to be present to approve the permit.
Should any excavation occur inside the Village limits without an excavation permit, the Village may
impose an administrative charge of up to $300.
Any damage to the sewer system caused during excavation without a permit will result in an
administrative fee of $1,000 plus the cost of the repair and/or replacement to the sewer system.
Any damage to the sewer system caused during excavation with a permit as a result of negligence
will result in a charge of $300 plus the cost of the repair and/or replacement to the sewer system.
Telephone and cable television lines shall be installed at a depth of 24 inches within the right-ofway.
§ 9-3-18. Emergency shutoff to repair system.
The Utilities Director shall have the right at any time, without notice, to shut off any grinder pumping
unit and/or any pressure sewer line for the purpose of necessary repairs. In that event, the Village shall
not be liable for any damages occasioned by the interruption of sewer service.
§ 9-3-19. Connection fees.
Fees for connecting buildings to the sewer system shall be as follows:
Single grinder pumping unit: current market value at the time the application is submitted.
Double grinder pumping unit: current market value at the time application is submitted.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 134/346
(3)
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
(c)
(1)
(a)
(2)
F.
Plus current market value per linear foot for each linear foot of pressure service line required
above 200 linear feet.
For any customer where the served property is located on a private road in the Village, in addition
to the connection fee the customer shall pay the out-of-pocket costs incurred in extending the
pressure sewer line and installing the pressure service lateral required to provide service to all lots
on private road. See § 9-3-9C, Right-of-way.
For any customer where the served property is outside the municipal boundaries of the Village, in
addition to the connection fee determined by the governing body the customer shall pay the outof-
pocket costs incurred in extending the pressure sewer line and installing the pressure service
lateral required to provide service.
If a customer requests an existing grinder pumping unit be relocated on the served property, the
customer shall pay the Village all out-of-pocket costs incurred in moving, replacing, partially
replacing, disconnecting and reconnecting the customer's grinder pumping unit, which may
include an additional connection fee.
If a customer is required to replace an existing single grinder pumping unit with a double grinder
pumping unit due to water usage above that allowed for a single grinder pumping unit, or if a
customer is required to install additional grinder pumping units:
A new application shall be submitted with an additional connection fee. The connection fee
shall be determined as if the building were not served by a private sewage disposal unit prior
to connection to the sewer system.
The customer shall have the existing control panel (except for buried wires) removed by the
customer's electrician and returned in reusable condition to the Village. The Village may, but
is not required to, remove part or all of the existing grinder pumping unit and/or pressure
service line.
The installation of the grinder pumping unit, control panel and pressure service line will be as
if the property had not had service and had never been served with a private sewage disposal
unit.
An applicant may sign a note with the Village and pay the connection fee as follows for each
grinder pumping unit the applicant requires:
Single grinder pumping unit:
Ten percent down with application.
The Village will finance the remaining balance for 24 months with interest at the rate of
0.833% per month on the unpaid balance. The final payment, with interest, will be due
and payable on the 12th month following the date the note is executed by the applicant.
Should an applicant/customer fail to make the note payments when due:
The remainder of the note shall become immediately due.
Should the applicant/customer demonstrate to the Clerk/Administrator that an
economical hardship exists, a time extension for payment may be granted. The
Clerk/Administrator shall be the final authority in determining if a time extension shall
be granted.
Double grinder pumping unit:
Ten percent down with application.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 135/346
(b)
[1]
[2]
(c)
(d)
G.
[1]
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(b)
(1)
[1]
(a)
(2)
[1]
[2]
(a)
(3)
A.
The Village will finance the remaining balance for 24 months with interest at the rate of
0.833% per month on the unpaid balance. The final payment, with interest, will be due
and payable on the 12th month following the date the note is executed by the applicant.
Should an applicant/customer fail to make the note payments when due:
The remainder of the note shall become immediately due.
Should the applicant/customer demonstrate to the Clerk/Administrator that an
economical hardship exists, a time extension for payment may be granted. The
Clerk/Administrator shall be the final authority in determining if a time extension shall
be granted.
The Village shall bill note payments with the customer's monthly water and/or sewer bills.
A deposit of $25 will be required from any customer not on the Village water system. The deposit
shall be held by the Village of Bosque Farms and shall be returned upon notice of disconnection
and full payment of the consumer's sewer bill.
§ 9-3-20. Sewer use fees.
[Rates effective 7-1-2019]
The monthly sewer use fees shall be as follows:
Residential customers connected to Village water:
Minimum fee for:
Single grinder pumping unit: $27.58.
[Amended 7-1-2018, 7-1-2019]
Plus commodity fee of:
Water usage between 5,001 gallons and 10,000 gallons will be an additional $4 per
1,000 gallons.
Water usage between 10,001 gallons and 20,000 gallons will be an additional $6 per
1,000 gallons.
Water usage between 20,001 gallons and 40,000 gallons will be an additional $8 per
1,000 gallons.
Water usage of 40,001 gallons or more will be an additional $10 per 1,000 gallons.
Residential customers not connected to Village water:
Minimum fee for:
Single grinder pumping unit: $41.65.
[Amended 7-1-2018; 7-1-2019]
Commercial customers connected to Village water or master water meter customers:
Minimum fee for:
Single grinder pumping unit: $27.58.
[Amended 7-1-2018; 7-1-2019]
Double grinder pumping unit: $48.21.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 136/346
[3]
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
B.
[Amended 7-1-2018; 7-1-2019]
Specialty grinder pumping unit and use of grinder pump: to be determined based on
type.
Plus commodity fee of:
Water usage between 5,001 gallons and 10,000 gallons will be an additional $4 per
1,000 gallons.
Water usage between 10,001 gallons and 20,000 gallons will be an additional $6 per
1,000 gallons.
Water usage between 20,001 gallons and 40,000 gallons will be an additional $8 per
1,000 gallons.
Water usage of 40,001 gallons or more will be an additional $10 per 1,000 gallons.
Commercial customers not connected to Village water:
Minimum fee for:
Single grinder pumping unit: $41.65.
[Amended 7-1-2018; 7-1-2019]
Double grinder pumping unit: $48.21.
[Amended 7-1-2018; 7-1-2019]
Specialty grinder pumping unit and use of grinder pump: to be determined based on
type.
For commercial customers having more than one grinder pumping unit, 5,000 gallons per
grinder pumping unit shall be allowed before a commodity fee is charged.
If a customer can adequately demonstrate to the Utilities Director's satisfaction a single high
month of water use was the result of a break in the customer's plumbing system, the Utilities
Director may recommend to the Clerk/Administrator an adjustment to the customer's sewer
bill for that month to reflect the estimated metered water which could not have entered the
sewer system. The Clerk/Administrator shall be the final authority in determining if such an
adjustment is to be made.
[Amended 4-20-2017]
On July 1 of each year, the minimum monthly fees contained in this Section 9-3 shall be
adjusted automatically to reflect a cost-of-living increase of 3%.
[Amended 4-17-2014; 4-20-2017; 6-21-2018]
Credit card, direct pay and Autopay administrative fees.
When paying for monthly sewer service fees by use of a credit card or direct pay through a
bank, the Village shall be paid the following administrative fee for each transaction:
[Amended 6-21-2018]
Visa, Mastercard or Discover: $2.
Bank payment: $1.
If the customer is enrolled in the Autopay feature through Xpress Bill Pay, no administration
fee will be assessed.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 137/346
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
H.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The monthly sewer use fees shall be billed starting when connection to the sewer system has
been made and/or 90 days from time of installation of the grinder pumping unit, whichever comes
first.
The applicable fee shall continue to be due for any installed grinder pumping unit to which service
has been discontinued by the Village under the provisions of this Section 9-3.
Monthly fees and bills shall be determined for a monthly billing period, not for a calendar month.
Monthly fees shall be due without prorating for any portion of a month or monthly billing period
during which service is provided.
Monthly bills indicating the amount due may be mailed with, or as a part of, a customer's water bill.
Monthly bills shall be due within 20 days following the date the statement was mailed.
New residents whose property is not connected to the Village water system will be required to fill
out an application for a new resident and place a refundable deposit prior to the change of billing
name. The deposit shall be returned upon notice of sewer disconnection and full payment of
consumer's final sewer bill.
[Added 4-20-2017]
All new accounts must provide a deposit as follows:
Residential/commercial owners: $25.
Real estate contracts: $75.
Renters: $100.
Closing papers, real estate contracts and lease or rental agreements will need to be
presented at the time of application.
§ 9-3-21. Special charges.
The Village may assess special charges to a customer for any out-of-pocket costs incurred by the
Village beyond the normal costs the Village incurs in providing service to similar customers. Special
charges shall be made for, but are not limited to, these situations:
Costs associated with sampling, analyzing and evaluating the customer's wastewater and the
effect of such wastewater on the sewer system when such wastewater is found to be prohibited
sewage and thereafter for verification of compliance with this Section 9-3 as the Utilities Director
deems appropriate.
Costs associated with repairing or replacing components of the sewer system which are damaged
or destroyed by the actions of the customer or by any of the customer's wastewater discharged to
the sewer system.
Costs associated with restoring a salvaged grinder pumping unit to reusable condition or replacing
the grinder pumping unit if a unit is no longer in use due to the customer requiring a larger unit or
requesting a unit be relocated on the served property.
Costs associated with more than a single inspection of work performed or components installed by
an applicant's licensed electrician and/or an applicant's licensed plumber.
Costs beyond routine inspections associated with verifying compliance with the grease trap and
sand trap requirements of this Section 9-3.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 138/346
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Costs associated with inspection of the pressure sewer lines and pressure service laterals
installed by a subdivision developer.
Costs associated with enforcing this Section 9-3.
§ 9-3-22. Delinquencies and disconnections.
If any customer fails to pay the monthly sewer charges within 20 days after the date of mailing of
the monthly bill, a charge of 10% of the monthly sewer billing shall be assessed to the unpaid,
delinquent amount to cover the associated costs and charges in maintenance and administrative
costs for the delinquent account.
If any fee, charge or penalty for sewer service remains unpaid 40 days after the monthly bill has
been mailed, the Village may disconnect a customer's water service and/or disconnect or make
inoperable the customer's grinder pumping unit. Prior to discontinuing service, the Village shall
provide written notice to the customer 10 days prior to such discontinuance.
The Clerk/Administrator shall hear any appeal or complaint and shall be the final authority
regarding delinquent bills and may decide service will be continued for not more than an additional
30 days before service is discontinued. If such a continuance is allowed, no additional notice will
be necessary for the Village to discontinue service if the bill, or any subsequent bill, is still
delinquent.
When water and/or sewer service has been discontinued due to delinquent payment, water/sewer
service shall not be restored to the property and/or customer until all arrears in charges have been
paid, together with a processing fee of $50. Once the charges have been paid, water/sewer
service will be restored during regular business hours. In the event a customer relocates within the
Village of Bosque Farms, leaving a delinquent water/sewer bill at his/her previous residence,
water/sewer service at his/her new location will not be provided until the delinquent charges from
service at his previous address have been paid.
§ 9-3-23. Discontinuation of sewer service.
Service shall not be terminated to any occupied property in response to customer's request after a
grinder pumping unit has been installed.
Service may be temporarily (not to exceed three months) terminated only to unoccupied or
otherwise vacant properties such as rental units, mobile homes moving on or off of properties, etc.
Should the customer demonstrate to the Clerk/Administrator that an economical hardship exists, a
time extension may be granted.
Upon receipt of a written statement by the owner of a lot or parcel of property which has previously
been connected to the public sewer system that there is no longer any building or structure for
human occupation or use or for any business purpose located thereon and that the toilet and other
facilities therein have been removed, disconnected and properly plugged from the Village sewer
system, and upon inspection by the Utilities Director or his designated representative to ascertain
that the statement is true, the sewer charges shall cease as of the first day of the following month.
The Utilities Director or his designated representative shall remove the motor from the grinder
pumping unit.
Service shall be restored once the property has been reoccupied.
§ 9-3-24. Notices.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 139/346
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
(b)
(1)
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
(b)
(2)
C.
When the Village is required by this Section 9-3 to notify a customer or potential customer, such notice
shall be deemed to have been made if the Village:
Hand delivers a notice to the customer's served property;
Includes a notice with the customer's utility bill mailed to the customer; or
Mails a notice to the customer by first class mail.
§ 9-3-25. Forms and standards.
The Village administration may develop, use and revise forms for the administration and
implementation of this Section 9-3. An indexed copy of the latest edition of the forms shall be
maintained at the Village for public inspection.
The Village administration may develop, use, revise and enforce standards for the design and
construction of the sewer system and for the materials to be used as part of the sewer system. An
indexed copy of the latest edition of the standards shall be maintained at the Village offices for
public inspection.
Size and number of grinder pumping units required.
Customers which may have a single grinder pumping unit:
Residential customers.
Commercial customers:
Whose rest rooms are only used by employees.
Who do not have kitchens.
Who have 10 or less total full-time equivalent employees.
Who do not use water for any processes, wash down, food processing or industrial
activities.
Whose maximum water use has been (or is expected to be) less than 15,000 gallons
per month during any month.
Customers required to have at least one double grinder pumping unit:
Any commercial customer which does not qualify for a single grinder pumping unit as
given above.
Any:
Restaurant or bar.
Church.
Motel, hotel or bed-and-breakfast establishment.
School.
Day-care facility.
Business or institution having rest rooms available to customers, patrons or clients.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 140/346
[7]
[8]
(a)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Vehicle service stations.
Vehicle and mechanical equipment repair facilities.
Customers required to have more than one double grinder pumping unit:
Any commercial customer whose maximum water use has been (or is expected to be)
more than 25,000 gallons during any month. The number of double grinder pumping units
required shall be one for every 25,000 gallons of water use (or fraction of 25,000 gallons)
per month. The arrangement of the customer's building drainage lines and gravity service
lines shall be such that generally equivalent flows will be directed to each unit.
If a customer's use of the served building will be changed so that by this requirement an
increase in the number or size of grinder pumping units would be required, the customer shall
submit an application for the larger or additional grinder pumping units not less than 60 days
prior to such change.
If a customer's water use is found to be, or increases, so that, by this requirement, an
increase in the number or size of grinder pumping units would be required, the Utilities
Director shall notify the customer that a larger or additional grinder pumping unit(s) is/are
required. The customer shall submit an application with payment for the larger or additional
grinder pumping units within 60 days of the date of such notice and shall connect such
additional units within 60 days of the date the resulting permit is issued.
No waiver shall be made for the maximum gallons-per-month limitations given in this
requirement unless the applicant can adequately demonstrate to the Utilities Director's
satisfaction that a single high month of water use was the result of a break in the applicant's
plumbing system and the escaping water would not have entered the sewer system if the
applicant had been connected to the sewer system or did not enter the sewer system if the
applicant was connected to the sewer system. Such a waiver shall not be given more than
once for any served property. The Utilities Director shall be the final authority in determine if
such a waiver shall be given.
If a customer has a single grinder pumping unit, but due to a change in use of the served
building or due to actual water use being higher than allowed for a single grinder pumping unit
one double grinder pumping unit is required, the Utilities Director may allow the installation of
a second single grinder pumping unit, provided the Utilities Director is satisfied the customer's
sewage will be directed reasonably equally between the two single grinder pumping units.
§ 9-3-26. Termination for misconduct.
The Village may disconnect a customer's water service and/or disconnect or make inoperable the
customer's grinder pumping unit without notice for any of the following activities by any person:
Unauthorized connection to the sewer system.
Failure to permit the Utilities Director or Health Officer reasonable access to a grinder pumping
unit, pressure service line, control panel, grease trap or sand trap.
Damage to the grinder pumping unit or to the pressure service line.
For customers who purchase water from the Village, allowing any water not purchased from the
Village to enter the sewer system.
Use of the service so as to interfere with the quality, safety, continuity or efficiency of service
furnished by the utility.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 141/346
F.
G.
H.
Failure to submit an application for a larger grinder pumping unit or for additional grinder pumping
units prior to 60 days of a change in use of the served property which would require the installation
of a larger unit or additional units.
Failure to submit an application for a larger grinder pumping unit or for additional grinder pumping
units within 60 days of being notified by the Utilities Director that a larger unit or additional units
is/are required by this Section 9-3; also, failure to install and connect to such larger unit or
additional units within 60 days of date of application for such unit(s).
Willful or continued violation of any portion of this Section 9-3.
§ 9-3-27. Penalty.
Any person violating any provision of this Section 9-3 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and on
conviction thereof shall be fined a sum not to exceed $500 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. In
addition to such penalties, the Village Attorney shall have the authority to apply to the District Court for
the purpose of obtaining an order restraining any person from violating any of the provisions of this
Section 9-3.
§ 9-3-28. Additional remedy.
Any charge by this Section 9-3 shall be payable either by the customer or by the occupant of the
served property to which service is furnished. In addition to any other remedy which may be authorized
by this Section 9-3, the Village shall have a lien upon the tract of land being served by the system for
delinquent charges. The lien shall be imposed and enforced in the manner provided in NMSA 1978,
§§ 3-35-1 through 3-35-5. Exceptions to this section are provided in NMSA 1978, § 3-23-6C.
10. LAND USE
Section 10-1. Zoning
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 8-6-2015. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Business registration or license  See Sec. 5-1.
Fireworks  See Sec. 5-5.
Property maintenance  See Sec. 7-3.
Water  See Sec. 9-2.
Sewers  See Sec. 9-3.
Subdivision regulations  See Sec. 10-2.
Flood damage prevention  See Sec. 11-1.
§ 10-1-1. Title.
These regulations shall be known as the "Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Bosque
Farms, New Mexico," and shall be referred to herein as "this Section 10-1."
§ 10-1-2. Purpose.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 142/346
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
The regulations and restrictions of this Section 10-1 are designed to lessen congestion in the streets
and public ways; to secure safety from fire, flood and other dangers; to promote health and the general
welfare of the residents; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid
undue concentration of population; to facilitate adequate provisions for transportation, water, sewage,
schools, parks, and other requirements; to conserve the value of buildings and land; to encourage the
most appropriate use of land throughout the Village of Bosque Farms; and to maintain the rural
environment of the community.
§ 10-1-3. Applicability.
All property except that property owned or controlled by the federal government, the State of New
Mexico, the County of Valencia, the Village of Bosque Farms, and their subdivisions or agencies, is
governed according to the zone district in which it is located. Any use not classified as permissive or
conditional within a particular zone district is hereby prohibited from that zone district, except as
otherwise provided herein. The zone districts and boundaries of zone districts described herein are
shown on the Zone Map, which shall be made a part of this Section 10-1 as if fully described herein.
The governing body shall adopt administrative policies and procedures to effectuate and carry out the
purpose and application of this Section 10-1, which said administrative policies and procedures shall
be duly enforceable under this Section 10-1.
§ 10-1-4. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Section 10-1, standard dictionary definitions shall be used except for
certain words or phrases used herein, which shall be interpreted as follows:
The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or
corporation, as well as an individual.
The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the
plural number includes the singular.
The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive.
As used in this Section 10-1, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ABANDONED WELL
A wellhead whose use has been permanently discontinued or which is in such disrepair that
its continued use for the purpose of obtaining groundwater is impracticable or may constitute
a health hazard.
ACCESSORY LIVING QUARTERS
Temporary living quarters within an allowed accessory structure only for the reason of a
legitimate hardship or medical necessity. This unit shall not be used as a rental unit and shall
not exceed 500 square feet of floor space.
ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
Uses and structures that are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to
principal uses and structures.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT
A business which either directly or indirectly provides sex-related products and services or
adult entertainment.
AGENT
Anyone authorized by a notarized letter signed by the property owner to represent same.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 143/346
AGRICULTURAL ANIMAL
Animals other than dogs, cats and indoor birds, such as horses, cows, pigs, sheep, llamas,
chickens, etc., such as would typically be found in an agricultural environment.
[Added 8-18-2016]
AGRICULTURAL EQUIPMENT
Farm field and farmstead machinery used for the production of crops and agricultural
livestock.
ANIMAL SANCTUARY/SHELTER
A nonprofit facility for the short- or long-term care and custody of animals, which may include
lost pets, owner-released pets, cruelty cases, rescued animals and/or permanent retirement
candidates.
BAIL BOND
A written promise signed by a defendant or a surety (one who promises to act in place of
another) to pay an amount fixed by a court should the defendant named in the document fail
to appear in court for the designated criminal proceeding at the date and time specified.
BANKING AND FINANCIAL SERVICES
Any state or federally chartered bank, saving association, credit union, or industrial loan
company, retail seller engaged primarily in the business of selling consumer goods that
cashes checks or issues money orders as an incidental service to its main purpose or
business and which is offered as a service to customers, but excludes any establishment
whose primary purpose is to provide cash advances, payday loans, payday advances, and
similar services.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST
An owner-managed and -occupied residential structure used as a lodging establishment
where a room or rooms are rented on a nightly basis, and in which only breakfast is included
as a part of the basic compensation.
BODY ART
Tattooing, body piercing or scarification, but does not include practices that are considered
medical procedures by the New Mexico Medical Board.
BODY ART/MODIFICATION ESTABLISHMENT
Any establishment that engages in the business of tattooing and/or branding and body
piercing of human beings, including scarification. A permanent picture, design, or other
marking made on the skin by pricking it and staining it with an indelible dye. This excludes the
application of permanent makeup in a salon setting with appropriate equipment and the
piercing of ears with the use of a piercing gun.
CHECK CASHING/PAYDAY LOAN ESTABLISHMENT
Any establishment whose primary purpose is to provide cash advances, payday loans,
payday advances, and similar services. It does not include a state or federally chartered bank,
saving association, credit union, or industrial loan company, retail seller engaged primarily in
the business of selling consumer goods that cashes checks or issues money orders as an
incidental service to its main purpose or business and which is offered as a service to
customers.
COLLECTOR STREET
A street that serves as a connection between a major or secondary thoroughfare and several
minor streets. The term includes the principal entrance streets of a residential development
and streets for major circulation within such a development.
COMMISSION
The Village of Bosque Farms Planning and Zoning Commission.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 144/346
(1)
(2)
COMMON AREA
An area inside a housing development that is owned by all residents or by an overall
management structure which charges each tenant for maintenance and upkeep.
[Added 8-18-2016]
CONDITIONAL USE
One of those uses enumerated as conditional uses in a given zone district. A permit for such
use shall be granted upon approval by the Commission. A conditional use permit shall be
either permanent or renewable, as established by this Section 10-1.
CONTAMINATION
The presence of any harmful substance which is likely to unreasonably injure human health,
animal or plant life, property, or public welfare.
CONTIGUOUS
Abutting or touching and/or separated by nothing more than a ditch, canal, or right-of-way.
DAY-CARE FACILITY
An establishment or facility which has the primary function of providing care, services and
supervision to children.
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations.
DWELLING UNIT
Any structure or part of a structure intended for human occupancy and containing one or
more connected rooms and a single kitchen designed for and occupied by no more than one
family for living and sleeping purposes. A dwelling unit may include a mobile home, a modular
housing unit, manufactured house, site-built house or planned residential development.
DWELLING UNIT, CONVENTIONAL
A single-family detached dwelling unit which is installed on a permanent foundation and which
is either:
A site-built unit constructed in accordance with the standards of the New Mexico Uniform
Building Code; or
A multi-section manufactured home or modular home that is a single-family dwelling with
a heated area of at least 36 feet by 24 feet and at least 864 square feet and constructed
in a factory to the standards of the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development, the National Urban Development Zone Code 2 or the Uniform Building
Code, as amended to the date of the unit's construction, and installed consistent with the
Manufactured Housing Act (NMSA 1978, Chapter 60, Article 14) and with the regulations
made pursuant thereto relating to permanent foundations.
DWELLING UNIT, CARETAKER
The dwelling unit of a person who takes care of the property of an owner in the owner's
absence. A caretaker dwelling unit shall allow for spouses and dependent children. The
caretaker dwelling unit shall be within one of the structures located on the lot, or it may be a
separate structure, mobile home/manufactured home, or modular unit.
EASEMENT
Rights granted to public utilities for ingress and egress to serve water, sewer,
telephone/cable, gas and electric lines and the right granted to a landowner for ingress and
egress to property by either purchase, deed, or adverse possession or any other legal means.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 145/346
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME
An occupied dwelling unit in which a person provides, for remuneration, care for at least five
children but not more than six children, provided that no more than two of those children be
under the age of two, on a regular basis for fewer than 24 hours per day. The resident
provider's children who are age six or more shall not be counted for this definition.
FENCE
A structure, other than a building, which serves as a barrier and is used as a boundary or
means of protection or confinement. This includes a masonry fence or wall and privacy fence.
FORTUNE TELLERS
Fortune tellers, psychics, clairvoyants, palmists, and similar trades.
FRONTAGE
A distance measured along a roadway right-of-way line.
GALVANIZED STEEL
A metal panel coated with zinc or corrosion resistance material.
GARAGE OR YARD SALE
A sale of used household or personal articles held on the seller's premises.
GOVERNING BODY
The Village of Bosque Farms Council.
GRADE
The average elevation of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of a building or all
sides of a structure.
GROUNDWATER
Water found beneath the land surface in a saturated zone.
GUEST ROOM
A room or a group of rooms forming a single habitable unit which is located within the walls of
a dwelling unit and which is used or intended to be used for sleeping and living, but not for
cooking or eating purposes, and which is rented individually as a unit.
HARDSHIP
To cause privation or suffering.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Substances defined in Section 101(14) of the Federal Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA) or as regulated under Subtitle C of the
Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA).
HAZARDOUS WASTE
Materials that are corrosive, flammable, reactive or toxic.
HEIGHT
When applied to a building, the vertical distance from the finished lot grade to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof, or the deck line of a mansard roof or the average height
between the plate and the ridge of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof, or to the highest point of any
other roof style not mentioned in this definition.
HOME OCCUPATION
An occupation or activity clearly incidental and secondary to use of the premises for a
dwelling unit; requires home occupation approval from either the Planning and Zoning
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 146/346
(1)
(2)
Administrator/Officer or Commission depending on the type of use requested as per § 10-1-
13L.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE
Any motor vehicle which is incapable of being propelled under its own power.
KENNEL
COMMERCIAL KENNEL
Any building, buildings or land designed or arranged for boarding dogs, cats, and other
household pets, and where grooming, breeding, boarding, training or selling animals is
conducted in the Commercial Zone (C-1).[1]
HOBBY KENNEL
Any building, buildings or land designed or arranged for housing dogs, cats, and other
household pets belonging to the property resident in all residential zones (A-R, R-1, and
R-1A).
KITCHEN
A room or other place equipped with any combination of the following: a stove/oven,
refrigerator, small cooking devices, a sink, where food may be stored or prepared.
LOCALIZED STORMWATER
Surface water deposited on a particular area of land by direct precipitation and not by an
overflow of surface waters from other land areas.
LOCAL STREET
A street of relatively short length that provides direct access to a limited number of contiguous
residential properties designed to discourage use by through traffic.
LOT
An area of land, described by metes and bounds, recorded and filed in the Valencia County
Clerk's office in accordance with appropriate laws and ordinances. Such lot shall have
frontage on a dedicated public right-of-way or on an approved private roadway for ingress and
egress.
MEDICAL USE OF CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENT
Any facility, building, space, or grounds licensed for the production, possession, testing,
manufacturing, or distribution of cannabis, concentrates or cannabis-derived products.
METAL INTAKE/RECYCLING CENTER
Any business engaged in purchasing or otherwise acquiring for sale or barter any material
such as old iron, copper, brass, lead, zinc, tin, aluminum or other metals, metallic cable, wire,
rope, bottles, rubber, batteries, e-scrap or other like material.
MOBILE HOME
Also known as "manufactured housing"; a structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in
length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used for a dwelling with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes plumbing, heating, air
conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein.
MOBILE HOME PARK
An area of land on which space is leased or rented for occupancy for 30 days or more by
mobile homes, and which contains permanent facilities and services for the use of the mobile
home occupants.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 147/346
MODULAR STRUCTURE
Any structure built for use of occupancy by persons or property, whether or not designed to be
placed on a permanent foundation. Modular structures include factory-built buildings and
subassemblies for manufactured residential and commercial units, modular homes and premanufactured
homes. Modular structures do not include nonassembled component parts that
are subject to all permit and inspection requirements, or to manufactured housing structures
that are subject to federal regulation as per NMAC § 14-12-3.7.K.[2]
MOTOR VEHICLE
A vehicle (such as, but not limited to, a car, truck, or motorcycle) that is powered by a motor
and was at any time designed to carry passengers.
MOTOR VEHICLE SALES LOT
Any lot or parcel of land where a dealer sells new/used/consignment motor vehicles.
MULTI-SECTION MANUFACTURED HOME OR MODULAR HOME
A single-family dwelling with a heated area of at least 36 feet by 24 feet and at least 864
square feet and constructed in a factory to the standards of the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development, the National Urban Development Zone Code 2 or the
Uniform Building Code, as amended to the date of the unit's construction, and installed
consistent with the Manufactured Housing Act (NMSA 1978, Chapter 60, Article 14) and with
the regulations made pursuant thereto relating to permanent foundations.
NONCONFORMING USES, LOTS, OR STRUCTURES
A structure or use of a structure or land which does not conform to the regulations of this
Section 10-1 and which lawfully existed on the effective date of those regulations with which it
does not conform.
OVERLAY ZONE DISTRICT
An overlay zone district is created to identify a special resource or development area and to
adopt new provisions that apply in that area in addition to the provisions of the underlying
zone district. The provisions of an overlay zone district can be more restrictive or more
expansive than those contained in the underlying zone district. An overlay zone district can be
coterminous with existing property boundaries or contain only parts of one or more properties
and may extend over more than one zone district.
OVERLAY ZONE, WELLHEAD PROTECTION
An area designated by the Village of Bosque Farms to protect the groundwater source of
municipal water supply wells from contamination originating from human activities.
OWNER-OCCUPIED
A dwelling occupied by a person or persons who shall own at least 51% of said dwelling unit.
PAWNBROKER
An individual or business (pawnshop or pawn shop) that offers secured loans to people, with
items of personal property used as collateral.
PERMISSIVE USE
A specific use allowed in a particular zone district.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT (PRD)
A development approach that creates open space in residential development and encourages
imaginative site building and design by permitting greater flexibility in zoning requirements
than is permitted by other sections of this Section 10-1.
PREMISES
Any lot or combination of contiguous lots held in single ownership, together with the
development thereon.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 148/346
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A structure which is designed or used as temporary living quarters for recreation, camping, or
travel, and which may be a self-propelled motor vehicle or designed to be towed or mounted
on a motor vehicle.
REGULATED BUSINESS
Any business requiring additional regulation as listed under § 10-1-11G.
RIGHT-OF-WAY
A dedicated and accepted public land deeded to the Village of Bosque Farms, reserved by
plat, or otherwise acquired by the Village, county, or state for the use of the public for the
movement of people, goods, and vehicles.
ROADWAY
That portion of public right-of-way or private way or thoroughfare which is primarily devoted to
vehicular use.
SALVAGE OR SCRAP FACILITY
A salvage yard, scrap yard, wrecking yard, junkyard, dismantler or any entity in the business
of outdoor storage or deposit for storing, keeping, processing, buying or selling disused
vehicles, disused machinery or other disused goods or materials for resale.
SCRAP TIRE
A tire that is no longer suitable for its originally intended purpose because of wear, damage,
defect or obsolescence.
SERVICE BAY
Any enclosed work area for the maintenance or repair of vehicles, comprising an average
floor area of 420 square feet per bay to accommodate both service and access requirements.
SETBACK
The required distance between every building or structure (fences, walls, and signs excepted)
and a boundary line of the lot upon which it is located. Setbacks shall consist of an open
space, unoccupied and unobstructed by any part of a building or structure, except as
otherwise provided in this Section 10-1.
SETBACK, FRONT
The minimum allowable distance between a structure and the boundary line of the lot, upon
which such structure is located, bordering on a roadway.
SETBACK, REAR
The minimum allowable distance between a structure and the boundary line of the lot, upon
which such structure is located, which is opposite and most distant from a roadway and does
not intersect with a roadway.
SETBACK, SIDE
The minimum allowable distance between a structure and the boundary line of the lot, upon
which such structure is located, which intersects a roadway.
SIGN
A device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not on the premises on which
the device is located. All signs within the Village of Bosque Farms shall require a permit,
unless otherwise specified, in accordance with this Section 10-1 (§ 10-1-20).
SKID ROW
A high density of businesses that may have the potential to create adverse effects on the
surrounding area and community.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 149/346
(a)
(b)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
SMOKE SHOP
Any business devoting more than 15% of the total floor space for display for sale of smoking
or tobacco paraphernalia or whose gross dollar volume of business is over 25% from sales of
smoking or tobacco paraphernalia.
SOLID FENCE
Block, ribbed metal panels, adobe, solid vinyl wood panel or other fencing that has 0% open
area.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT
A permit approving uses which require special consideration as listed in § 10-1-11F.
STRUCTURE
Anything constructed, placed, or erected above ground level which requires location on the
ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground, but not including a tent,
vehicle, vegetation, public utility pole or line, signs or fences. For the purpose of this Section
10-1, a mobile home is a structure, with or without wheels, when located on any lot.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either:
Before the improvement or repair is started; or
If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage
occurred.
For the purpose of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure
safe living conditions; or
Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a
State Inventory of Historic Places.
TIRE SHOP
Any entity conducting sales or services of tires, including, but not limited to, changing,
replacing, balancing, aligning or otherwise servicing tires or the sales of new or used tires.
TRAILER
A nonmotorized vehicle designed to be pulled behind a motor vehicle.
UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK
A single tank or combination of tanks, including underground pipes connected thereto, which
are used to contain an accumulation of fuels, hazardous materials, or other regulated
substances, and the volume of which, including the volume of the underground pipes
connected thereto, is 10% or more beneath the surface of the ground. This definition does not
include septic tanks.
VARIANCE
A relaxation of the terms of this Section 10-1 where such relaxation will not be contrary to the
public interest (§ 10-1-16).
VEHICLE
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 150/346
[1]
[2]
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
Any motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, trailer or agricultural equipment.
VEHICLE REPAIR, LIGHT
Checking and topping off of fluids (not changing fluids), replacement of bulbs and fuses,
checking and adjusting of tire pressure (not changing of tires), charging of batteries (not
changing), windshield repair.
VEHICLE REPAIR, MAJOR
Repairs that produce relatively high levels of noise, vibration and fumes and, more
specifically, include the following types of repairs to motor vehicles and repairs of a similar
nature with respect to impacts on nearby properties: air conditioning service, brake
repair/replacement, engine oil changes, fluids replacement, exhaust system
repair/replacement, auto body customizing, auto body sheet metal/fiberglass/plastic
repair/replacement, auto body prepping/painting/media blasting, chassis fabrication/repair,
complete engine/transmission rebuild and replacement.
VEHICLE REPAIR, MINOR
Repairs and servicing that will produce relatively low noise, vibration and fumes and, more
specifically, include the following types of repairs to motor vehicles: shock
absorber/spring/strut replacement, tire balancing/installation, wheel alignment,
windshield/glass replacement, tune-ups, diagnostics, emission control service.
VISUAL BARRIER FENCE
Wood panel fencing, chain-link with slats, mesh fencing or any other fencing which provides
25% or less open area per square foot of fencing.
WAREHOUSING OPERATIONS
Includes use of any building, structure or other protected enclosure in which goods, materials
or agricultural products are or may be stored.
WELLHEAD
The structural element of a constructed water well which is the source of a groundwater
supply system.
ZONE MAP
A map of the Village of Bosque Farms that delineates the zone district boundaries within the
Village boundaries.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 10-1-5. General regulations.
Access to structures. All structures shall be located on lots or parcels of land such that safe and
convenient access is provided for servicing, fire protection, and any required off-street parking or
loading.
Agricultural activities are permitted in A-R, R-1 and R-1A Zone Districts only, provided that:
Confinement areas for livestock and fowl shall be constructed and maintained to discourage
the concentration and breeding of insects and rodents which are detrimental to human health.
Livestock and fowl manure and soiled bedding shall not be allowed to accumulate in amounts
that offend or cause a noxious odor. Such material shall be removed within 10 days of official
notification from the Village of Bosque Farms.
Temporary on-site storage of animal waste shall be designed to prevent groundwater or
surface water contamination.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 151/346
(4)
(5)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
E.
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
G.
Surface water runoff shall be contained on site and controlled to avoid overflow into irrigation
ditches and drains and surrounding property.
The Village of Bosque Farms adopts NMSA 1978, Article 9, §§ 47-9-1 through 47-9-7, the
Right to Farm Act, as an ordinance of the Village.
Building and structure height. No building or structure shall exceed 26 feet in height from the base
flood elevation plus six inches of freeboard. This height limitation shall not apply to silos, water
tanks, wind generators, antennas, solar collectors, flagpoles, and other such accessory objects,
excluding signs.
Building and structure setback. All buildings and structures shall be placed on a lot in accordance
with the following setback requirements:
There shall be a front setback of 30 feet and a side setback of 10 feet on all lots.
There shall be a rear setback of 10 feet on all lots with the exception as noted below in
Subsection D(4).
An accessory building shall not be placed within any front setback area.
An accessory building shall not be placed within any side or rear setback area except when
the lot line borders a vehicle-accessible irrigation ditch, roadway or utility easement, in which
case the accessory building may be placed on the lot line.
Walls, fences and signs are exempt from all setback regulations, provided they are not placed
within seven feet of Bosque Farms Boulevard (NMSH 47) and they do not obstruct the
required vision clearance at all roadway access points, as per Subsection O of this § 10-1-5.
Development. For any new development, new construction or substantial improvement, a
development permit shall be obtained from the floodplain administrator as per Section 11-1, Flood
Damage Prevention, §§ 11-1-9 and 11-1-15C, of the Village Code.
Exterior lighting requirements. Exterior lighting shall be controlled to avoid spillover of light and
glare onto neighboring properties, operators of motor vehicles, or pedestrians in the proximity of
the light source. Furthermore, in order to preserve and enhance the community's natural resource
of dark skies, all outdoor night lighting fixtures shall be effectively shielded to prevent direct or
reflected light into the sky.
Fence. All fences shall be durable, properly maintained and not detrimental to contiguous
property. A solid fence shall be required as specified in this Section 10-1.
Fences shall not cause a nuisance, fire hazard, or dangerous condition that may affect public
safety.
For purposes of this Section 10-1, a solid fence shall not be composed of metal [except as
described in Subsection G(6) below], exposed tires, doors, or other materials deemed unsafe
or detrimental to adjoining property by the Commission.
For purposes of this Section 10-1, visual barrier fencing is not acceptable where a solid fence
is required in a Commercial Zone.
The height of a fence shall be measured from the natural ground level or the base of the
fence, whichever is appropriate.
No visual barrier or solid fence shall exceed four feet in height in the front setback area. No
fence shall exceed six feet in the front setback area.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 152/346
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(b)
(c)
(d)
(6)
H.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
I.
(1)
J.
Ribbed metal panels are allowable within the Village with development review permit approval
(as per § 10-1-18A of this Section 10-1) from the Planning and Zoning Officer/Administrator,
with the following conditions:
As fencing material if classified as ribbed type seam type with a minimum thickness of 26
gauge and a factory-applied coating of paint or epoxy.
Metal panels are allowable, provided that the panels meet the following criteria:
"Ribbed" means a raised line in the flat portion of a metal panel that gives added
strength and minimizes that appearance of oil canning.
Panels, as noted above, shall not exceed six feet in height within the rear or side
setback of a lot.
There shall not be any panels within the front setback of a lot.
Panels will meet the vision clearance requirements in Subsection O of this § 10-1-5.
Galvanized steel panel fences are not allowed.
Fencing over six feet in height shall be engineered in conformity with the regulations of
New Mexico construction industries and approved by New Mexico Construction
Industries Division.
A garage or yard sale is permitted for no more than three consecutive days and not more than four
sales per calendar year.
Hobby kennels are permitted in A-R, R-1 and R-1A Zone Districts, provided that:
Kenneled animals shall be retained in a manner that prevents escape of enclosed animals or
entry of other animals.
Kennels shall be designed to ensure safe, healthy, and sanitary conditions for animals on
premises.
Kennels shall be maintained to discourage the concentration and breeding of insects and
rodents, which are detrimental to human health.
Kennels shall be designed to retain surface water. discharges shall be retained on site.
Animal waste shall not be allowed to accumulate in amounts that offend or cause a noxious
odor; such material shall be removed within 10 days of official notification from the Village of
Bosque Farms.
Temporary on-site storage of animal waste shall be designed to prevent groundwater or
surface water contamination.
Minimum lot sizes and open space requirements. The purpose of minimum lot sizes and open
space requirements is to protect and preserve the established low-density rural character of the
zone districts of the Village, to secure a low density of future residential development, and to
minimize impervious surfaces which increase stormwater runoff that may result in flooding or
water pollution. Open space shall be unoccupied by structures as defined by this Section 10-1.
R-1 and R-1A Zones. Lot size shall be a minimum of 3/4 of one acre (32,670 square feet),
having a minimum frontage of 40 feet, and no less than 60% of the land shall be permeable
open space.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 153/346
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
K.
A-R Zone. Lot size shall be a minimum of two acres (87,120 square feet), and with a
residential usage shall have a minimum frontage of 100 feet, and no less than 60% of the
land shall be permeable open space.
[Amended 8-18-2016]
C-1 Zone. Lot size shall be a minimum of 1/4 of one acre (10,890 square feet) and meet the
following requirements:
Development shall be connected to the Village water and wastewater systems;
There shall be adequate stormwater retention as specified in Subsection N of this § 10-1-
5;
There shall be adequate off-street parking as specified in § 10-1-19;
There shall be no adverse impact created upon contiguous properties;
In cases where both water and wastewater system connections are not established, the
minimum lot size shall be 3/4 of one acre (32,670 square feet) with on-site stormwater
retention;
Site development plans are required for all new development in this zone district; and
There shall be adequate legal access, which shall require a New Mexico Department of
Transportation access permit for development on Bosque Farms Boulevard (NMSH 47).
Mobile home/manufactured home installation.
All mobile homes and manufactured housing shall be installed in accordance with regulations
promulgated by the Manufactured Housing Act of New Mexico (NMSA 1978, § 60-14-1 et
seq.) and with regulations made pursuant thereto relating to installation and ground anchors.
All mobile homes and manufactured housing in the R-1A Zone District shall be placed on a
permanent and continuous frost-protected perimeter as regulated by the Manufactured
Housing Division and shall be compatible and harmonious with existing structures in the
vicinity.
Mobile homes or manufactured housing installed on any premises in mobile home parks, or
as a temporary dwelling unit during construction of a permanent dwelling unit, or as a rental
property in an R-1A Zone, or as temporary accessory living quarters, as regulated under the
conditional use permit procedures of this Section 10-1, are not required to be placed on a
perimeter foundations but shall provide skirting of durable materials and shall be stabilized
and anchored in accordance with state laws.
On such occasions as are permitted under this Section 10-1 for the habitation of a
temporary mobile home/manufactured home, the owner of the property on which the
temporary mobile home/manufactured home is placed shall either deposit the sum of
$2,500 with the Village Treasurer or post a bond in the equivalent amount made payable
to the Village of Bosque Farms.
In the event that the temporary mobile home/manufactured home is not removed from
the property at the time specified in this Section 10-1, said deposit or bond shall be
forfeited as liquidated damages to the Village of Bosque Farms.
The Village Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer is hereby authorized to use any
forfeited funds to remove the temporary mobile home/manufactured home from the
property consistent with the terms of this Section 10-1. Any sums remaining after said
removal costs have been paid shall revert to the Village.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 154/346
(d)
(4)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(a)
(b)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
L.
M.
N.
O.
The Village Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer is authorized, in addition to
forfeiture of the bond or deposit, to charge additional fees for the removal and storage of
the mobile home/manufactured home as appropriate.
Mobile homes or manufactured housing installed on a rented property or as conditional use
permits shall be installed and anchored to adequate foundations in accordance with Section
11-1, Flood Damage Prevention, § 11-1-19D, of the Village Code.
All mobile homes or manufactured housing shall obtain a development review and mobile
home permit from the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer.
To obtain a mobile home/manufactured housing permit, the following information shall be
submitted:
A legal description of the property;
A plat map of the property;
A site plan showing where the mobile home or manufactured home will be placed on
the property (showing setbacks); and
A copy of the purchase agreement, registration or title of the mobile home or
manufactured home.
All mobile homes or manufactured homes shall be skirted within 90 days from the date of
inspection and shall remain skirted.
Recreational vehicle storage. On any lot in residential use, the storage of, such as, but not limited
to, a boat, pick-up camper shell, travel trailer, or other recreational vehicle is allowed, provided:
It is not used as additional living quarters for more than 60 days per year for an occasional
guest. The property owner will notify the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer when
guests will be staying more than 14 consecutive days;
It does not have a permanent connection to utilities;
It is not parked or stored within 10 feet of any roadway, right-of-way or multi-use path; and
Such recreational vehicle shall be stored on private property.
Refuse disposal. All persons owning or occupying lands within the Village of Bosque Farms shall
be responsible for the sanitary conditions of their premises. No person shall permit or cause the
accumulation of refuse, garbage, trash, or other materials which may become hazardous to public
health or safety, or which obstructs traffic, drainage, or access to structures. Refuse disposal shall
be in accordance with Section 9-1, Solid Waste, of the Village Code.
Stormwater drainage. It is the responsibility of any owner of real property located in the Village of
Bosque Farms to acceptably handle direct rainfall and stormwater runoff as it flows onto the
property. Acceptable handling of direct rainfall and stormwater does not include pumping the water
onto any adjacent roadway or right-of-way. Site design shall ensure that stormwater runoff will not
adversely affect neighboring properties. Methods used to determine stormwater flow rates and
storage requirements shall be taken from reputable sources such as Technical Release 55 (TR-
55, 1986 Edition) of the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service. The design frequency
storm shall be for a ten-year/six-hour frequency flood rate. All substantially improved or developed
lots shall be graded to retain localized stormwater on site.
Vision clearance. At all roadway intersections, or any entrance to property located adjacent to
Bosque Farms Boulevard (NMSH 47), no obstructions to view shall be placed or maintained
between three feet and eight feet above the roadway level in a triangular space at the roadway
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 155/346
P.
Q.
(1)
(2)
(3)
R.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
D.
corner on a corner lot. Such triangular space shall be bounded by the roadway property lines and
a diagonal line connecting points 25 feet distant from the intersection of the roadway property
lines.
Water and wastewater requirements. All development within the Village of Bosque Farms shall be
in compliance with applicable regulations established by Village ordinances, New Mexico State
Building Codes, the New Mexico Environment Department (concerning water and wastewater
systems), and the New Mexico State Engineer's Office (concerning water systems).
Floodplain compliance. All applicable FEMA requirements and Section 11-1, Flood Damage
Prevention, of the Village Code shall be adhered to in any determination of this Section 10-1.
Accessory structures.
Units, vehicles, and/or containers which were not originally intended for use as accessory
structures shall not be permitted as permanent structures in A-R, R-1 or R-1A Zone Districts.
This type of unit includes, but is not limited to: semi-trailer, panel truck bodies, railroad cars,
buses, mobile homes, and other such units. Any shipping containers and portable shipping
units shall have all logos and other identifying information removed or covered.
Portable storage units and shipping containers designed for temporary storage and/or
movement of stored items shall be allowed in A-R, R-1 or R-1A Zone Districts for up to 90
days with an approved permit from the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer. A single
thirty-day extension may be granted by the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer.
Portable storage units and cargo hauling vehicles shall be allowed as permanent storage
structures in the C-1 Zone District. Any cargo hauling vehicle used as a permanent storage
structure shall have all logos and other identifying information removed or covered unless the
information is specific to the business using the structure.
§ 10-1-6. Zone district boundaries.
Districts. In order to carry out the provision of this Section 10-1, the Village of Bosque Farms is
hereby divided into zone districts, as named and described in the following sections. The
regulations prescribed in this Section 10-1 shall apply within the corporate limits of the Village of
Bosque Farms.
Zone Map. The boundaries of said zone districts are hereby established as shown on the Bosque
Farms Zone Map, which shall be made a part of this Section 10-1 as if fully described herein. The
Village of Bosque Farms Zone Map boundaries and zone districts are hereby incorporated and
adopted in this Section 10-1 as the Official Village of Bosque Farms Zone Map.
Interpretation. Where due to the scale, lack of detail, or illegibility of the official Bosque Farms
Zone Map there is any uncertainty, contradiction, or conflict as to the intended location of any zone
district boundaries shown therein, interpretations concerning the exact location of zone district
boundary lines shall be determined by the Commission upon written request. Contiguous zone
districts along frontage of a public right-of-way shall automatically extend to the center line upon
vacation from public use of said right-of-way.
Multiple-zoned lots. Circumstances may justify the need to designate more than one zone on a
single lot. In such cases, zone boundaries within a multiple-zoned lot shall be more fully described
in the Bosque Farms Zone Map by showing any necessary dimensions of zones in relation to
existing property lines.
Each use shall meet minimum standards in each zone designated on the lot.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 156/346
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
C.
The Commission or governing body may require additional conditions for a conditional use
permit or for a special use permit.
The governing body shall make the final decision upon recommendation from the
Commission.
§ 10-1-7. Establishment of zone districts.
For the purpose of this Section 10-1, the following zone districts are hereby established:
A-R Agricultural/Residential Zone
R-1 Conventional Single-Family Residential Zone
R-1A Mixed Single-Family/Mobile Home Residential Zone
C-1 Commercial Zone
WPOZ Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone
§ 10-1-8. A-R Agricultural/Residential Zone.
Intent. The purpose of this zone district is to maintain agricultural and related activities and to
provide for low-density residential uses that are conducive to a rural atmosphere.
Permissive uses. Any of the following uses are permissive in this zone district:
Accessory uses and structures;
Agricultural activities, including the cultivation and harvesting of croplands, and the raising
and management of livestock and fowl in accordance with § 10-1-5B;
Hobby kennels in accordance with § 10-1-5I;
One conventional dwelling unit per lot; and
One temporary stand for the display and sale of agricultural products may be erected for a
period of not more than 90 days per year and shall not exceed more than 400 square feet of
gross floor area.
Conditional uses. Conditional uses are governed by § 10-1-13 of this Section 10-1. The following
uses shall be allowed in this zone district only upon permit granted by the Commission:
Accessory living quarters.
Mobile home/manufactured home, provided it meets current installation requirements, or
recreational vehicle as a conditional use when used as temporary dwelling unit during
construction of a standard site-built dwelling unit or on-site assembly of a modular dwelling
unit in accordance with §§ 10-1-5K and 10-1-13.
A development review/building permit shall be obtained within 30 days following issuance
of the conditional use permit.
Active and continuous construction shall begin within 90 days following issuance of a
conditional use permit.
The mobile home/manufactured home shall be removed with 10 days of the expiration of
the conditional use permit.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 157/346
(d)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(1)
D.
The recreational vehicle shall no longer be used as a residence after expiration of the
conditional use permit.
Additional dwelling units for occupancy by employees or persons related to the residing family
on the premises who are involved in any agricultural activities on the premises. In no case will
such additional dwelling units be used as rental units for persons not associated with the
agricultural activities on the premises.
Bed-and-breakfast inn in accordance with § 10-1-13M.
Commercial greenhouses, nurseries, landscaping businesses.
Commercial stable, riding school and livestock sales.
Family day-care home as regulated by the applicable New Mexico state agency.
Home occupations in accordance with § 10-1-13L, which shall require approval from either
the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer or the Commission.
The processing, packaging and sales of goods from agricultural products and/or agricultural
by-products.
Winery.
Special use permits. A special use permit shall be authorized and established as per § 10-1-14
only for the following uses as designated by the governing body:
Wireless cell phone tower, provided:
Wherever practical, co-location of equipment for use of more than one wireless
communication provider on a single site.
The applicant shall provide information for the reason that the applicant cannot co-locate
on an existing tower within Valencia County.
Property shall be enclosed within a solid fence at least six feet high as defined in § 10-1-
4 of this Section 10-1.
Setbacks shall be at one to one foot setback for every foot of tower height from the
boundary of the cell phone tower.
Color will be a light tone or color to minimize visual impact.
Owners of a wireless facility shall file annually a declaration as to the continuing use.
Failure to do so shall be determined to mean the facility is no longer in use.
Unused towers and associated facilities shall be removed within 180 days of cessation
unless an extension is approved. If the tower is not removed within 180 days, the tower
and facilities shall be removed by the Village and associated costs shall be assessed
against the company and/or property owner.
Towers built in the floodplain shall provide an environmental assessment.
Towers shall have FCC approval prior to being built.
The maximum height of the tower shall be 120 feet.
Property security shall be provided.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 158/346
(l)
(m)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(3)
Any cell phone tower shall incorporate sufficient landscaping as a screening device at the
base of the tower and associated structures, subject to the review and approval of the
Planning and Zoning Commission. The total lot shall be maintained and kept free of
weeds and debris.
These provisions shall not apply to HAM radio towers.
Mobile home/manufactured home park, provided:
All lots in a mobile home/manufactured home park shall be connected to Village sewer
and water facilities. A mobile home/manufactured home park shall present evidence that
adequate water and sewer service for each dwelling unit is provided in compliance with
the requirements of the New Mexico Environment Department and in conformance with
any applicable procedures and standards for centralized water as more specifically set
forth within the provisions of Section 9-2, Water, and Section 9-3, Sewers, of the Code of
the Village of Bosque Farms.
The minimum park size shall be at least five acres (217,800 square feet), but in no case
more than 12 acres (522,270 square feet).
The maximum gross density shall be one mobile home/manufactured home per threequarters
of an acre (32,670 square feet).
No mobile home/manufactured home shall be located within 40 feet of any other mobile
home/manufactured home. Any mobile home/manufactured home shall be at least 30
feet from the right-of-way line of any street and at least 10 feet from any property line of
the mobile home/manufactured home park.
All roadways shall be at least 40 feet wide, and shall be paved per Village specifications.
Perimeter areas adjacent to public roadways shall be landscaped with at least one
fifteen-gallon tree for each 50 feet of frontage along the roadway.
The park shall be continually maintained by the landowner to provide a clean and healthy
condition for residents.
Planned residential development, subject to the following provisions:
All lots in a planned residential development shall be connected to Village sewer and
water facilities. A planned residential development shall present evidence that adequate
water and sewer service for each dwelling unit is provided in compliance with the
requirements of the New Mexico Environment Department and in conformance with any
applicable procedure and standards for centralized water as more specifically set forth
within Section 9-2, Water, and Section 9-3, Sewers, of the Code of the Village of Bosque
Farms.
Development shall be residential land use.
Buildings shall be no greater than 26 feet in height.
Elevation drawings of all buildings shall be included with the development plans.
The maximum gross density of the total development shall be one building per threequarters
of an acre lot (32,670 square feet), or one-half of one acre lot (21,780 square
feet), for lots platted prior to 1973, and shall not exceed two dwelling units per building.
A portion of the land within the total development shall be set aside as open space for the
common use of the residents of the development with the following assurances:
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 159/346
[1]
[2]
[3]
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(4)
[1]
(5)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
(1)
C.
The ownership of the common area is clearly defined, with appropriate covenants
forbidding partition;
Partition for future sale and development is not allowed; and
The responsibility for improvements and maintenance of the common area is clearly
defined, and a method is provided for funding such improvements and maintenance
of the common area.
It shall be strongly encouraged that all perimeter areas adjacent to public roadways shall
be landscaped with at least one fifteen-gallon tree for each 25 feet of frontage along the
roadway.
For those planned residential developments that are nine acres or larger, all common
roadways into the total development shall be at least 40 feet in width and shall be paved
per Village specifications.
The total development shall be graded to retain localized stormwater on site.
There shall be at least 20 feet of separation between buildings.
Animal sanctuary/shelter in accordance with the following regulations:
Section 10-1-5B, Agricultural activities;
Section 10-1-5E, Development;
Section 10-1-5I, Hobby kennels; and
Section 10-1-18, Development review.
Residential care/assisted-living facility.[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, Minimum lot sizes, density and open space
requirements, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Section 1-1). See the requirements in § 10-1-5J.
§ 10-1-9. R-1 Conventional Single-Family Residential Zone.
Intent. The purpose of this zone district is to provide for the development of rural residential
neighborhoods which is compatible with the rural residential character of the area.
Permissive uses. Any of the following permissive uses are allowed in this zone district:
Accessory uses and structures;
Hobby kennel in accordance with § 10-1-5I;
One conventional dwelling unit per lot; and
Agricultural activities, including the cultivation and harvesting of croplands, and the raising
and management of livestock and fowl in accordance with § 10-1-5B.
Conditional uses. Conditional uses are governed by § 10-1-13 of this Section 10-1. The following
uses shall be allowed in this zone district only upon permit granted by the Commission:
Accessory living quarters.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 160/346
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
[1]
(5)
D.
[1]
A.
B.
Mobile home/manufactured home, provided it meets current installation requirements, or
recreational vehicle as a conditional use when used as temporary dwelling unit during
construction of a standard site-built dwelling unit or on-site assembly of a modular dwelling
unit, in accordance with §§ 10-1-5K and 10-1-18B of this Section 10-1.
A development review/building permit shall be obtained within 30 days following issuance
of the conditional use permit.
Active and continuous construction shall begin within 90 days following issuance of the
conditional use permit.
The mobile home/manufactured home shall be removed at the expiration of the
conditional use permit.
The recreational vehicle shall no longer be used as a residence after expiration of the
conditional use permit.
Bed-and-breakfast inn in accordance with § 10-1-13M.
Commercial riding stable or riding school, provided the lot is a minimum of two acres (87,120
square feet) in size.
Family day-care home as regulated by the applicable New Mexico state agency.
Home occupations in accordance with § 10-1-13L shall require approval from either the
Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer or the Commission.
The processing, packaging, and sales of goods from agricultural products and/or agricultural
by-products.
Special use permits. A special use permit shall be authorized and established as per § 10-1-14
only for the following uses as designated by the governing body:
Wireless cell phone tower as per § 10-1-8D(1).
Mobile home/manufactured home park as per § 10-1-8D(2).
Planned residential development as per § 10-1-8D(3).
Animal sanctuary/shelter as per § 10-1-8D(4).
Residential care/assisted-living facility as per § 10-1-8D(5).[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, Minimum lot sizes, density and open space
requirements, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Section 1-1). See the requirements in § 10-1-5J.
§ 10-1-10. R-1A Mixed Single-Family/Mobile Home Residential
Zone.
Intent. The purpose of this zone district is to provide for the development of rural residential
neighborhoods consisting of a mixture of detached dwelling units, including conventional, modular,
manufactured or mobile home dwelling units, provided they are installed in accordance with § 10-
1-5K and applicable floodplain ordinances.[1]
Editor's Note: See Sec. 11-1, Flood Damage Prevention.
Permissive uses. Any of the following permissive uses are allowed in this zone district:
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 161/346
(1)
(2)
(1)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
[2]
(5)
D.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
(a)
(b)
(1)
C.
All uses which are permissive in the R-1 Zone District; and
One mobile home/manufactured home unit per lot, installed in accordance with § 10-1-5K;
nothing in this subsection permits more than one conventional dwelling unit per lot.
Conditional uses. Conditional uses are governed by § 10-1-13 of this Section 10-1. The following
uses shall be allowed in this zone district only upon permit granted by the Commission:
All uses which are conditional in the R-1 Zone District, except bed-and-breakfast inns.
Special use permits. A special use permit shall be authorized and established as per § 10-1-14 of
this Section 10-1 only for the following uses as designated by the governing body:
Wireless cell phone tower as per § 10-1-8D(1).
Mobile home/manufactured home park as per § 10-1-8D(2).
Planned residential development as per § 10-1-8D(3).
Animal sanctuary/shelter as per § 10-1-8D(4).
Residential care/assisted-living facility as per § 10-1-8D(5).[2]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, Minimum lot sizes, density and open space
requirements, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Section 1-1). See the requirements in § 10-1-5J.
§ 10-1-11. C-1 Commercial Zone.
Intent. The purpose of this zone district is to promote and enhance existing and new commercial
development, including retailing, financial, and personal services.
Designation of Commercial Zone. The designation of the Commercial Zone is hereby established
under the following criteria:
A Commercial Zone shall be delineated as the geographic area as per the Official Zoning
Map of the Village of Bosque Farms dated August 28, 2006.
The governing body shall make the final determination, upon recommendation by the
Commission, regarding whether any particular property is within or outside of any Commercial
Zone.
The Village Zone Map shall be made available for public inspection at the Village Office.
As of August 5, 2015, all C-1 regulations shall take effect no later than January 5, 2016; and
all noncompliant uses, including any uses holding a certificate of noncompliance, shall cease
unless brought into compliance with these regulations. A possible extension of up to six
months may be granted at the Planning and Zoning Commission's discretion upon application
to the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer.
Application. A site development plan (SDP) shall be required for all new or redeveloped land use
in this zone district.
At a minimum, the SDP shall include the following:
A written statement explaining the purpose and intent of the development, and a
development phase schedule, if appropriate.
Boundaries and topography of the property to be developed.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 162/346
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(3)
(a)
(4)
(5)
D.
A site map, of sufficient size and scale, showing the proposed location, type, use and
size of all structures, setbacks, signs, lighting, on-site parking and loading areas, as
required in § 10-1-18 of this Section 10-1, on-site stormwater retention facilities,
landscaping, fencing, driveways, traffic and pedestrian circulation routes, and emergency
vehicle access. Other information to show compliance with Village ordinances may be
required.
Details of the engineering design of the on-site parking and on-site stormwater retention
facilities shall be included in the SDP.
Delineation of proposed dedications and easements for public rights-of-way.
An area map showing the location, type, use and size of all structures on adjacent
properties within 200 feet of the proposed development.
Written documentation showing that the New Mexico Department of Transportation has
been notified of the new use if accessing a New Mexico state highway, and its findings.
Deviation or changes from the site plan shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator/Officer for approval before the changes are implemented.
Permissive uses. Any of the following permissive uses are allowed in this zone district:
Banking and financial services.
Business and personal services.
Commercial kennels, veterinary hospitals, animal grooming parlors, or pet sales stores,
provided that:
All animals shall be retained in a manner that prevents escape of enclosed animals or
entry of other animals;
Animal quarters shall be designed to ensure safe, healthy, sanitary conditions for animals
on premises;
Animal quarters shall be maintained to discourage concentration and breeding of insects
and rodents;
Surface water discharge contamination shall be retained on site;
Animal waste shall not be allowed to accumulate in amounts that offend or cause a
noxious odor. Such material shall be removed within 10 days of official notification from
the Village of Bosque Farms;
Temporary on-site storage of animal waste shall be designed to prevent groundwater or
surface water contamination; and
A solid fence, as defined in § 10-1-4, to provide a visual barrier at least six feet high shall
be erected and maintained between the activity and all contiguous residential zone
districts.
Construction and maintenance contractors and building trades, including associated storage,
equipment sales and services, provided that:
A solid fence, as defined in § 10-1-4, to provide a visual barrier at least six feet high shall
be maintained between the activity and all contiguous residential zone districts.
Conventional dwelling units, provided that:
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 163/346
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(a)
(b)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(14)
(1)
(2)
E.
It complies with the definition of "dwelling unit" in § 10-1-4;
The minimum lot size shall be 3/4 of one acre (32,670 square feet);
Raising and management of livestock is excluded;
The dwelling setbacks shall comply with the regulations as set forth in § 10-1-5D;
Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit having both a dwelling and a business on the
same lot, or both a business and a dwelling in the same building on the lot; and
Only one dwelling unit is allowed per lot.
Food processing activities, in a building under 3,600 square feet, not including a
slaughterhouse, provided all state regulations and licensing information is provided to the
Village of Bosque Farms Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer.
Fireworks sales allowable in accordance with Section 5-5, Fireworks, of the Village Code.
Galleries and museums.
Gas stations and other retailers of bulk petroleum products, provided that:
Dry clean-up of spilled gas and other petroleum products is provided for; and
There is a spill prevention countermeasure control plan as regulated by EPA and NMED.
General and professional offices.
Indoor amusement facilities, provided Village ordinances for off-street parking and noise
regulations are followed.
Retail business establishments.
Pasture lands, provided that they are in accordance with § 10-1-5.
Self-storage mini-warehouses, provided that:
All storage is within a completely enclosed single-story structure not to exceed 12 feet in
height;
All stored items shall be enclosed within the structure;
A solid fence to provide a visual barrier at least six feet high, as defined in § 10-1-4, shall
be erected and maintained between the activity and any contiguous residential zone
districts; and
The site shall not exceed two acres (87,120 square feet) in size.
Conditional uses. Conditional uses as outlined in § 10-1-13 of this Section 10-1. All permissive
commercial uses shall also be permissible in conjunction with an approved conditional use.
Additional reasonable conditions may be required by the Commission as the situation warrants.
The following uses shall be allowed in this zone district only upon permit granted by the
Commission:
Amusement park, carnival, or circus, as provided in § 10-1-13.
Caretaker dwelling unit as provided in § 10-1-13, provided there is no other conventional
dwelling unit on the property.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 164/346
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(3)
(a)
[1]
(b)
(c)
(d)
(4)
[2]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(5)
Mobile home/manufactured home, provided it meets current installation requirements, or
recreational vehicles as a conditional use when used as temporary dwelling unit during
construction of a standard site-built dwelling unit or on-site assembly of a modular dwelling
unit, in accordance with § 10-1-5K and L and:
A development review/building permit shall be obtained within 30 days following issuance
of the conditional use permit;
Active and continuous construction shall begin within 90 days following issuance of the
conditional use permit;
The mobile home/manufactured home shall be removed at the expiration of the
conditional use permit; and
The recreational vehicle shall no longer be used as a residence after expiration of the
conditional use permit.
Auction house or lot for the purpose of allowing regular public sales on a site designated for
such use in which items of merchandise are sold to the highest bidder, excluding animals
and/or livestock of any type or nature, provided:
Storage and/or display areas. Storage and/or display areas shall not occupy more than
40% of the lot where the auctions are to take place;
Off-street parking. There shall be adequate off-street parking as specified in § 10-1-19.
Off-street parking within a reasonable distance shall be permitted, subject to approval of
the Planning and Zoning Commission, provided written guarantees are given that such
off-street parking shall continue to be available for the duration of the conditional use
auction permit. Off-street parking and traffic areas shall be clearly designated and
separated from the sales area so as not to create traffic or safety hazards, as required by
the applicant's safety engineer or qualified expert and reviewed and approved by the
Commission;[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Ingress and egress. Adequate and appropriate ingress and egress shall be provided to
and from the lot and/or area where the auction is to take place; and
Storage, display and items to be auctioned. The storage and/or display of items to be
auctioned shall be kept in an enclosed building or in an outside area with the construction
of a solid fence on all sides to provide a visual barrier at least six feet in height, as
defined in § 10-1-4. No stored materials shall be stacked or arranged above the height of
the screen wall or fence. The structure shall be erected and maintained between such
storage/display area and contiguous residential lots or a residential zone district, to be
approved by the Commission.
Flea markets, subject to the following regulations:
There shall be adequate off-street parking as specified in § 10-1-19;[2]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
The sale of animals is prohibited;
No merchandise intended for sale shall be stored on site after closing hours;
All tarps, tents, or sunshades shall be securely attached to prevent a safety hazard and
shall be removed at daily closing time;
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 165/346
(e)
(f)
(g)
(a)
(b)
(c)
[3]
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(6)
[4]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(7)
A site plan designed in accordance with the above requirements shall be submitted as
part of the approval process;
A solid fence to provide a visual barrier at least six feet high, as defined in § 10-1-4, shall
be erected and maintained between the activity and any contiguous residential zone
districts as per § 10-1-5G; and
All food vendors shall have a separate business license/registration with the Village of
Bosque Farms and show permit approval by the New Mexico Environment Department.
Mobile home/manufactured home sales lot, including, but not limited to, the sale of new, used
or consignment mobile/manufactured homes.
Separation requirements for display storage of mobile homes/manufactured homes shall
be at least eight feet from one another and at least 10 feet from all fencing to allow for
safety access. There shall be no dead-end passageways, and passageways will be a
minimum of 20 feet in width. Obstructions under any definition within passageways shall
not be allowed (25-4.3.1 NFPA Special Provisions, 1994, Life Safety Code);
A solid fence to provide a visual barrier at least six feet high, as defined in § 10-1-4, shall
be erected and maintained between the activity and any contiguous residential zone
districts;
On-site residential use is prohibited;
On-site customer parking shall be provided as specified in § 10-1-19;[3]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Parking of semi-tractor trailer rigs used for moving or transporting mobile
homes/manufactured homes shall be limited to two semi-tractor trailer rigs per mobile
home/manufactured home sales lot;
Internal and external repair of mobile home/manufactured home units on site shall be
limited to minor repair, and no major structural repairs or scrapping shall be allowed;
A mobile home/manufactured home may be used as an office, provided that it meets the
requirements as set forth in § 10-1-14 of this Section 10-1; and
The property shall be paved or surfaced with base course or gravel.
Vehicle sales/leasing, including, but not limited to, the sale or leasing of new, used or
consignment vehicles, recreational vehicles, trailers and agricultural equipment as defined in
§ 10-1-4, provided:
There shall be adequate off-street parking as specified in § 10-1-19;[4]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Each vehicle sales space shall require, at a minimum, the length and width of the vehicle
plus a two-foot access aisle around the perimeter of the vehicle;
Minimum setbacks from all rights-of-way and property lines for all parked, displayed or
stored vehicles shall be four feet;
A solid fence, to provide a visual barrier at least six feet high, as defined in § 10-1-4, shall
be maintained between the activity and contiguous residential zone districts;
Service of vehicles on site shall be limited to light repair. (See the definition of "vehicle
repair, light" in § 10-1-4.) Any other repairs shall be subject to the provisions of
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 166/346
(f)
(g)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(8)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(9)
(a)
(10)
Subsection C and E(8) of this § 10-1-11;
The property shall be paved or surfaced with base course or gravel; and
All vehicles must be operable within 30 days of arrival.
Vehicle service and/or commercial garages, to include collision, paint and body shops
(excluding tire shops and salvage or scrap facilities), provided that:
Any major repair work shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building;
Any minor repair work conducted outside of an enclosed building shall be on a concrete
pad and shielded by a visual barrier from street view;
A solid fence to provide a visual barrier at least six feet high, as defined in § 10-1-4, shall
be erected and maintained between the activity and any contiguous residential zone
districts;
Outdoor storage of not more than three vehicles per enclosed service bay awaiting repair
and/or delivery;
Provisions are made to adequately handle, contain and control all hazardous waste and
shall meet all EPA requirements;
All parking areas for customers and vehicles awaiting service shall be paved or surfaced
with base course or gravel;
Inoperable motor vehicles (as defined under § 10-1-4) shall not remain on the premises
for longer than 90 days unless proof of activity, including, but not limited to, invoices
dated within the preceding 10 days after the vehicle has been deemed inoperable or
vehicle parts have been ordered and have not been received, will be grounds to grant an
extension by the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer for an additional 30 days. No
more than two such extensions shall be granted on any motor vehicle; and
All miscellaneous materials and parts must be stored within an enclosed building.
Processing and manufacturing activities, fabrication and assembly activities, provided that:
Bulk storage of toxic substances or hazardous materials shall be above ground and
contained in a manner approved by the Fire Department and current FEMA;
All processing activities shall be carried out within a building and shall not produce offsite
impacts which would be disruptive to contiguous properties;
No activity is conducted outside;
Other conditions as may be required by the Commission are met; and
No equipment or process shall be used which creates a nuisance such as noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses,
off the premises. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be
used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off
the premises, or causes fluctuations in the line voltage off the premises;
Tire shops, provided that:
All work conducted outside of an enclosed building shall be on a concrete pad and
shielded by a visual barrier from street view;
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 167/346
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(a)
(b)
(11)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(a)
(10)
F.
A solid fence to provide a visual barrier at least six feet high, as defined in § 10-1-4, shall
be erected and maintained between the activity and any contiguous residential zone
districts;
All tires, including new, used and scrap tires, must be stored entirely within an enclosed
building or accessory structure [see § 10-1-5R(3)];
Display of tires shall be limited to not more than four sets of tires (four tires per set) to be
displayed outside of the building during hours of operation and must be brought back
inside at the close of business;
The owner/operator must provide the Village with a copy of a contact for licensed tire
disposal with an approved tire disposal service through the New Mexico Environment
Department or show registration as a scrap tire hauler if the generator will self-haul in
accordance with Section 50 of the New Mexico Recycling, Illegal Dumping and Scrap
Tire Management Rule (RIDSTMR) and be able to provide manifests as requested by the
Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer; and
The property shall be paved or surfaced with base course or gravel;
Warehousing operations, provided the business is conducted entirely inside a building or
within an area enclosed on all sides by a solid fence to provide a visual barrier at least six feet
high, as defined in § 10-1-4, provided:
Bulk storage of toxic substances or hazardous materials shall be above ground and
contained in a manner approved by the Fire Department and FEMA; and
There shall be no off-site impacts that are disruptive to contiguous properties.
Special use permits. A special use permit shall be authorized and established as per § 10-1-14 of
this Section 10-1 only for the following uses as designated by the governing body:
Wireless cell phone tower as per § 10-1-8D(1).
Mobile home/manufactured home park as per § 10-1-8D(2).
Planned residential development as per § 10-1-8D(3).
Animal sanctuary/shelter as per § 10-1-8D(4).
Residential care/assisted-living facility as per § 10-1-8D(5).
Fairgrounds, baseball park complex, stadium and recreation complex.
Food processing, except a slaughterhouse, which requires an area of more than 3,600 square
feet.
Fuel wholesalers and storage (gasoline, liquefied petroleum), provided that no facilities shall
be within 400 feet of any lot in residential use unless sufficient blast, explosion, or fire
confinement structures are installed according to the appropriate state regulatory agencies.
Hospital, sanitarium, and residential treatment centers.
Manufacturing, compounding, processing activities that require any work conducted outside,
assembling or treatment of products made from raw or processed materials, provided:
They comply with current environmental pollution standards;
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 168/346
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(c)
(11)
Bulk storage of toxic substances or hazardous materials shall be above ground and
contained in a manner approved by the Fire Department and FEMA;
There shall be no off-site impacts that are disruptive to contiguous properties;
Other conditions as may be required by the Commission and/or governing body are met;
and
No equipment or process shall be used which creates a nuisance such as noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses,
off the premises. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be
used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off
the premises, or causes fluctuations in the line voltage off the premises.
Senior housing development.
[Added 8-18-2016]
Intent. This use provides for single-family dwellings, townhouses and uses incidental
thereto on smaller lot sizes geared to senior living in compliance with the Department of
Housing and Urban Development, Housing for Older Persons Act 1995, 42 U.S.C.
§ 3501. It is the intent of this subsection to permit eligible persons to live in developments
that are safe, attractive and provide opportunities for exercise, recreation and social
activities.
Development land requirements. Development may be established in a C-1 Zone on a
tract of land containing four or more acres and shall follow the requirements for a major
subdivision in the Village of Bosque Farms § 10-2, Land Subdivision Regulations, and
§ 10-1-18, Development review/flood hazard protection, of this section. Developments
shall not be closer than 200 feet from State HWY 47.
Application.
The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall, in conjunction with the Planning and
Zoning Commission, develop an application for any proposed senior housing
development. That application may include, among other things, a site map, utilities,
homeowner association (HOA) agreements, proposed landscaping, and any other
materials which either the Administrator or the Commission believe to be important
to the consideration of the proposed development. Upon the completion of the
application, the Administrator shall transmit the application to the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall begin its review of the application within
60 days of receiving the application from the Administrator. The Commission shall
have the ability to request additional information from the applicant, to approve,
reject and/or to require amendments to the proposed development or its HOA
agreement as a condition of its approval of the application. Upon a majority vote
approving the proposed development, the Commission shall transmit the application
to the governing body.
The governing body shall begin its review of the application within 60 days of
receiving the application from the Commission. The governing body shall have the
discretion to approve or reject the proposed development, or to remand the
application to the Commission for further consideration.
The governing body may, by resolution, assess a fee for the consideration of any
application for a senior housing development.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 169/346
(d)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(e)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(f)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(g)
[a]
[1]
(h)
[1]
(i)
[1]
(j)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(k)
Number of units. The number of dwelling units permitted in a senior housing development
is determined by dividing the site area, minus street and front utility/sidewalk easement,
by the minimum lot size permitted to the nearest whole number. The minimum lot size to
be used for determining the number of dwelling units shall be 4,500 square feet.
Common area. A minimum of 500 square feet per lot shall be set aside as common area.
Certain portions of drainage control areas may be accepted as detached open space if
approved by Planning and Zoning Commission. Streets shall not count as common area.
"Common areas" may include, but are not limited to:
Active and passive outdoor recreation.
Botanical parks.
Lakes, ponds, floodwater storage areas, and other public facilities for handling
floodwater.
Structures and facilities incidental to the above uses.
Permissive lot uses:
One conventional dwelling per lot.
Accessory uses and structures.
Site built or modular homes of a uniform design.
Nonpermissive lot uses:
Hobby kennels.
Agricultural animal keeping.
Front yard parking of recreational vehicles.
Mobile homes/manufactured homes.
Conditional uses:
Conditional use permits.
Home occupations in accordance with § 10-1-13L of this Section shall require
approval from either Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer or the
Commission.
Lot size:
Lots shall be a minimum of 4,500 square feet with a minimum lot width of 40 feet.
Dwelling size:
There shall be a minimum of 864 square feet per dwelling unit.
Setbacks:
There shall be a front yard setback of not less than 25 feet;
There shall be a ten-foot side setback on the street side of corner lots;
Side yard setbacks which are interior, i.e., measured from side lot lines which are not
adjacent to streets, shall be one of the following:
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 170/346
[a]
[b]
[c]
[4]
(l)
(m)
(n)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
(o)
(1)
(2)
G.
Not less than five feet on each side.
There shall be one side yard setback of not less than 10 feet on one side. The
other side yard setback may be eliminated and the abutting lot's contiguous side
yard setback may also be eliminated sharing a common wall such as the case in
a townhouse.
In all cases there shall be 10 feet between nonadjacent dwellings.
There shall be a rear yard setback of no less than 10 feet.
Permeable open space. Permeable open space shall be provided on site at 800 square
feet per lot.
Streets. Streets shall meet standards required by § 10-2, Land Subdivision Regulations,
regardless of whether they will be dedicated to the Village of Bosque Farms or they are
to remain private.
Utilities. All utility lines providing electric and telecommunication services within the
senior housing development shall be placed underground. Individual utility service meters
shall be placed in the front portion of a dwelling space and shall be visible and accessible
for monitoring purposes. All water and sanitary sewer systems shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with Village of Bosque Farms ordinances.
Homeowners' associations and deed restrictions.
HOAs shall be established in compliance with the Homeowner Association Act
NMSA 1978, §§ 47-16-1 to 47-16-15, and subject to such additional or amended
terms as approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, the Planning and
Zoning Commission and the governing body.
Deed restrictions shall be referenced on the subdivision plat and recorded with the
Valencia County Clerk's office.
HOAs shall require individual lot owners and the members of the homeowners'
association to be jointly and severally liable for maintenance of the senior housing
development.
The recorded deed restrictions may not be amended or repealed without the
Village's prior written approval.
The Municipal Judge of the Village of Bosque Farms shall not have jurisdiction to
enforce disputes regarding the provisions of this subsection.
Regulated business.
Application. Regulated businesses shall apply on prescribed forms to the Planning and
Zoning Administrator/Officer at least 20 days prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission
meeting date when the application will be considered. Each application for a regulated
business shall be accompanied by a site development plan as described in Subsection C of
this § 10-1-11. (See also Subsection H.) Submission of inaccurate information with an
application is grounds for denial.
Preliminary public meeting. The Commission shall hold a public meeting at which there will be
a hearing to evaluate the regulated business application and shall submit its recommendation
in writing to the governing body. Notice of the public meeting shall be given in accordance
with the Open Meetings Act (NMSA 1978, §§ 10-15-1 to 10-15-4) at least 15 days prior to
said meeting.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 171/346
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
H.
Public notification. The applicant shall post and maintain one or more signs on the premises,
as provided and where instructed by the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer, at least
15 days prior to the date of the Commission and governing body meetings at which the
application will be heard.
Commission recommendation. All applications for a regulated business shall first be reviewed
by the Commission, which shall submit a written recommendation concerning the application
to the governing body. If the Commission fails to make such a written recommendation to the
governing body within 45 days after receipt thereof, then the governing body shall act upon
said application without a recommendation by the Commission.
Final public hearing. The governing body shall conduct a public hearing at which all parties in
interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notification of the time and place
of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with the Open Meetings Act (NMSA 1978,
§§ 10-15-1 to 10-15-4) at least 15 days prior to the hearing. The notice of public meeting
published 15 days before the Commission meeting shall be considered sufficient notice if it
also has included the time and place of the public hearing to be held by the governing body.
Regulated business types. The following uses shall be considered regulated businesses.
Additional reasonable requirements may be required by the Commission or governing body as the
situation warrants:
"Adult entertainment establishment" includes but is not limited to an adult bookstore, adult sex
accessories/products or services, adult cabaret, adult photo amusement establishment, adult
photo studio, adult theater, adult video arcade, adult body oil or lotion demonstration parlors,
strip clubs or gentlemen's clubs.
No person under 18 years of age may enter the business even if he is accompanied by
an adult.
All clerks/personnel shall be 18 years of age or older.
The establishment may not display any form of advertising for adult-oriented products or
services in view of the public, with the exception of any on-site sign that contains the
name of a business for the purpose of identifying the business.
If the applicant is an individual, the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer shall obtain
the current residence address of the applicant, together with the applicant's social
security number. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall disclose the names
of all partners. If the applicant is a corporation, the applicant shall disclose the state of
incorporation, the date of incorporation, the name and address sufficient for service of
process of the registered agent within New Mexico and of each officer and director of the
corporation. Further, the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer shall obtain the social
security number of each officer or director of the corporation, it being the intention of this
provision that the social security number shall be utilized to assist in obtaining
background information on the officers and directors of the corporation. If the applicant is
other than an individual, the applicant shall name a managing agent and provide that
person's address and social security number. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant
to pay any applicable fees on background checks.
Evidence that the owner, registered agent, resident manager or any officer or director of
any corporation has been convicted or pled guilty to any felony or misdemeanor involving
a crime of moral turpitude, including, but not limited to, sex offenses or violation of child
pornography laws or other laws restricting or regulating the dissemination of adultoriented
material within five years preceding the date of this application will result in
denial of the application.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 172/346
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(5)
"Body art/modification establishment" includes but is not limited to a tattoo shop/parlor,
scarification shop/parlor and body piercing shop/parlor.
Prior to receiving initial and annual renewal of a business license for a body
art/modification establishment, each business owner must provide evidence to the
Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer that the body art establishment successfully
passed a state inspection pursuant to the Body Art Safe Practices Act (NMSA 1978,
§ 61-17B-1 et seq.) during the preceding calendar year. In the event that the body art
establishment has not been inspected by the state through no fault of the business
owner, the owner may apply to the Village for a thirty-day extension of time, allowing the
business to operate temporarily until an inspection can be performed. If the body art
establishment fails to successfully pass a state board inspection, the body art
establishment shall suspend body art activities until it passes a reinspection.
Administering body art on any person 18 years of age or under is prohibited.
Proof of age will be shown by a government-issued photo identification accompanied by
at least one other government-issued document showing proof of age, such as a birth
certificate.
"Medical cannabis establishment" includes but is not limited to any facility, building, space, or
grounds licensed for the production, possession, testing, manufacturing, or distribution of
cannabis, concentrates, or cannabis-derived products. Such establishments must be
compliant with NMAC Title 7, Chapter 34, Medical Use of Cannabis, and all other current
state and local regulations.
"Smoke shop" includes but is not limited to a head shop, hookah bar, hookah lounge,
herbal/tobacco smoke shop or vapor dealer.
No person under 18 years of age may enter the business even if he is accompanied by
an adult.
All clerks/personnel shall be 18 years of age or older.
No products may be sold by means of self-service or vending machine assistance.
Smoke shops may not display any form of advertising for tobacco products in visible
locations, with the exception of any on-site sign that contains the name of a business that
lawfully sells tobacco products that have been placed at or upon the business premises
for the purpose of identifying the business.
Businesses shall not distribute free tobacco products or promotional items.
Businesses shall not sell or offer for sale cigarettes or other tobacco or smoking products
not in the original packaging provided by the manufacturer and with all required health
warnings.
Businesses must comply with all state and federal laws and regulations.
No smoking shall be permitted inside the shop.
"Check cashing/payday loan establishment" includes but is not limited to cash advances,
payday advances, payday loans, title loans, and check cashing establishments.
Establishments shall comply with all federal and state regulations.
Establishments may not display any form of advertising for loan or check cashing
services in visible locations, with the exception of any on-site sign that contains the name
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 173/346
(a)
(b)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(8)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(9)
(a)
(b)
(10)
of a business that lawfully conducts loans or check cashing services that has been
placed at or upon the business premises for the purpose of identifying the business.
Bail bonds:
Shall comply with all federal and state regulations.
May not display any form of advertising bail bond services in visible locations, with the
exception of any on-site sign that contains the name of a business that lawfully conducts
bail bond services that has been placed at or upon the business premises for the
purpose of identifying the business.
Pawn brokers:
Shall comply with all federal and state regulations.
May not display any form of advertising for pawn broker services in visible locations, with
the exception of any on-site sign that contains the name of a business that lawfully
conducts pawn broker services that has been placed at or upon the business premises
for the purpose of identifying the business.
Fortune tellers:
Shall comply with all federal and state regulations.
May not display any form of advertising for fortune telling services in visible locations,
with the exception of any on-site sign that contains the name of a business that lawfully
conducts fortune telling services that has been placed at or upon the business premises
for the purpose of identifying the business.
"Metal intake/recycling center" includes but is not limited to recycling centers, aluminum
transfers, bottle exchanges, or scrap metal dealers.
Site fencing. A solid fence at least six feet in height, as defined in § 10-1-4, with
exception to the front setback area being no taller than four feet in height, shall be
erected on all perimeters.
Parking of semi-tractor trailer rigs used for moving or transporting materials shall be
limited to two units and must be stored out of public view.
A maximum of three roll-off storage bins will be allowed on the property and must be
stored out of public view.
Any and all salvage or scrap material will be unloaded on an appropriate concrete pad or
the inside of the building and stored out of public view.
Centers shall comply with all federal and state requirements and regulations.
"Salvage or scrap facility" includes but is not limited to salvage yards, scrap yards, wrecking
yards, junkyards, dismantlers, or any entity in the business of outdoor storage or deposit for
storing, keeping, processing, buying or selling disused vehicles, disused machinery or other
disused goods or materials for resale.
[Amended 10-20-2016]
All vehicle parking areas for customers shall be paved or surfaced with base course.
All areas where salvage containing EPA-regulated fluids are stored must be paved.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 174/346
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
I.
(1)
(2)
J.
Each vehicle space shall require at a minimum the length and width of the vehicle plus a
two-foot access aisle around the perimeter of the vehicle.
Minimum setbacks from all rights-of-way and property lines for all parked, displayed or
stored vehicles shall be four feet.
Solid fence, to provide a visual barrier at least six feet high as defined in § 10-1-4, shall
be maintained between the activity and contiguous residential zone districts.
Provisions are made to adequately handle, contain and control all hazardous waste and
shall meet all EPA requirements.
All miscellaneous materials and parts must be stored within an enclosed building.
Other conditions as may be required by the Commission. As of November 1, 2016, all
regulations for § 10-1-11H(10) shall be complied with no later than May 1, 2017; and all
noncompliant uses, including any uses holding a certificate of noncompliance, shall
cease unless brought into compliance with these regulations. A possible extension of up
to six months may be granted at the Planning and Zoning Commission's discretion upon
application to the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer.
Regulated business requirements. Anti-skid-row regulations shall apply to all regulated businesses
in an effort to disperse businesses evenly across the Village in order to avoid a high-density area,
or skid row effect. All regulated businesses shall comply with the distance requirements listed
below (See also § 10-1-11G.):
Shall be at a location no closer than 1,000 feet along Bosque Farms Boulevard to another
regulated business.
Shall be at a location no closer than a one-thousand-foot radius from a school property line
(universities, community colleges, high schools, junior high schools, elementary schools,
nursery schools).
Shall be at a location no closer than a one-thousand-foot radius from state-licensed child-care
centers and/or family day-care facilities.
Shall be at a location no closer than a one-thousand-foot radius from youth-frequented
locations, including, but not limited to, religious institutions, public libraries, public parks,
bowling alleys, electric-game centers, pool and billiard halls, laser-tag or paint ball facilities.
Shall have a three-hundred-fifty-foot setback between any activity conducted by the salvage
or scrap facility, including any activity defined in Subsection H(10) and the lot line of any
residentially zoned lot or lot in residential use regardless of zoning.
[Amended 10-20-2016]
Shall pay a yearly regulated business licensing fee as per Section 5-1, Business Registration
or License.
Special provisions. The following provisions shall apply to all commercially zoned properties:
Any development plans with proposed infrastructure improvements such as streets,
sidewalks, and water and sewer utilities shall be subject to the requirement for subdivision
approval as set forth in the Section 10-2, Subdivision Regulations, of the Village Code. In
addition, any subdivision of land shall be subject to the provisions of Section 10-2,
Subdivision Regulations.
Landscaping shall be strongly encouraged on all new and existing development in this zone
district. Visually attractive trees and shrubs should be placed along Bosque Farms Boulevard
(NMSH 47) to enhance and soften the streetscape, and landscaping is encouraged to be
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 175/346
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(1)
(2)
K.
placed as buffers along the perimeter of the C-1 Zone District and contiguous residential
zones.
No development shall divert or channel stormwater runoff to contiguous properties. To the
extent possible, direct precipitation shall be retained on site. It shall be strongly encouraged
that all stormwater retention basins will be landscaped with appropriate plantings to withstand
excess water and to aid in the filtration of polluted runoff.
Exterior lighting in this zone district shall be controlled to avoid spillover of light and glare on
operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians, and land uses in the proximity of the light source.
Furthermore, in order to preserve and enhance the community's natural resource of dark
skies, all outdoor night lighting fixtures shall be effectively shielded to prevent direct or
reflected light into the sky.
All outdoor storage shall be enclosed on all sides by a solid fence at least six feet high, as
defined in § 10-1-4. No stored materials shall be stacked or arranged above the height of the
screen wall or fence.
There shall be no storage within setback areas as defined in § 10-1-5D; or, alternatively, there
shall be designated emergency access.
No display and storage areas shall impose an undue burden upon police, fire or other
emergency response officials or otherwise provide an unsafe or hazardous environment, and
display and storage areas must allow free access for equipment.
All display and storage areas shall be kept weed, refuse and vermin free and shall not present
a hazard to customers or the health, safety and welfare of the Village.
All display shall be set back from the street and public right-of-way lines so as not to obstruct
pedestrian or vehicle traffic, allowing adequate visibility consistent with § 10-1-5O.
Adequate refuse containers shall be provided to control litter.
Adequate sanitary facilities (rest rooms), either portable or permanent, shall be provided on
site.
A list of hazardous materials or explosives that are stored in bulk on the property, with such
storage areas clearly marked on the map, shall be provided to the Fire Chief and the
floodplain administrator.
No use will be allowed which will create dangerous, injurious, noxious, or other conditions that
will pose a threat to public health, safety and welfare. No adverse impact on surrounding
property will be allowed.
All businesses shall pay a business registration fee within 10 days following issuance of such
permit; and shall maintain a current state Taxation and Revenue number and state licensing
and certification if applicable to the type of business conducted.
There shall be adequate, legal access, which may require a New Mexico Department of
Transportation access permit for development on New Mexico Highway 47.
Setbacks, lot size and open space. The minimum lot size for this zone district shall be a minimum
of 1/4 of one acre (10,890 square feet) and shall meet the following requirements:
Development shall be connected to the Village water and wastewater systems;
There shall be adequate stormwater retention as specified in § 10-1-5N;
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 176/346
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
L.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
There shall be adequate off-street parking as specified in § 10-1-19;
There shall be setbacks as required in § 10-1-5D;
There shall be no adverse impact created upon contiguous properties;
In cases where both water and wastewater system connections are not established, the
minimum lot size shall be 3/4 of one acre (32,670 square feet), with on-site stormwater
retention; and
Site development plans are required for all new development in this zone district.
Exceptions. Any and all other business activities and/or the like of which are not covered in this
Section 10-1 shall be disallowed except by completing and filing a business exception permit
which will be presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission for determination. Permits may or
may not be allowed after consideration of this Section 10-1 and the Comprehensive Land Use
Plan.
§ 10-1-12. WPOZ Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone.
Intent. This section is intended to provide supplemental land use and development regulations in
an area designated to protect the groundwater source of municipal water supply wells from
contamination originating from human activities. Specifically, regulations shall be imposed on the
surface and subsurface area surrounding a municipal water supply well, through which
contaminants are likely to move toward and reach such water well.
Designation of overlay zone. The designation of one or more Wellhead Protection Overlay Zones
is hereby established under the following criteria:
A Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone shall be delineated as a geographic area within a onethousand-
foot radius around each municipal water supply wellhead, as recommended by the
New Mexico Environment Department in the State Wellhead Protection Program.
An alternative delineation of the Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone may be used, provided it
is based on an acceptable hydrogeologic evaluation and a validated groundwater flow model.
The governing body shall determine whether any particular property is within or outside of any
Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone.
Wellhead Protection Overlay Zones shall be delineated on the Village Zone Map, which shall
be available for public inspection at the Village Office.
In the event that a Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone lies partially or wholly outside the
municipal corporate limits, extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be imposed as authorized by NMSA
1978, § 3-27-3. Intergovernmental arrangements with another governmental entity, within
whose jurisdiction the Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone lies, may be executed through a
joint powers agreement, as authorized by NMSA 1978, §§ 11-1-1 to 11-1-7, for the purposes
of coordinated planning and administration of this section.
Conditional uses. A conditional use permit shall be granted by the Village of Bosque Farms and
shall be either permanent or renewable, depending upon the requirements and procedures for
conditional uses as specified by this Section 10-1, as follows:
All nonresidential land activities located within the Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone; and
All residential land uses with on-site liquid waste disposal systems located within the
Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 177/346
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
E.
Prohibited uses. Businesses, materials and activities of the following types shall not be allowed
within Wellhead Protection Overlay Zones:
Solid waste disposal, including transfer stations.
Underground storage tanks.
Uncontained storage of road salt or other deicing materials.
Industrial uses which discharge contact-type process waters on-site.
Commercial animal feedlots.
Mining activities, including sand and gravel excavation.
Automotive fueling, maintenance, repair, and salvage activities.
Collection, storage, processing, or disposal of hazardous materials.
Commercial septage disposal sites.
Liquid petroleum product pipelines.
Trucking and bus terminals.
Dry cleaning business.
Electrical, electronic manufacturing facilities.
Metal plating, finishing, or fabricating facilities.
Chemical processing or storage facilities.
Wood preserving or treating facilities.
Junk, scrap, or salvage yards.
Irrigated nursery or greenhouse stock.
Injection wells, dry wells, or sumps.
Special conditions. The following conditions apply to all uses within the Wellhead Protection
Overlay Zone:
In addition to the prohibitions set forth in this section, any use involving a discharge to
groundwater is not allowed in this zone unless the discharge is demonstrated to cause no
contamination of the receiving groundwater.
On-site liquid waste disposal systems shall be subject to periodic inspection to determine
compliance with the New Mexico Liquid Waste Disposal Regulations.
Use of pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, manures, and other potentially dangerous leachable
substances shall be minimized, and bulk storage of these substances shall be prohibited.
The minimum lot size for any use with an on-site liquid waste disposal system shall be one
acre.
Proposals for nonresidential development in this zone shall include a site plan indicating:
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 178/346
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
F.
(1)
G.
Any subsurface disposal of waste material;
Proposed earth-moving operations which alter slope or composition of soil;
Proposed methods of conveying water from paved surfaces; and
Any proposed diversion of surface water or groundwater.
Every abandoned well shall be filled and plugged with such materials and in such manner to
prevent contamination from entering the groundwater through the abandoned well according
to state regulations.
All facilities shall adhere to appropriate state and federal standards for storage, handling, and
disposal of any hazardous waste material.
An acceptable contingency plan for all facilities with hazardous materials on site shall prepare
an acceptable contingency plan preventing hazardous materials from contaminating the
underlying aquifer should floods, fire, or other natural catastrophes, equipment failure or
release occur.
For fire control, plans shall include but not be limited to a safe fire-fighting procedure, a fireretarding
system, effective containment of any liquid runoff, and provide for dealing safely with
any other health and technical hazards that may be encountered by disaster control
personnel in combating fire. Hazards to be considered are pipes, liquids, chemicals, or open
flames in the immediate vicinity.
For any release occurring, the owner and/or operator shall report all incidents involving liquid
or chemical material to the Village Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer.
Substantial modification.
Substantial modification shall be supported by scientifically based studies from a qualified
source.
Any facility involving the collection, handling, manufacture, use, storage, transfer or disposal
of any hazardous solid or liquid material or wastes shall have a secondary containment
system which is easily inspected and whose purpose is to intercept any leak or release from
the primary containment vessel or structure.
Adherence to the Spill Prevention Countermeasure Control (SPCC) Regulations, where
applicable, is required.
Underground tanks or buried pipes carrying hazardous materials shall have double walls and
inspectable sumps.
Open liquid waste ponds containing hazardous materials shall not be permitted without a
secondary containment system.
Storage of petroleum products in quantities exceeding 100 gallons at one locality in one tank
or series of tanks shall be in elevated tanks; such tanks shall have a secondary containment
system.
Administration. Primary responsibility for administering this section shall be assigned to the
Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer and Public Utilities Director, who shall be assisted by
other municipal employees as appropriate. The following duties shall be performed by the
Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer within the Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone:
Maintain a special file for those conditional uses within the Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone;
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 179/346
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
Maintain a map-based inventory of all land use activities, including septic tanks, underground
storage tanks, and all other water wells, public and private, active and abandoned, within the
Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone;
Conduct on-site inspections as necessary to enforce the provisions of this section;
Develop and maintain a contingency plan for the provision of alternate drinking water supplies
in the event of contamination at a municipal water supply well; and
Prepare and present an annual report during the first quarter to the governing body for the
purpose of summarizing the status of land use activities within the Wellhead Protection
Overlay Zone and any actions taken, or in the progress, by the Village of Bosque Farms in
carrying out the provisions of this section. Following acceptance of such annual report by the
governing body, a copy of such annual report shall be transmitted to the appropriate staff of
the New Mexico Environment Department.
§ 10-1-13. Conditional use procedures.
Permit required. No conditional use shall be established in any zone district except upon permit
issued by the Commission, which shall be guided in making a decision by the criteria set forth in
this section. Conditional use permits (CUPs) shall apply only to the property that was granted the
CUP and are not transferable to another site. Any person seeking a conditional use permit shall
provide to the Commission such information as it may reasonably require to determine whether
the grant of the requested conditional use permit is consistent with the intent and purpose of this
Section 10-1. Any change in the terms and/or conditions shall require reapplication.
Application. Any request for a conditional use permit shall be submitted with the filing fee on an
application obtainable at the Village offices. Any landowner wishing to apply for a CUP that is
currently held by a lessee for the same use may have the filing fee waived until January 5, 2016.
The Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer shall transmit the application and any
supplementary information to the Commission for review and consideration at the next regular
Commission meeting scheduled at least 20 days after the completed application is received by the
Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer.
Public notification. The applicant shall post and maintain one or more signs on the premises, as
provided and where instructed by the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer, at least 15 days
prior to the date of the Commission meeting at which the conditional use permit application will be
heard or 15 days prior to the home occupation permit being approved by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator/Officer.
Guidelines. In considering an application for a conditional use permit, the Commission shall not
grant any conditional use permit unless satisfactory provision and arrangement has been made
concerning the following minimum guidelines, where applicable:
Ingress and egress to the property and proposed structures thereon, with particular reference
to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in
case of fire or catastrophe; written documentation showing that the New Mexico Department
of Transportation has been notified of the new use, if accessing Bosque Farms Boulevard
(NMSH 47);
Off-street parking and loading areas where required, with particular attention to refuse and
service areas;
Public and private utilities, with reference to locations, availability, and compatibility;
The noise, glare, odor, or economic effects of the conditional use on adjoining properties;
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 180/346
(5)
(6)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
H.
I.
J.
K.
General compatibility with adjacent properties and other property in the district; and
All uses with a conditional use permit shall comply with the regulations of the New Mexico
Environment Department, if applicable.
Denial or withdrawal of permit.
If any conditional use permit is denied, the Commission shall state in writing the reason for
denial.
Any of the following reasons shall be cause for withdrawal by the Commission of a conditional
use permit (as applicable):
Misrepresentation of information stated on the permit application or presented before the
Commission;
Violating any of the limits or restrictions stated on the permit application; and
Applicants who do not bring in the required documentation relating to any part of this
section within 30 days.
Violation and/or breach of the conditional use permit shall be heard by the Commission at the next
regularly scheduled meeting after the violation is made known to it. Violation and/or breach of any
provision may result in termination of the conditional use permit. Knowingly violating any of this
section is punishable by a fine of up to $500 per day.
Reevaluation. Where there has been significant change in the physical extent, operations, or
character of a permitted conditional use, the Commission may require a reevaluation of the
conditional use permit. Significant change shall be determined by the Commission, based on a
review of the conditional use permit.
Expiration. Conditional use permits shall be either permanent or renewable.
Permanent conditional uses may be granted to landowner on a permanent basis, but shall
comply with Subsection H(3).
Renewable conditional uses may be granted to a landowner or business operator and shall
be approved for a specified duration at the Commissioners' discretion.
If the rights and privileges granted under the conditional use permit have not been used for a
period of one year, or if, after the use has begun, it ceases for a period of one year as
determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer, there shall be an automatic
expiration of the conditional use permit.
Noncompliance with any special restriction or requirement after 30 days following the date of
the permit, or a stated effective date on the permit, shall render the permit null and void.
Renewable conditional use. Thirty days prior to expiration, the permit shall be subject to review
and possible extension by the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer, if no changes have been
made to the original application or the currently approved conditional use permit. If there are
changes, the application shall be forwarded to the Commission and shall be processed in the
same manner as the original application.
Special requirements. For any conditional use permit, the Commission may establish special
restrictions or requirements, and the reasons for such restrictions or requirements shall be clearly
stated in writing on the conditional use permit.
Additional requirements. All recipients of a conditional use permit for a business or home
occupation shall pay a business registration fee within 10 days following the issuance of such
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 181/346
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
[1]
(10)
L.
permit. All recipients of a conditional use permit shall maintain a current State Taxation and
Revenue number and state licensing and certification, if applicable to the type of business
conducted.
Home occupations. A conditional use permit for a home occupation shall be either permanent or
renewable and may be issued by the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer or Commission
subject to the following requirements. If a home occupation permit meets all the following
requirements, it may be approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer. Any
deviations from the following requirements will require approval from the Planning and Zoning
Commission. In either case, the posting of the sign will be required by the applicant as per
Subsection C of this § 10-1-13.
No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in the
home occupation. Allowances shall be made for non-family employees not working on the
premises of the home occupation to visit the premises, provided such employees'
responsibilities are identified and the frequency of daily trips made to the premises of the
home occupation is stated. Non-family member employees shall not report for work at the
home occupation premises;
The use of the dwelling unit for a home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate
to its principal use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than 25% of the
floor area of such dwelling unit, or more than 600 square feet of an accessory building,
contiguous and partitioned, shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation;
There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other
visible evidence of the conduct of a home occupation, other than one sign, not to exceed five
square feet, as regulated by this Section 10-1 [see § 10-1-20D(9)];
There shall be no sales in connection with a home occupation that would disrupt the
residential nature of the district;
No traffic shall be generated by a home occupation in greater volumes than would normally
be expected in a residential neighborhood;
No equipment or process shall be used in a home occupation which creates a nuisance such
as noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal
senses, off the premises. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall
be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the
premises, or causes fluctuations in the line voltage off the premises;
A maximum of two service vehicles are allowed if one is stored in an enclosed building;
Upon the approval of a conditional use permit for a home occupation by the Commission, a
copy of such permit, along with any supplemental documentation, shall be provided to the
applicant. The Commission shall ascertain that all limits and restrictions are clear to the
applicant at the time of permit approval;
A list of hazardous materials or explosives that are stored in bulk on the property, which are
used in the home occupation, with such storage areas clearly marked on the map, shall be
provided to the Fire Chief and the floodplain administrator; and
No use will be allowed which will create dangerous, injurious, noxious, or other conditions that
will pose a threat to public health, safety and welfare. No adverse impact on surrounding
property will be allowed.[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection L(11), regarding business registration fees, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Section
1-1).
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 182/346
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
M. Bed-and-breakfasts.
Zoning requirements. A bed-and-breakfast establishment is permitted (with a conditional use
permit) only in C-1, R-1 and A-R Zone Districts. The minimum lot size in the R-1 Zone District
shall be 3/4 of one acre (32,670 square feet), and the minimum lot size in the A-R Zone
District shall be two acres (87,120 square feet). Bed-and-breakfast establishments are
prohibited in all other zone districts. A bed-and-breakfast will only be allowed on Village
streets designated as "collector" streets and on "local" streets if all property owners within 100
feet are in agreement.
Permits/Licenses required. No bed-and-breakfast use shall be lawfully established without
first obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of this Section 10-1.
Additionally, before issuance of a conditional use permit, an applicant shall show satisfactory
written proof that the property has been inspected and approved by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator/Officer for compliance with these regulations, and the Health Department, and
that all required licenses have been issued by the State of New Mexico. The facility shall
comply with all applicable fire, health and safety codes.
Accessory use. A bed-and-breakfast facility shall be accessory to the use of a property as a
single-family residential home. This means that the individual or family who operates the
facility shall also occupy the house as his/her primary residence.
Maximum size. Bed-and-breakfast facilities are limited to a maximum of four guest rooms
available for rent to guests. The bed-and-breakfast room(s) shall occupy no more than a total
of 25% of the dwelling unit floor area. All guest rooms shall be contained within the principal
structure. No residence shall be utilized for a bed-and-breakfast operation unless there are at
least two exits to the outdoors from such premises. Rooms utilized for sleeping shall have a
minimum size of 100 square feet for two occupants, with an additional 30 square feet for each
additional occupant, to a maximum of four occupants per room.
Lighting. Lighting shall be provided and shall be kept to a contiguous, compact and welldefined
area between the residential structure and the parking area. Any additional exterior
lighting for the bed-and-breakfast is prohibited.
Parking. All parking, whether for guests, property owners, employees, or invitees, shall be onsite.
No parking shall be allowed on any public streets or roads. One off-street parking space
per room to be rented shall be provided, in addition to the owner's vehicles. Tandem parking
is allowed; however, not more than two cars per lane shall be allowed.
Signage. Bed-and-breakfast establishments are allowed an identification sign not exceeding
five square feet in size. The signs shall be located on site as per § 10-1-20D.
Appearance. Residential structures may be remodeled for the development of a bed-andbreakfast
facility. However, structural alterations may not be made which prevent the structure
from being used as a residence in the future. Internal or external changes which will make the
dwelling appear less residential in nature or function are not allowed. Examples of such
alterations include paving of required setbacks and commercial-type exterior lighting. The
kitchen shall not be remodeled into a commercial kitchen; however, commercial-grade
appliances may be allowed as recommended by NMED.
Sewer and water hookup. The residence shall be connected to the Village sewer and water
systems.
Smoke alarms. Smoke alarms shall be hard-wired (not battery-operated), installed and
maintained in each room designated for guest occupancy.
Fire extinguisher. A minimum 1A:10 BC portable fire extinguisher shall be provided in the
kitchen of the bed-and-breakfast residence.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 183/346
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
Escape window. Each guest room in the bed-and-breakfast residence shall be provided with
an escape window as defined in the State Building Code.
Employees. A bed-and-breakfast establishment shall have no employees.
Length of stay. No guest shall stay in the facility for more than 14 days within any thirty-day
period.
Guest log book. All bed-and-breakfast facilities shall maintain a guest log for all paying guests
that shall include the names and home addresses of guests, guest license plate numbers if
traveling by automobile, dates of stay, and the room number of each guest. It shall be
unlawful for any person to make false statements in said register. No page of the register may
be disposed of until three years after the date of the most recent entry recorded on it.
Liquor service. No liquor is to be sold or served on the premises by the owner/manager to
paying guests.
Meals. A morning meal shall be served on premises and included within the room charge for
guests of the facility and shall be the only meal provided. The facility is not allowed to serve
meals to nonresident guest for compensation. Additionally, there shall be no cooking in the
guest rooms, other than microwave use.
Other uses. The facility shall not be used for commercial receptions or other public
gatherings.
Public hearing and acceptance. Whenever a bed-and-breakfast facility is proposed, the
Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer will contact by written notification, certified US mail
and return receipt requested, all residential (property) homeowners within 100 feet of the
dwelling, excluding public right-of-way, to determine if they accept the proposed change in
use for the property. If more than 2/3 of the residents contacted within the one-hundred-foot
zone are against the bed-and-breakfast facility, then that may serve as a basis for denial of
the conditional use. Noncompliance with the provisions of this Section 10-1, other Village
ordinances, and state statutes is also grounds for denial.
§ 10-1-14. Special use permits.
Intent. Special use permits permit only those approved uses which require special consideration
because of their unusual characteristics, dimensions, and frequency of occurrence, effect on
surrounding property or other similar reason. This permit may be determined on a case-by-case
by case basis following the procedures for a zone change as provided by this Section 10-1. Any
accessory uses shall be approved by the governing body. Any change in the terms and/or
conditions shall require reapplication. Supplementary regulations and special conditions may be
imposed by the governing body upon recommendation by the Commission. The governing body
shall not grant a special use permit unless satisfactory provisions have been made:
To preserve the integrity, character and the value of the property in adjacent zone districts.
To assure that the special use permit will not become detrimental to the public health, safety
or general welfare of the Village.
To assure that the special use permit will not pose a danger of explosion, toxic or noxious
odors or otherwise endanger adjacent properties or the general public.
Application. Each application for a special use permit shall declare the proposed use and shall be
accompanied by development plans of sufficient size and scale and which shall include:
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 184/346
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
C.
A site development plan (SDP) shall be required for all new or redeveloped land use for this
special use permit.
At a minimum, the SDP shall include the following:
A written statement explaining the purpose and intent of the development, and a
development phase schedule, if appropriate.
Boundaries and topography of the property to be developed.
A site map, of sufficient size and scale, showing the proposed location, type, use
and size of all structures, setbacks, signs, lighting, on-site parking and loading areas,
as required in § 10-1-19 of this Section 10-1, on-site stormwater retention facilities,
landscaping, fencing, driveways, traffic and pedestrian circulation routes, and
emergency vehicle access. Other information to show compliance with Village
ordinances shall be required.
Details of the engineering design of the on-site parking and on-site stormwater
retention facilities shall be included in the SDP.
Delineation of proposed dedications and easements for public rights-of-way.
An area map showing the location, type, use and size of all structures on adjacent
properties within 200 feet of the proposed development.
Written documentation showing that the New Mexico Department of Transportation
has been notified of the new use if accessing a New Mexico state highway.
Deviation of changes from the site plan shall be reviewed by the Commission for
approval before the changes are implemented; and
A traffic study may be required as per Section 10-2, Subdivision Regulations, § 10-2-10C, of
the Village Code.
Special provisions.
Any development plans proposing infrastructure improvements such as streets, sidewalks,
and water and sewer utilities shall be subject to the requirement for subdivision approval as
set forth in the Section 10-2, Subdivision Regulations. In addition, any subdivision of land
shall be subject to the provisions of Section 10-2.
Landscaping shall be strongly encouraged on all new and existing development. The
following guidelines are provided for landscaping design:
Visually attractive trees and shrubs should be placed along Bosque Farms Boulevard to
enhance and soften the streetscape.
Landscaping is encouraged to be placed as buffers along the perimeter of the special
use permit property and contiguous properties.
Trees should be interspersed throughout off-street parking areas to provide shade for
parked cars.
No development shall divert or channel stormwater runoff to contiguous properties. To
the extent possible, direct precipitation shall be retained on site. It shall strongly be
encouraged that stormwater retention basins may be landscaped with appropriate
plantings to withstand excess water and to aid in the filtration of polluted runoff.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 185/346
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
D.
E.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
Exterior lighting shall be provided in accordance with § 10-1-5F of this Section 10-1. All
outside storage shall be enclosed behind a solid fence of at least six feet high, as defined
in § 10-1-4.
Adequate refuse containers shall be provided to control litter.
Adequate sanitary facilities (rest rooms), either portable or permanent, shall be provided
on site.
A list of hazardous chemicals or explosives that are stored in bulk on the property, with
such storage areas clearly marked on the map, shall be provided to the Fire Chief and
the floodplain administrator.
No use will be allowed which will create dangerous, injurious, noxious, or other conditions
that will pose a threat to public health, safety and welfare. No adverse impact on
surrounding properties will be allowed.
All businesses shall pay a business registration fee within 10 days following approval of
the special use permit and shall maintain a current Taxation and Revenue number and
state licensing and certification if applicable to the type of business conducted.
There shall be adequate, legal access, which may require a New Mexico State
Transportation Department access permit for development on New Mexico Highway 47.
If the owners of 20% or more of the area of the lots and the land included in the area
proposed for a special use permit or within 100 feet, excluding public right-of-way, of the
area proposed protest in writing to the proposed change, the proposed change shall not
become effective unless the change is approved by a majority vote of all the members of
the governing body.
Termination of a special use permit. In the event that a use authorized as a special use permit is
discontinued for a period of 30 days, such use shall not thereafter be reestablished unless there is
reapplication for a special use permit.
Revocation of existing special use zones and issuance of a special use permit. Upon the
enactment of this Section 10-1, any and all properties which have an existing special use zone are
hereby rescinded and deemed null and void. Such existing special use zones will be issued a
special use permit within 30 days of the enactment of this Section 10-1. All such properties, which
had been issued a special use zone and issued a special use permit, shall adhere to the
provisions of this Section 10-1. All special use zones effected by this section are permitted to
continue their respective special use zone activity within the 30 days as prescribed herein.
§ 10-1-15. Map and text amendments.
Intent. The major focus of any recommendations for change or endorsement of plans as
presented shall be to promote the educational, cultural, and economic welfare of the Village by
preserving and protecting neighborhoods and a rural lifestyle and to strengthen the economy of
the Village by stabilizing and improving the property values to help property owners avoid any
action which might tend to decrease property values.
Map amendment procedures.
Amendment. Application for amendment to the Zone Map may be made by any landowner or
his agent or by the Village of Bosque Farms or any official or body thereof.
Application. Amendments to the Zone Map shall be initiated by application to the Village of
Bosque Farms on prescribed forms and upon payment of an administrative fee. The
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 186/346
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(1)
C.
administrative fee will be waived if the proposed change is initiated by the Planning and
Zoning Administrator/Officer. A completed signed and notarized application form shall be
received by the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer at least 20 days prior to the
Commission meeting date when the application will be considered. Each application for an
amendment to the Zone Map shall be accompanied by an accurate site plan, building plan,
sketch, evidence of interest in property, and other related information as required by this
Section 10-1, the Commission or the governing body. Submission of inaccurate information
with an application is grounds for denial.
Preliminary public meeting. The Commission shall hold a public meeting to evaluate proposed
zone changes or amendments to this Section 10-1 and shall submit its recommendation in
writing to the governing body. Notice of the public meeting shall be given in accordance with
the Open Meetings Act (NMSA 1978, §§ 10-15-1 to 10-15-4) at least 15 days prior to said
meeting.
Posting. Applicants requesting a zone change shall post a copy of the prescribed form on the
property at the applicant's expense. Posting shall be in the form of a sign structure at least
three feet high and large enough to receive the form. The sign shall be placed, at least 15
days prior to preliminary public meeting, in such a location that it can readily be viewed from
the nearest roadway.
Spot zoning. Any request for a change of zoning for a relatively small area which would
establish a zone district that is inconsistent or incompatible with the surrounding area, and
which might bring about a detriment to the surrounding area, shall be considered an
inappropriate zone change and shall be given a negative recommendation from the
Commission to the governing body, unless it is demonstrated that the public welfare will be
served.
Commission recommendation. All applications for an amendment to this Section 10-1 shall
first be reviewed by the Commission, which shall submit a written recommendation
concerning the application to the governing body. If the Commission fails to make such a
written recommendation to the governing body within 45 days after receipt thereof, then the
governing body shall act upon said application without a recommendation from the
Commission.
Final public hearing. The governing body shall conduct a public hearing at which all parties in
interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notification of the time and place
of the public hearing shall be in accordance with the Open Meetings Act (NMSA 1978, §§ 10-
15-1 to 10-15-4) at least 15 days prior to the hearing. The notice of public meeting published
15 days before the Commission meeting shall be considered sufficient notice if it also has
included the time and place of the public hearing to be held by the governing body. Whenever
a change in a zoning district boundary is proposed, notice of the public hearing shall be
mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owners of land within the area
proposed to be changed by a zoning regulation and within 100 feet, excluding public right-ofway,
of the area proposed to be changed by zoning regulation.
Decision. If the owners of 20% or more of the area of the lots and of land included in the area
proposed to be changed by a zoning regulation or within 100 feet, excluding public right-ofway,
of the area proposed to be changed by a zoning regulation protest in writing to the
proposed change in the zoning regulation, the proposed change in zoning shall not become
effective unless the change is approved by a majority vote of all the members of the
governing body.
Ordinance text change procedures.
Amendment. Application for amendment to the text of this Section 10-1 may be made by any
landowner or his agent or by the Village of Bosque Farms or any official or body thereof.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 187/346
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
D.
Application. Amendments to the text of this Section 10-1 shall be initiated by application to the
Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer on prescribed forms and upon payment of an
administrative fee. The administrative fee will be waved if initiated by the Village of Bosque
Farms. A completed signed and notarized application form shall be received by the Planning
and Zoning Administrator/Officer at least 20 days prior to the Commission meeting date when
the application will be considered.
Preliminary public meeting. The Commission shall hold a public meeting to evaluate proposed
zone changes or amendments to this Section 10-1 and shall submit its recommendation in
writing to the governing body. Notice of the public meeting shall be given in accordance with
the Open Meetings Act (NMSA 1978, §§ 10-15-1 to 10-15-4) at least 15 days prior to said
meeting.
Commission recommendation. All applications for an amendment to this Section 10-1 shall
first be reviewed by the Commission, which shall submit a written recommendation
concerning the application to the governing body. If the Commission fails to make such a
written recommendation to the governing body within 45 days after receipt thereof, then the
governing body shall act upon said application without a recommendation by the Commission.
Final public hearing. The governing body shall conduct a public hearing at which all parties in
interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notification of the time and place
of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with the Open Meetings Act (NMSA 1978,
§§ 10-15-1 to 10-15-4) at least 15 days prior to the hearing.
§ 10-1-16. Variance procedures.
Definition. The Village governing body may grant a variance from the strict application of area,
height, dimension, distance, parking, loading, or setback requirements of this Section 10-1 in the
case of exceptional physical conditions where the strict application of the requirements of this
Section 10-1 would result in a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship that would deprive the
owner of the reasonable use of land or building only. Financial gain or loss shall not be a major
determining factor in deciding a variance.
Application. A request for a variance shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Administrator/Officer on prescribed application forms, and upon payment of an administrative fee.
A completed, signed, and notarized application form shall be received by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator/Officer at least 20 days prior to the Commission meeting date when the application
will be considered. Public notice shall be given in accordance with the Open Meetings Act (NMSA
1978, §§ 10-15-1 to 10-15-4) at least 15 days prior to the date of said meeting. The Commission
will then make its recommendations to the governing body, which at its regular meeting will either
approve or disapprove the variance request.
Considerations. A variance shall be considered if:
The applicant complies strictly with the provisions of this Section 10-1, he can make no
reasonable use of his property;
The hardship relates to the applicant's land, rather than personal circumstances;
The hardship is unique, rather than one shared by many surrounding properties;
The hardship is not the result of the applicant's own actions; and
The variance will not impact surrounding properties in a negative way.
Posting requirements. The applicant shall post and maintain one or more signs on the premises,
as provided and where instructed by the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer, at least 15
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 188/346
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
days prior to the date of the Commission meeting at which the application will be heard. The
purpose of the sign or signs is to provide public notice of the application for a variance. Failure to
properly post such signs is grounds for deferral or denial of the application. The applicant is
responsible for removing such signs within five days after a decision is made regarding the
application.
Requirements. The governing body shall impose any necessary requirements or conditions in
approving a variance in order to assure that the requested variance:
Will cause no significant hazard, annoyance, or inconvenience to the owners or occupants of
nearby property;
Will not significantly change the character of the neighborhood or reduce the value of nearby
property;
Will not impose any significant cost burden upon the Village; and
Will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Section 10-1.
§ 10-1-17. Nonconformities.
Definition. Within the zone districts (except Commercial Zone) established by this Section 10-1, or
amendments that shall be adopted, there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, signs
and characteristics of use which were lawful before this Section 10-1 was passed or amended, but
which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this Section 10-1 or future
amendment. It is the intent of this Section 10-1 to allow these nonconformities to continue until
they are removed, but not to encourage their survival.
Certificate of nonconformance. All nonconformities within the jurisdiction of this Section 10-1 shall
be issued certificates of nonconformance upon determination of nonconformity by the Planning
and Zoning Administrator/Officer or Commission. Failure to accept the certificate of
nonconformance under the provision of this section shall be considered a violation of this Section
10-1.
Expansion. The addition of a lawful use to any portion of a nonconforming building, which existed
prior to the enactment of this Section 10-1, shall not be deemed an expansion of such
nonconforming use.
Reconstruction. A nonconforming building shall not be reconstructed or structurally altered during
its life to an extent exceeding an aggregate cost of 25% of the assessed value of the building
unless said building is changed to a conforming use. Any building damaged by fire or other causes
to the extent of more than 50% of its assessed value shall only be restored or rebuilt after an
application for such restoration or rebuilding has been approved by the Commission and shall
comply with regulations in Section 11-1, Flood Damage Prevention, of the Village Code.
Discontinuance. Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of 90 days,
such use shall not thereafter be reestablished, and any future use shall conform to the provisions
of this Section 10-1.
Vested rights. Nothing in this Section 10-1 shall require any change in plans, construction, or
designated use of a building for which a building permit has been issued prior to enactment of this
Section 10-1, or amendments thereto.
Nonconforming lot size. Any lot of record existing prior to the effective date of this Section 10-1
which fails to meet the minimum area requirements shall be developed or improved, provided that
setbacks and any other requirements of the lot are in conformance with the provisions of this
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 189/346
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
H.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
Section 10-1. Unless specifically cited by the Commission, a certificate of nonconformance will not
be required for nonconforming lots.
Special exemptions.
The following land uses, which existed prior to the effective date of this Section 10-1, or
amendments thereto, shall be allowed to continue and shall be exempt from all requirements
of this § 10-1-17:
Farming, ranching, and dairying;
Farm supplies and equipment sales and service;
Dairy products and sales;
Greenhouse or nursery, landscaper; and
Stable, riding school (commercial).
Sections or subsections of this Section 10-1 which regulate the above-noted land uses in
zone districts where they are allowable land uses shall also regulate these exempted
nonconforming land uses. The exemptions as noted herein shall be allowed only as long as
the land area devoted to the above-noted land uses exceeds five acres (217,800 square feet)
per lot.
§ 10-1-18. Development review/flood hazard protection.
Review required. For the purpose of this Section 10-1, no building or structure or ribbed metal
panel shall be erected or substantial improvements constructed upon any lot within the Village of
Bosque Farms without first being reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer.
Development review permit applications and building plans shall be submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Administrator/Officer for review and signature before applying for a building permit with the
New Mexico Construction Industries Division.
Mobile home/manufactured housing installation permits. Installation permits shall be reported to
the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer upon issuance.
On-site liquid waste disposal permits. Permits from the New Mexico Environment Department for
installation of on-site liquid waste disposal systems shall be shown to the Planning and Zoning
Administrator/Officer upon receipt.
Review process and fee. An administrative fee shall be paid at the Village Office prior to any
consideration in the development review. The Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer shall
determine if a variance, zone change, conditional use, floodplain development permit as directed
in Section 11-1, Flood Damage Prevention, § 11-1-9, of the Village Code, or other permit is
required, and if so, shall notify and advise the appropriate person of subsequent procedures as
required by this Section 10-1. A building permit application shall be returned within three working
days after receipt by the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer.
§ 10-1-19. Off-street parking and loading.
Parking and loading space required. There shall be provided on site, when any new building or
structure is erected, off-street parking and loading spaces as set forth herein. Existing buildings or
structures need supply such parking and loading space only to the extent ground space is
available. Such spaces may be located on any portion of the lot but shall not obstruct public rightsof-
way.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 190/346
[1]
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
E.
Number of parking spaces. The minimum number of designated parking spaces to be provided
shall be as follows:[1]
Use Number of Spaces Required
Auction houses 1 per 200 square feet of sale/display and/or
storage area on the lot
Banks, offices, service establishments, retail
businesses, and public buildings
1 per 300 square feet of floor area
Bed-and-breakfast establishments As per § 10-1-14M
Bowling alleys 4 per alley
Club, lodge, or fraternal organizations 1 per 200 square feet of floor area
Commercial garages 1 per service bay
Dwelling units 2 per dwelling unit
Flea markets At least 2 per rental stall on the lot
Hospitals, clinics, and convalescent or nursing
homes
1 per bed and 1 per staff doctor
Industrial, manufacturing, and wholesaling
establishments
1 per 2 employees on largest shift
Laundromats 1 per 3 washing machines
Medical and dental offices 5 per doctor
Mobile home/manufactured home sales lots 1 per 6 mobile/manufactured homes for sale
Places of public assembly, including churches,
community centers, auditoriums, theaters,
gymnasiums, and arenas
1 per 4 seats
Restaurants, bars 1 per 4 seats plus 1 per 2 employees on largest
shift
Shopping center developments 5 per 1,000 square feet of floor area
Vehicle sales lots 1 per 6 vehicles available for sale on the lot
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Parking design standards. The following standards shall be applied to off-street parking areas:
All parking facilities shall provide adequate ingress and egress to and from a roadway or
public right-of-way;
All driveways shall be of sufficient width to permit access into the parking area, but in no
circumstance shall be less than 20 feet wide except in residential use;
Each parking space shall consist of an area not less than nine feet in width by 20 feet in
length, exclusive of driveway area, except those in residential use; and
On any lot in residential use, the off-street parking area shall be consolidated to the extent
possible and shall not exceed 20% of the total lot area.
Development/Building permit review. An applicant for a development review/building permit shall
submit plans showing the off-street parking required by this Section 10-1. These plans shall show
location, arrangement, dimensions of the off-street parking, turning spaces, drives, aisles, and
ingress and egress in a manner satisfactory to the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer.
Off-street loading requirements. Off-street loading space shall be provided for all structures which
receive or distribute bulk materials by motor vehicle. The following standards shall apply:
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 191/346
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
Required off-street loading space shall not be located on designated off-street parking space
or public rights-of-way;
Individual off-street loading spaces shall be at least 50 feet by 12 feet; and
All buildings used for commercial or industrial purposes shall be provided with off-street
loading space.
§ 10-1-20. Signs and outdoor advertising devices.
Special definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
ANIMATED SIGN
Any sign that uses movement of light or change in the lighting to depict action or create a
special effect or scene, within the sign face.
AUXILIARY SIGN
A sign which provides specific information such as direction, price, sales information, hours of
operation, or warning and does not include information regarding product lines or services.
Examples of such signs include the following:
Signs identifying the building contractor or future tenant of a building under construction;
Real estate sale or lease signs and real estate directional signs;
Signs used by gasoline retailers to display prices of gasoline as required by law;
Signs which direct but do not obstruct the flow of traffic in or out of drives, parking areas
and buildings; and
Signs which advertise an approved subdivision, its buildings, or individual parcels for
sale.
BANNER
Any sign printed or displayed upon cloth or other flexible material, with or without frames.
BUILDING-MOUNTED SIGN
A sign entirely supported by a building in the following manner: a wall sign, which is applied or
mounted flush to any exterior surface of a building; and signs affixed to a marquee, awning, or
canopy of a building. A building-mounted sign shall not project beyond the overall silhouette
of the building.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN
Any sign limited to directional messages such as "enter" or "exit." Logos and business names
are permitted as needed to complete the directional message.
FREESTANDING SIGN
A sign attached to an independent supporting structure, which is not an integral part of a
building.
ILLUMINATED SIGN
Any nonmoving, nonflashing sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outlines
illuminated by an artificial light source.
INDIRECT LIGHT SOURCE
A light that does not proceed straight to any object.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 192/346
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
INFORMATIONAL SIGN
Any sign of identification or of informational nature bearing no advertising.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN
Any sign that is not physically located on the premises to which the sign refers.
ON-PREMISES SIGN
Any sign that is physically located on the premises to which the sign refers.
PENNANT
Any lightweight plastic fabric, or other material, including balloons, whether or not containing a
message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string, usually in series, designed to
move in the wind.
PORTABLE SIGN
Any sign which is mounted or transported on a trailer or similar structure, with or without
wheels, and not permanently attached to the ground or any structure.
READER BOARD
A sign that is designed so that characters, letters, or illustrations can be changed or
rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign. A reader board shall be a
building-mounted, freestanding, or portable sign; and can include electronically changing text
messages.
SIGN
Any display to public view of letters, words, numerals, figures, statues, devices, emblems,
logos, pictures, or any parts or combinations thereof designed to inform or advertise or
promote merchandise, services, or activities except for the following, which shall not be
included in the application of regulations herein:
National, state, or locally recognized commemorative symbols, flags, plaques, or
historical markers (Note: The use of the flag of the United States of America is regulated
under federal law, specifically the Flag Code, Public Law 94-344, which limits the use of
the flag and does not allow it to be used for advertising.);
Signs or official notices required by law or signs of a duly constituted governmental body
or agency;
Merchandise and pictures or other devices describing products or services when
incorporated in a window display; and
Signs placed by a public utility for the health, safety, welfare, or convenience of the
public.
SIGN FACE
The net geometric area enclosed by the display surface of the sign and which encompasses
the outer extremities of all letters, characters and delineations of the sign. On any two-sided
sign, only one sign face is counted in computing the sign's area.
SPOTLIGHT
A strong beam of light that illuminates only a small area, used especially to center attention
on an object.
STREET BANNER
A sign intended to be stretched across and hung over a public roadway.
TEMPORARY SIGN
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 193/346
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
B.
A sign which is designed to attract attention or announce a public event, community activity,
civic or religious event, political campaign, business promotional event or other such signs
which are erected for a limited time period.
Sign permits. The following provisions apply to all zone districts within the Village of Bosque
Farms:
No person shall erect a sign within Bosque Farms without first applying for a sign permit on a
prescribed application form available from the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer. A
permit will not be required for the following exceptions:
All signs or devices exempted by definition in this section (refer to the definition of "sign"
in Subsection A above);
Professional name plates erected flush to building walls with a sign face not exceeding
four square feet;
Signs upon a motorized vehicle, provided that any such vehicle with a sign face over 10
square feet is not used in a manner to avoid the provisions of this Section 10-1; nothing
herein prevents such a vehicle from being used for a bona fide delivery and other
vehicular purposes;
Temporary holiday decorations, except temporary street banners;
On-premises real estate signs with a sign face not exceeding 10 square feet;
Any renovation or content changes to the sign face, but not changes in dimension,
location, or height;
Political signs not to exceed 32 square feet;
Signs which only display local time and temperature, not exceeding 36 square feet;
Signs painted on the exterior surface of a building or structure. Wall signs shall not
exceed 100 square feet or exceed 30% of the wall space, whichever is greater, in which
the business or activity is housed. Wall signs shall be limited to advertise the business
within the building or retail space, and products produced or sold by that business; and
Signs used by local, registered nonprofit organizations at Village recreational facilities for
advertising businesses supporting the organizations, not exceeding 36 square feet per
sign, will be the responsibility of the respective nonprofit organization.
Applications for a sign permit shall be accompanied by an administrative fee and shall include
the following information:
Name and address of the sign owner or sign lessee (if any);
Name and address of owner (or agent if applicable) of the building or premise to which
the sign refers;
A drawing showing the design, dimensions, and construction of the proposed sign or
signs, along with a site plan and/or building elevation drawing showing the location or
placement of the sign or signs;
Signature of the applicant for the sign permit; and
Signature and written permission of the landowner for off-premises signs.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 194/346
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(5)
C.
(1)
D.
If the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer determines that any sign permit which has
been issued does not comply with the information supplied on the permit application form, or
that the permitted sign is in violation of any other provisions of this Section 10-1, then the
Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer shall notify the sign or building owner of such
violation. Written notice shall be sent to the applicant of the sign permit, sign owner, and
building owner by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the violation is not corrected within
30 days following the date of such written notice, then the permit shall be terminated.
Thereafter, a new permit application and fee shall be required in order to reinstate the permit.
If no application is made to reinstate the terminated permit, the Planning and Zoning
Administrator/Officer is authorized to remove or cause removal of such sign or signs in
violation of this Section 10-1, and any cost incidental thereto shall be assessed and paid by
the sign owner or owner of the building or structure.
Any sign existing prior to the effective date of this Section 10-1, and which is not in violation of
any preexisting Village sign regulations, and which also possesses a sign permit issued by
the Village, shall be allowed to remain under this Section 10-1.
General provisions. The following general provisions apply to all signs within the Village of Bosque
Farms:
No sign shall exceed 20 feet in height, as measured from the grade to the highest part of the
sign or its supporting structure;
Any sign located at a roadway intersection shall comply with the restrictions stated in this
Section 10-1 regarding the vision clearance necessary within the designated triangular space
on a corner lot (see § 10-1-5O);
No sign or portion thereof shall be placed within a dedicated public right-of-way or a private
roadway;
All signs shall be repaired and maintained in an appropriate and safe manner. Any sign
deemed to be in disrepair by the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer shall be
considered to be in violation of this Section 10-1; and
The following types of signs or advertising devices shall be prohibited within the Village of
Bosque Farms:
Spotlights or beacons which do not illuminate a sign or which do not illuminate a building
or parking lot for security purposes, provided such illumination does not adversely affect
adjoining properties or roadways;
Portable swinger "A-frame" or sandwich board signs;
Signs attached to or painted on any tree, rock or other natural object, utility pole,
standpipe, fire escape, or any other man-made object not intended to support a sign;
Sign structures with three or more sides containing sign faces; and
Signs which are or may become a physical hazard to the public.
Regulations for business signs. The following regulations shall apply to all businesses, commercial
activities, and services throughout the Village of Bosque Farms. Nothing under this subsection
shall inhibit the use of miscellaneous design features incorporated in the architectural scheme of a
building.
No more than two permanent, on-premises signs shall be allowed to advertise each business,
commercial, or service activity.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 195/346
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
[1]
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
E.
Solely on Bosque Farms Boulevard (NMSH 47), no more than one off-premises sign shall be
allowed to advertise each business, commercial or service activity, provided the following
conditions are met:
Such signs may be either permanent or portable signs; and
Such signs shall not exceed eight feet above ground level.
One additional, portable sign shall be allowed on any lot.
No sign face shall exceed 36 square feet, except as provided in Subsection D(10) below.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Signs may be illuminated and/or animated, but shall not move or emit sounds.
One of the two permanent signs allowed for each business may be a freestanding sign,
provided that only one such freestanding sign structure shall be allowed on any lot.
One of the two permanent signs allowed for each business may be a reader board, provided
the following conditions are met:
The sign face shall not exceed 36 square feet in size;
Such sign shall be on-premises; and
Such sign may be illuminated by indirect source only; no spotlights shall be allowed.
One of the two permanent signs allowed for each business may be an animated sign not to
exceed 36 square feet in size.
One nonilluminated sign is permitted for each home occupation, approved by the Village,
provided that no such sign face shall exceed five square feet.
Buildings with multiple tenants, such as shopping centers, are allowed to have one
freestanding sign, and tenants shall share space on the freestanding sign. The total combined
sign face for buildings with multiple tenants shall not exceed 96 square feet, or 16 square feet
per business, whichever is larger. The freestanding sign for multiple-tenant shopping centers
shall not count toward the two allowable signs for each of the tenants in the shopping center.
Regulations for auxiliary signs. The following regulations for auxiliary signs shall apply to all zone
districts, unless otherwise specified, within the Village of Bosque Farms:
Signs related to the sale, lease, or development of real estate shall comply with the following
regulations:
One on-premises sign per lot frontage is permitted, provided that each sign face shall not
exceed 10 square feet;
Off-premises signs directing or leading prospective buyers to real estate for sale or lease
shall be limited to no more than six signs for each property, provided that no such sign
face shall exceed five square feet;
Signs promoting or advertising subdivisions for sale shall not have a sign face greater
than 36 square feet; and
All real estate signs shall be removed within 30 days after the property is sold or the
project is completed.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 196/346
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
G.
A.
One price sign per gasoline retailer is permitted, provided that no such sign face shall exceed
36 square feet;
No private signs which direct traffic shall contain a sign face greater than five square feet; and
Informational signs relating to business, commercial or service activities shall be on-premises
signs, each limited to a sign face no greater than five square feet.
Regulations for temporary signs. The following regulations for temporary signs shall apply to all
zone districts within the Village of Bosque Farms:
Signs related to a political campaign prior to an election shall be permitted on any lot,
provided the following conditions are met:
Such signs shall not be placed more than 30 days prior to the final day of voting
designated as Election Day and shall be removed within three days following the
election;
The height of such signs shall not exceed eight feet above grade; and
Written permission of the landowner shall be provided to the Planning and Zoning
Administrator/Officer before placing a sign on vacant or unoccupied property.
All other temporary signs, including pennants and balloons, which are not related to a political
campaign will be permitted on any lot, provided that such signs shall not be displayed more
than 30 consecutive days for each announced event. A sign permit, purchased on an annual
basis to run from January 1 to December 31, is required and shall be approved for use of no
more than four nonconsecutive times within that year. Dates to be displayed shall be
submitted at the time of application.
Street banner signs shall receive prior written approval from the New Mexico Department of
Transportation Traffic Engineer and the Village; documentation that all requirements have
been satisfied is required. These documents shall be submitted with a sign permit application
to the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer for any street banner that is to be erected on
Bosque Farms Boulevard (NMSH 47). The Village of Bosque Farms shall erect all street
banner signs.
Abandonment and removal. Any sign will be subject to removal or alteration by the business
and/or property owner if one or more of the following conditions exist:
The sign does not contain legibly printed matter on the display surface; or
The sign is unsafe; or
The sign is not secure; or
The sign is a menace to the public; or
The sign has been erected in violation of this Section 10-1; or
The sign, by its nature, has become obsolete for a period of 90 days and therefore deemed to
have been abandoned by the owner thereof.
§ 10-1-21. Fees.
Applications and permits. All fees for application and permits shall be taken from the fee schedule
adopted by resolution. No applications and permits required by this Section 10-1 shall be
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 197/346
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
processed without payment of an administrative fee as specified herein. Such fees shall not be
required where the Village of Bosque Farms or any official thereof is the moving party.
Fees. Administrative fees will be charged according to fee schedule adopted by resolution.
§ 10-1-22. Appeals.
Right of appeal.
Any person aggrieved by an interpretation, decision, or action of the Planning and Zoning
Administrator/Officer in carrying out the provisions of this Section 10-1 may appeal such
interpretation, decision, or action to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Any person aggrieved by an interpretation, decision, or action of the Planning and Zoning
Commission in carrying out the provisions of this Section 10-1 may appeal to the governing
body. Such appeal shall set forth specifically wherein it is claimed there was an error or an
abuse of discretion, or where the interpretation, decision, or action was not supported by
evidence in the matter. The appeal to the governing body will be a record review from the
Planning and Zoning Commission hearing. The governing body may affirm in part and/or in
whole and/or modify in part and/or in whole the decision of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and/or remand the matter in part and/or in whole back to the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
If the governing body's decision is adverse to the appellant, the appellant may appeal to the
District Court.
Application.
Any appeal to the Commission following an interpretation, decision, or action of the Planning
and Zoning Administrator/Officer shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk/Administrator on
prescribed forms and upon payment of an administrative fee.
An appeal to the governing body following an interpretation, decision, or action of the
Commission shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk/Administrator on prescribed forms
and upon payment of an administrative fee.
Any appeal not submitted within 30 days after the interpretation, decision, or action which is
the subject of the appeal shall not be considered.
Public hearing. The decision on an appeal shall be made by the Commission or governing body
following a public hearing. Notification of the time and place of the public hearing shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the area at least 15 days prior to the hearing.
The Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer shall notify the applicant, members of the
Commission or governing body, and a representative of the opponents, if any, of the hearing date.
Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in the action unless the Village
Clerk/Administrator certifies that a stay will cause imminent peril to life or property. Upon such
certification, the proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the District Court.
Decision.
An appeal shall be decided within three months of the date of application of the appeal.
A majority vote of the members of the Commission is required to reverse, change or affirm an
interpretation, decision, or action made by the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 198/346
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
A majority vote of the members of the governing body is required to reverse, change or affirm
an interpretation, decision, or action made by the Commission.
The governing body shall state in writing the final decision and the reasons for its decision,
both for the applicant and to enter as a part of the permanent record.
If the governing body reverses an appeal from the action or decision made by the
Commission, the appellant's fee shall be returned.
§ 10-1-23. Administration and enforcement.
Administrative official. A Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer shall be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to the approval of a majority of all members of the governing body, to administer
the provisions of this Section 10-1. The Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer may also serve
in some other capacity as an employee or appointed official of the Village of Bosque Farms. The
Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer shall have all the administrative powers in connection
herewith which are not specifically assigned to some other officer or body. The Planning and
Zoning Administrator/Officer shall have no power to vary or waive requirements of this Section 10-
1. The Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer may delegate the authority to a Zoning Officer to
administer and enforce the regulations of this Section 10-1.
Inspection. The Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer has the authority to conduct inspection
of buildings, structures, and the use of land to determine compliance with this Section 10-1. This
provision does not grant right-of-entry without due process, if necessary. The Planning and Zoning
Administrator/Officer shall provide for on-site inspections and other relevant information which
may be requested by the governing body or Commission, as necessary, to carry out the purpose
of this Section 10-1.
Information and records. The Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer shall make available to
the public the information contained in this Section 10-1, maintain the official Zone Map in a
current manner, and make available to the public the records and forms and any other documents
deemed relevant to this Section 10-1.
Violations: complaints and notification.
The Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer may institute any appropriate actions or
proceedings whenever there is probable cause to believe there is a violation of this Section
10-1.
Any person aggrieved by an apparent violation of this Section 10-1 may file a written
complaint with the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer, who shall investigate such
complaint in a timely manner to determine if a violation of this Section 10-1 is found to exist.
Whenever the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer finds probable cause to believe a
violation of this Section 10-1 exists, whether acting on independent initiative or in response to
a complaint, the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer shall notify the person responsible
for the alleged violation in writing.
Such notification shall order the necessary correction to be made within 15 days, 10 days in
cases of violations constituting a health hazard, as determined by days following the date of
notification.
Any person who fails to comply with the notification or order shall be charged with a petty
misdemeanor and subject to penalties as stated in this Section 10-1. If the notice of violation
is not complied with, the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer shall institute the
appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 199/346
A.
B.
require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy or use in violation of the
provisions of this Section 10-1 or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
§ 10-1-24. Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section 10-1 shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Violations continued for a period of 15 days after conviction shall be prosecuted and
treated as a separate offense.
§ 10-1-25. Interpretation and conflict.
The provisions of this Section 10-1 are held to be minimum requirements to carry out the purpose
of this Section 10-1 and are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any easement,
covenant, or other valid ordinance. Where this Section 10-1 imposes a greater restriction than is
required by existing regulations, easements, covenants, agreements, or ordinances, the
provisions of this Section 10-1 shall control. Regardless of any other provision of this Section 10-1,
no land shall be used and no structure erected or maintained in violation of any state or federal
pollution control or environmental protection law or regulation.
When the proposed correction is consist with the Village of Bosque Farms Comprehensive Plan,
the governing body shall, by ordinance, correct Zone Map mistakes upon a determination that the
mistake occurred due to clerical or mapping errors.
§ 10-1-26. Appearance at public hearings required.
Any applicants or their agents submitting a conditional use, variance, zone change, zone text
amendment, or appeal request shall appear in person at any meeting or hearing scheduled to consider
the respective applications. If the applicant is not the property owner, the property owner shall submit a
notarized letter authorizing a designated agent to appear at the public meeting. The property owner or
his designated agent shall be present at the public meeting. If any applicants or their agents do not
appear in person at the respective meeting, the application will be denied and any fees paid will be
forfeited to the Village of Bosque Farms.
Section 10-2. Subdivision Regulations
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 7-15-2010.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water  See Sec. 9-2.
Sewers  See Sec. 9-3.
Zoning  See Sec. 10-1.
Address regulations  See Sec. 10-3.
Annexations  See Sec. 10-4.
Flood damage prevention  See Sec. 11-1.
§ 10-2-1. Title.
This Section 10-2 shall be known as the "Land Subdivision Ordinance of the Village of Bosque Farms,
New Mexico," and shall be referred to herein as "this Section 10-2." The Village of Bosque Farms shall
hereinafter be called "the Village."
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 200/346
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
§ 10-2-2. Purpose.
The regulations and restrictions of this Section 10-2 are intended to create orderly, harmonious and
economically sound development of land in order to establish conditions favorable to the public health,
safety, convenience and general welfare of the Village and its area of jurisdiction. More specifically, this
Section 10-2 is designed to achieve adequate provision for light and air, public open spaces, adequate
water supply, drainage, and sanitation, including sewer facilities; economy in governmental
expenditures and efficiency in governmental operations; safe, convenient circulation of people, goods,
and vehicles; accurate and complete surveying, and preparation and recording of plats thereof; safety
and suitability of land for contemplated development; and coordination of land development in
accordance with orderly physical patterns as stated in the Village Master Plan, which is hereby
incorporated herein and adopted in this Section 10-2 and other ordinances and codes in furtherance of
such plans and policies as may have been or may be hereafter adopted by the Village.
§ 10-2-3. Authority.
This Section 10-2 is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 3, Articles 19 and 20, NMSA
1978.
§ 10-2-4. Jurisdiction.
This Section 10-2 shall govern the subdivision of land within the area of planning and platting
jurisdiction as defined in NMSA 1978, § 3-19-5 and as may be further defined by joint powers
agreement with any other municipality whose planning and platting jurisdiction overlaps with the
planning and platting jurisdiction of the Village.
§ 10-2-5. Interpretation.
This Section 10-2 is held to be the minimum requirement to carry out the purpose stated herein and is
not intended to interfere with any other laws, covenants, or ordinances. Whenever any of the
provisions of this Section 10-2 are more or less restrictive than other laws, covenants, or ordinances,
then whichever is more restrictive shall govern.
§ 10-2-6. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this Section 10-2, standard dictionary definitions shall be used, except for
certain words or phrases used herein which shall be interpreted as follows:
The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or
corporation, as well as an individual.
The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the
plural number includes the singular.
The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory and the word "may" is permissive.
As used in this Section 10-2, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AGENT
Anyone authorized by notarized letter and signed by the property owner to represent same.
ALLEY
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 201/346
(1)
(2)
A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or
rear of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
APRON
That portion of a street or driveway that is required to be paved for a smooth transition to
another paved roadway.
BARROW DITCH
A ditch parallel to the driving surface to convey rainwater runoff from the right-of-way.
BLOCK
The distance measured along a street between intersecting streets from center line to center
line; and where the context requires, such term also means the enclosed area within the
perimeter of the street or property lines enclosing it.
COMMISSION
The Village of Bosque Farms Planning and Zoning Commission.
COMPREHENSIVE AREA PLAN
A plan for future development of the total area owned or controlled by a subdivider, and which
includes the land proposed for immediate subdivision.
CONTIGUOUS
Touching or separated by nothing more than a ditch, canal, or public right-of-way.
COUNTY
Valencia County, New Mexico.
COVENANT
An express agreement or promise between two or more people to do or not to do a certain
thing. As used in this Section 10-2, it refers to a written, legally binding agreement between
two or more property owners to do or not to do certain constructions on the land or to pursue
or not pursue certain activities on the land or to use or not to use the land in any specific or
general manner.
CUL-DE-SAC
A short, dead-end street intersecting another street at one end and permanently terminating
at the other end, normally with a vehicular turnaround.
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PERMIT
A permit required by Section 10-1, Zoning, of the Village Code (§ 10-1-18), and issued in
conjunction with the Valencia County building permit application process.
EASEMENT
An acquired or granted right of use which one person may have in the land of another.
Easements are further classified as follows:
UTILITY EASEMENTS
Rights granted to public utilities for ingress and egress to serve water, sewer, telephone,
cable, gas and electric lines.
ACCESS EASEMENTS
The rights granted by a landowner for ingress and egress to and from property by either
purchase, deed or adverse possession or any other legal means. Any portion thereof
devoted to vehicular use shall be no less than 20 feet in width.
FUTURE STREET LINE
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 202/346
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A line, established by the governing body, for the purpose of delineating the future boundaries
of a public right-of-way to be used for street purposes.
FRONTAGE
The length of the front of a building or piece of land next to a street.
GOVERNING BODY
The Village governing body.
LOT
A tract, plot, or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership for building development.
LOT SIZE
The total square footage of the lot as described by the platted lot lines.
LOT WIDTH
The dimension between side property lines measured parallel to the street right-of-way
line or tangent line. In the case of irregularly shaped lots, the mean width shall be taken.
CORNER LOT
A lot bordering on two or more streets at their intersection.
DOUBLE-FRONTAGE LOT
Any lot which abuts two parallel or approximately parallel streets.
MASTER PLAN
A plan or any of its parts currently adopted and/or changed, modified or amended by the
governing body for the physical development of the area within the planning and platting
jurisdiction of the Village for the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing coordinated
and harmonious development.
MINIMUM LOT SIZE
The smallest allowable lot size in accordance with the provisions of Section 10-1, Zoning, of
the Village Code.
PARCEL
A unit of land capable of being described by location and boundaries and not dedicated for
public or common use.
PEDESTRIAN
Any human being afoot or in a wheelchair or similar device.
PHASED DEVELOPMENT
A subdivision that is implemented in sections or phases.
PLAT
A map, chart, survey, plan or replat certified by a licensed, registered land surveyor, the intent
of which is to describe a lot or subdivision and contains a description of the subdivided land
with ties to permanent monuments.
PUBLIC FACILITIES
Structures or uses of land which serve the general public, including municipal and private
utilities.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
That public area of land deeded, dedicated by plat, or otherwise acquired by any unit of
government and owned in fee for the purposes of movement of vehicles, pedestrian traffic,
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 203/346
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(3)
and/or for conveyance of public utility services and drainage.
REPLAT
To prepare and record a new plat, replacing all or a portion of a previously recorded plat that
has been vacated.
STREET
That portion of a public right-of-way or a private roadway which is primarily devoted to
vehicular use. A street normally provides primary access to abutting property. Streets are
further classified as follows:
ARTERIAL STREETS
Major streets or thoroughfares that carry or will carry a considerable amount of traffic of
more than one neighborhood character and which also serve abutting properties.
COLLECTOR STREETS
Streets that serve as a connection between a major or secondary thoroughfare and
several minor streets. The term includes the principal entrance street of a residential
development and streets for major circulation within such a development.
LOCAL STREETS
Streets of relatively short length that provide direct access to a limited number of abutting
residential properties and are designed to discourage their use by through traffic.
SUBDIVIDER
Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust or any other
group or combination acting as a unit, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a
subdivision as defined herein, and includes any agent of the subdivider.
SUBDIVISION; SUBDIVIDE
For the area of land within the boundaries of the Village, the division of land into two or
more parts by platting or by metes-and-bounds description into tracts for the purpose of
sale, lease or development.
For the area of land within the Village's extraterritorial subdivision and platting jurisdiction,
the division of land into two or more parts by platting or by metes-and-bounds description
into tracts of fewer than five acres in any one calendar year for the purpose of sale, lease
or development.
Subdivision does not include the following:
Any residual land retained by the subdivider after subdivision but which has not been
divided for subdivision purposes.
The sale or lease of offices, stores or similar space within a building.
Any division of land in which only gas, oil, mineral or water rights are severed from
the surface ownership of the land.
Any division of land created by court order, except court orders involving land grant
adjudications.
SUBDIVISION, LAND-SPLIT
A type of minor subdivision containing two lots.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR
A subdivision containing five or more lots or a subdivision containing not more than four lots,
one or more of which do not front on an existing street and involving new streets or the
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 204/346
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
creation of public improvements.[1]
SUBDIVISION, MINOR
A subdivision containing not more than four lots fronting on an existing street, not involving
any new streets or the creation of any public improvements, and not in conflict with any
provision of this Section 10-2, or the Master Plan or Section 10-1, Zoning, of the Village. A
minor subdivision may include the replat of all or a portion of an existing subdivision plat
wherein the number of lots is not increased and no changes are made to a public right-of-way.
TRAFFIC STUDY
A study prepared by a New Mexico certified and licensed engineer to determine the impact of
a proposed development on the existing roads and highways and recommends methods for
mitigating the impacts.
VACATION OF PLAT
To remove or delete all or part of a recorded subdivision plat, including legal dedications and
grants of easements.
VARIANCE
A modification or waiver of the regular subdivision design standards.
VEHICLE
Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn
upon a roadway or street.
VILLAGE ENGINEER
The licensed engineer or engineering firm currently under contract by the Village to provide
consultation on matters requiring such expertise.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 10-2-7. General provisions.
Required plat. Every person who desires to subdivide land into two or more lots or replat any
parcel of land in accordance with this Section 10-2 shall furnish a plat of the proposed subdivision
prepared by a surveyor, registered and licensed by the State of New Mexico, and shall comply
with the requirements of this Section 10-2. No such subdivision lot shall be smaller than the
minimum lot size allowed by Section 10-2, Zoning, of the Village Code. Upon request, the Village
Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer shall furnish the subdivider with basic information on
the requirements.
Subdivision within Village corporate limits. Any proposed subdivision, replat or vacation of plat
occurring within the corporate limits of the Village shall conform to the requirements of this Section
10-2, and shall be submitted for review and approval by the governing body following
recommendation by the Commission prior to filing with the County Clerk, before beginning
improvement activities or negotiating the sale or lease of any lot within the proposed subdivision.
Subdivision outside Village corporate limits. Any proposed subdivision occurring outside the
corporate limits but within the planning and platting jurisdiction of the Village shall conform to the
requirements of this Section 10-2 and as supplemented by the provisions of the County Land
Subdivision Regulations, and shall be submitted for concurrent review and approval by the
governing body, following recommendation by the Commission, and the Board of County
Commissioners prior to filing with the County Clerk, before beginning improvement activities or
negotiating the sale or lease of any lot within the proposed subdivision.
Appropriateness. Within the jurisdiction of the Village, land may be subdivided only in accordance
with procedures established by this Section 10-2. The subdivision shall be approved when it is
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 205/346
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
F.
G.
A.
determined that the land to be subdivided is suitable for the purposes proposed, that the
subdivision complies with this Section 10-2, and that the subdivision is not contrary to the best
interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
Acceptance of public lands. Approval of a subdivision shall not constitute acceptance by the
Village of public rights-of-way, easements, or other public lands shown on the subdivision plat.
The dedication of land for public use of any nature within the planning and platting jurisdiction of
the Village shall be accepted by the Village only after approval by the governing body.
Platting considerations. In order to provide guidance to subdividers concerning acceptable
proposed plats, the following considerations are fundamental:
The availability of adequate streets, fire protection, police protection, refuse service, public
schools, parks and recreation facilities, and utility services shall all be considered in all land
subdivisions;
The subdivider shall preserve major trees, scenic points, historic places and other community
landmarks wherever feasible or required;
If the subdivider owns or controls land abutting the land he wishes to subdivide immediately,
or if the subdivider expresses an intention to subdivide in a phased or incremental manner,
the subdivider may be required to submit a proposed comprehensive area plan for the total
area to be approved or approved in modified form prior to approval of the preliminary plat.
Any plat submitted shall be a reasonable planning unit in relation to the approved
comprehensive area plan. The proposed area plan shall show proposed uses, types, and
densities of development as well as proposed arterial, collector, and local street alignments;
No subdivider shall proceed with any grading and/or dirt work specifically in relation to a
proposed subdivision before approval has been given for the preliminary plat. Such grading
shall be consistent with the recommendations of an approved drainage plan, if any have been
required pursuant to this Section 10-2;
In order to ensure reasonable circulation and access for neighborhoods, local residential
streets shall connect with surrounding streets where necessary to permit the convenient
movement of traffic between residential neighborhoods or to facilitate access to
neighborhoods by emergency service vehicles or for other sufficient reasons. Connections
shall not be permitted where the effect would be to encourage the use of such streets by
substantial through traffic unless secondary or additional access routes are provided; and
Given that agriculture and the raising of livestock is a permissive use in every residential zone
in the Village, each subdivider must make every effort to ensure that the proposed subdivision
is compatible with such uses on surrounding properties and that the subdivision shall not
interfere with such uses in any way. (NMSA 1978, §§ 47-9-1 through 47-9-7, the Right to
Farm Act)
Recording of approved plat. See § 10-2-22 for procedure.
§ 10-2-8. Preapplication procedures.
Preapplication conference. Prior to submission of a plat, the subdivider shall discuss with the
Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer the procedure and requirements for plat approval. The
Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer, assisted by the Village Engineer if needed, shall
provide guidance to the subdivider as to the appropriateness of the proposal in relation to the
Master Plan of the Village, any applicable county plans, and zoning. The purpose of the
preapplication conference is to allow the subdivider to become familiar with the procedures and
requirements of this Section 10-2 and applicable ordinances, and to grant the Planning and
Zoning Administrator/Officer a preview of the proposed subdivision in its conceptual stages.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 206/346
B.
C.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
A.
B.
Advice to subdivider. The Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer or other Village employees
may assist the subdivider in analyzing the development and plan for its integration with the
community, and may give informal guidance to the development at a stage when potential points
of difference can be resolved to simplify official actions and save unnecessary expense and delay
to the subdivider.
Review procedures. Previous to the filing of an application for approval of the preliminary plat, the
subdivider shall submit to the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer a sketch plan and data as
specified herein. This step does not require formal application, payment of fee, or filing of a plat.
The Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer, within 30 days after sketch plan submittal, shall
inform the subdivider whether the sketch plan and data meet the general intent of this Section 10-
2. If the sketch plan and data do not meet the general intent, the Planning and Zoning
Administrator/Officer shall express the reasons therefor and provide general advice to the
subdivider to assist in bringing the proposed plan into conformance.
§ 10-2-9. Preapplication data requirements.
(This section applies to major and minor subdivisions, land-splits, replats and vacations.)
Location map. A location map shall show the relationship of the proposed plat to existing public
facilities which serve it; all abutting streets, nearby commercial areas, schools and parks; and
scale, North arrow and date.
Sketch plan. A sketch plan shall show the proposed layout of streets, lots, and other features in
relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a freehand pencil sketch made directly on
a current plat map, such as that from the County Assessor's office or from the Middle Rio Grande
Conservancy District.
Written information.
Preapplication information shall include the name and address of the subdivider and his
agent, if any, the total area of the proposed plat, the area of each proposed use, and a
description of the existing conditions of the site and the proposed development as necessary
to supplement the sketch plan. This information shall include data on existing and proposed
covenants and land characteristics, including surface drainage, grading, landfill areas, and
available private and public utilities.
For commercial subdivisions, the plan shall also include data on access for fire and
emergency response, landscaping, parking, setbacks, driveways, building footprints and
topography. This information shall also describe the subdivision proposal, such as the number
and typical lot width and depth of residential lots, business areas, public areas, and proposed
utilities.
§ 10-2-10. Preliminary plat procedures.
Application. Upon completion of the preapplication review, the subdivider shall prepare a written
application on prescribed forms, together with seven copies of the preliminary application
package, which shall be delivered to the Village office at least 60 days prior to the regular meeting
of the governing body, at which time the plat is to be formally submitted for review. The plat shall
contain the name and address of the person to whom a notice of hearing shall be sent.
Supplementary material shall be submitted according to the following specifications in this Section
10-2.
Annexation and/or zone change. If annexation and/or a zone change is proposed or required to
accomplish the proposed development in connection with the plat, the plat shall not be approved
until such time as the annexation and/or zone change is officially adopted by the governing body.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 207/346
(1)
(2)
C.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
D.
E.
F.
Traffic study for major subdivision.
A traffic study shall be required for all subdivisions containing 20 or more parcels. See § 10-2-
17 for procedure.
The governing body shall consider the traffic study and the impact of the traffic on the
surrounding community and the Village before approving any major subdivision. The
governing body may refuse to permit any major subdivision if it determines that the benefits of
the subdivision are outweighed by the impact of the traffic on the surrounding community, its
streets or the Village itself.
Review by the Commission. Following delivery of a complete preliminary plat application package,
the Commission shall, at a public hearing, review the preliminary plat and supplementary material
prepared as required by this Section 10-2.
Notice.
The Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer shall send notice of the time and place of
the hearing on a plat by mail to the address on the plat and all property owners with
property abutting the proposed subdivision within 100 feet, excluding public rights-of-way,
which are located within Bosque Farms Village limits, not less than 15 days before the
date of the hearing.
The Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer shall also give public notice of the
preliminary plat application in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village at least 15
days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice shall indicate the location of the
proposed subdivision and where the preliminary plat is available for viewing, where
interested persons may examine the preliminary plat and file comments.
Public hearing.
At the public hearing, interested persons shall be allowed to address the Commission.
The Commission shall then provide to the governing body a written report of its findings,
together with a recommendation that the preliminary plat be approved, conditionally
approved, stating conditions, or disapproved. A recommendation to disapprove shall
state the specific reason(s) for the disapproval and shall refer to the ordinance, section or
policy where the preliminary plat is deficient. In preparing its report of findings, the
Commission shall consult with any appropriate persons or agencies concerned with the
proposed subdivision. Any comments or findings of any reviewing agency shall be
entered upon the records of the Commission.
If the Village Engineer or any agency other the Village staff should be required to review
the submitted materials, the time period within which the Commission must act may
require reasonable extension. An extension of time may also be granted by the governing
body prior to final action upon written request by the subdivider.
Public hearing by the governing body. Upon receipt of a formal submittal of a preliminary plat, the
governing body shall call for a public hearing to be held within 35 days in order to act on the plat.
An extension of time may be granted by the governing body prior to final action upon written
request by the subdivider. No plat shall be acted upon without a public hearing.
Decision. If the preliminary plat is approved, the governing body shall express its approval and
state the conditions of such approval, if any. If the plat is disapproved, the governing body shall
express its disapproval and its reasons therefor. The action of the governing body shall be noted
on two copies of the preliminary plat, with all necessary conditions and supplemental information
attached and referenced. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider and the other retained by
the Village.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 208/346
G.
H.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
For major subdivision actions, approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the
final plat. Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of approval to the layout submitted on the
preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final plat. The subdivider shall be notified in
writing, within five days following the public hearing, of the action taken by the governing body and
the reasons therefor.
Duration of preliminary plat approval. Approval of a preliminary plat is effective for one year, at
which time the approval of the preliminary plat is rescinded and deemed null and void, unless
extended by the governing body, based on a finding that the delay has been unavoidable and that
extension is in the public interest.
§ 10-2-11. Preliminary plat data requirements.
The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale of no less than one inch to 200 feet for the purpose of
showing all details clearly. An adequate number of sheets, no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches, shall
be used to show the proposed subdivision in its entirety. Where more than one sheet is required, each
sheet shall be numbered in relation to the total number of sheets involved, and each sheet shall have a
small key map showing its relationship to the whole.
§ 10-2-12. Final plat procedures.
(This section applies to major subdivisions.)
Application. Application for approval of the final plat shall be transmitted on prescribed forms to the
Village Office at least 30 days prior to the hearing at which it is to be formally submitted. Such
application shall include an original and seven copies of the final plat and other required exhibits.
Submittal to the governing body must be within one year following approval of the preliminary plat;
otherwise, such approval shall become null and void unless an extension of time has been
granted by the governing body. The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as
approved.
Review.
The governing body shall review the final plat and other exhibits submitted at a public hearing
for conformity to this Section 10-2 and shall ensure that the conditions of the preliminary plat,
as approved, have been met. The final plat may constitute all or a portion of the approved
preliminary plat the subdivider desires to record and develop at the time; provided, however,
that any such portion shall be subject to the full application and review process and all other
requirements in accordance with this Section 10-2.
The Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer shall send notice of the time and place of the
hearing on the plat by mail to the address on the plat not less than 15 days before the date of
the hearing.
The Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer shall also give public notice of the final plat
application in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village at least 15 days prior to the
date of the hearing. The notice shall indicate the location of the proposed subdivision and
where the final plat is available for viewing, where interested persons may examine the final
plat and file comments.
Dedication of land for a major subdivision, if applicable. The final plat shall not be sent to the
County Clerk for filing until any dedication of land for public use, in accordance with this Section
10-2, has been formally accepted by resolution of the governing body. The procedure for such
dedications shall be as follows:[1]
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 209/346
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
[1]
D.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
E.
[2]
F.
All lands dedicated for public use shall be inspected to ascertain compliance with this Section
10-2. Such inspection shall be performed and documented by a qualified and certified
engineer at the expense of the subdivider prior to the submittal of the final plat. All new streets
must, upon inspection, be constructed as required by this Section 10-2. The final plat shall not
be acted upon without such inspection.
Acceptance of land dedicated for public use shall be made by resolution of the governing
body within 35 days of the date of final plat submission. A copy of the resolution shall be sent
to the subdivider for inclusion with the final plat.
Those lands which are accepted by the governing body for dedication to the public shall
become the responsibility of the Village for maintenance and future improvements.
Any lands offered for dedication but not accepted by the governing body shall be specifically
identified on the plat or deed.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Decision. If the final plat is in substantial conformance with the preliminary plat and complies with
this Section 10-2, it shall be approved by the governing body. Approval or disapproval shall be
given within 35 days of the date of the final plat submission, unless the subdivider agrees in
writing to a deferral. The governing body's decision shall be recorded on the original drawing of
the final plat and on two copies thereof and shall be dated and verified by the signature of the
Mayor. Should the final plat be disapproved, the governing body shall express in writing the
reasons for disapproval and attach to two copies of the final plat. One of said copies shall be
returned to the subdivider and the other shall become a part of the files of the Village
Clerk/Administrator or his/her designee.
Dedication of water rights. An applicant for subdivision approval within the Village corporate limits
shall agree that if the Village approves the subdivision, in consideration of that approval, the
applicant will make water rights available to the Village in an amount determined by the Village as
necessary to serve the subdivision with water available to the Village. The necessary water rights
shall be estimated on a formula of 0.4 acre foot of consumptive use water rights per subdivided
lot.
The applicant shall make these water rights available to the Village in one of the following
forms:
By dedicating water rights to the Village, meeting legal requirements to enable the Village
to serve the proposed subdivision with water.
By obtaining, by other means, the dedication of the necessary water rights meeting legal
requirements to enable the Village to serve the proposed subdivision with water.
If rights are to be dedicated, the applicant shall demonstrate ownership of those water rights
prior to approval of the subdivision.
Recording. The final plat shall be in effect only after having been duly recorded in the office of the
County Clerk and copies filed with the Village Clerk/Administrator or his/her designee. Approval of
the final plat shall become null and void if the plat is not so recorded within six months after the
date of approval. Submittal for recording is the subdivider's responsibility. In the case of a replat,
the subdivider shall request the County Clerk to mark the original plat with the words "replatted" or
"partially replatted" and refer on the original plat to the filed location of the replat. The Village
Clerk/Administrator or his/her designee shall mark the copies of the original plat on file in the
offices of the Village in a similar manner. No development review permits shall be issued until
copies of the recording of the final plat have been placed on file with the Village and the county.[2]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 210/346
G.
A.
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
D.
A.
(1)
[1]
(2)
B.
Replat. After final approval of any plat, no lot or block shall be further subdivided or the area of any
platted lot diminished, and no change shall be made in the platting of any street, alley or easement
established by said plat except upon the filing of a replat, showing such proposed change, or
changes, with the Commission and securing its approval in accordance with the procedures herein
established.
§ 10-2-13. Final plat data requirements.
Final plat. The subdivider shall submit the original and two copies of the final plat to the governing
body for approval in accordance with the following provisions.
Size, scale, material. The final plat shall be drawn, scribed or photoreproduced in black ink on
tracing cloth or stable-base polyester material, on sheets no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches,
and shall be at a scale of one inch to 200 feet. Enough sheets shall be used to show the
subdivision in its entirety, with each sheet numbered in relation to the total number of sheets
involved, and each shall have a small key map showing its relationship to the whole.
§ 10-2-14. Replat procedures.
Process. A replat, as defined by this Section 10-2, may be approved by the Commission in a twostep
process of preapplication conference and submission of a final plat.
Qualifications. In order to qualify for approval as a replat, the following conditions must exist:
The replat shall not increase the total number of previously existing lots.
No new public right-of-way shall be created and no existing public right-of-way shall be
changed.
The replat will not create a need for any additional public facilities which currently exist to
serve the area of the subdivision.
Application, review, decision and recording procedures shall conform to §§ 10-2-10A, B, D, E and
F, 10-2-11 and 10-2-22.
Replat. After final approval of any plat, no lot or block shall be further subdivided or the area of any
platted lot diminished, and no change shall be made in the platting of any street, alley or easement
established by said plat, except upon the filing of a replat, showing such proposed change, or
changes, with the Commission and securing its approval in accordance with the procedures herein
established.
§ 10-2-15. Land-split procedures.
Process. A land-split, as defined by this Section 10-2, may be approved by the governing body
following recommendation by the Commission in a two-step process of preapplication conference
and submission of a final plat.
Qualifications. In order to qualify for approval as a land-split, the following conditions must exist:
The land-split subdivision shall divide the tract into two lots. These two lots or any part thereof
shall not be further divided as a land-split subdivision.
The two lots shall conform to the zoning regulations governing that zone district.[1]
Editor's Note: See Sec. 10-1, Zoning.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 211/346
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
C.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
[1]
(b)
(c)
(d)
(5)
B.
Adequate ingress and egress to and from both lots must be provided by the subdivider by
either a public dedicated roadway or a private roadway easement of at least 40 feet in width.
The Village shall not be responsible for any private roadway easements developed in a landsplit
subdivision.
Application and approval for a land-split subdivision shall be made in accordance with the
procedures in §§ 10-2-7, 10-2-8, 10-2-12 and 10-2-13 of this Section 10-2.
The subdivision shall not be in conflict with any provision of this Section 10-2, the Master
Plan, or Section 10-1, Zoning, of the Village.
Application, review, decision and recording procedures shall conform to §§ 10-2-10A, B, D, E and
F, 10-2-11 and 10-2-22.
§ 10-2-16. Minor subdivision procedures.
Process. A minor subdivision, as defined by this Section 10-2, may be approved by the governing
body following recommendation by the Commission in a two-step process of preapplication
conference and submission of a final plat.
Qualifications. In order to qualify for approval as a minor subdivision, the following conditions must
exist:
The subdivision shall contain no more than four lots, with the exception of certain replats
which satisfy all other conditions stated herein.
All subdivided lots shall front on existing dedicated public right-of-way, with the exception of
land-splits which satisfy all other conditions stated herein.
No new public right-of-way shall be created and no existing public right-of-way shall be
changed.
The subdivision will not create a need for any addition to public facilities which currently exist
to serve the area of the subdivision, with the exception of land-splits which satisfy all other
conditions herein.
Subdividers with certain tracts of land which may not have adequate access off an existing
dedicated public right-of-way, and may require an addition to the public facilities, may be
granted a land-split subdivision by the governing body following recommendation by the
Commission. In order to qualify as a land-split subdivision, the following conditions must be
met:
The land-split subdivision divides the tract into two lots. These two lots or any part thereof
shall not be further subdivided as a land-split subdivision.
The two lots shall conform to the zoning regulations governing that zone district.[1]
Editor's Note: See Sec. 10-1, Zoning.
Adequate ingress and egress to and from both lots must be provided by the subdivider by
either a public dedicated roadway or a private roadway easement of at least 40 feet in
width.
The Village of Bosque Farms shall not be responsible for any private roadway easements
developed in a land-split subdivision.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 212/346
(e)
(6)
C.
A.
B.
(1)
(a)
[1]
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
(3)
C.
A.
Application and approval for a land-split subdivision shall be made in accordance with the
procedures for minor subdivisions as stated in this § 10-2-16.
The subdivision shall not be in conflict with any provision of this Section 10-2, or the Master
Plan or Section 10-1, Zoning, of the Village.
Application, review, decision and recording procedures shall conform to §§ 10-2-10A, B, D, E and
F, 10-2-11 and 10-2-22.
§ 10-2-17. Major subdivision procedures.
Process. A major subdivision, as defined by this Section 10-2, may be approved by the governing
body following recommendation by the Commission in a three-step process of preapplication
conference, submission of a preliminary plat and submission of a final plat.
Application, review and decision: as per §§ 10-2-10, 10-2-11, 10-2-12 and 10-2-13.
Traffic study.
A traffic study shall be required for all subdivisions containing 20 or more parcels. The report
shall be prepared by a qualified engineer, licensed in the State of New Mexico.
Submittal procedures:
Following the preapplication conference, the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer
shall schedule and conduct a special meeting with the applicant to establish the scope of
the traffic study report and the requirements stated herein. The Planning and Zoning
Administrator/Officer shall maintain a written record of this meeting;
Submit the draft study to the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer for review by that
department and the Utilities/Road Director;[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Submit three copies of the final report to the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer;
and
Submit a copy of the traffic study report to the State Department of Transportation, along
with a cover letter of explanation, for review, if the proposed subdivision requires direct
access to a state or federal highway.
Traffic study report requirements. The traffic study report will adhere to the processes and
products outlined in the New Mexico State Department of Transportation's State Access
Management Manual. This manual prescribes a tiered approach to evaluating traffic impacts
from a proposed development.
§ 10-2-18. Required improvements.
Authorization. Receipt of the signed copy for the preliminary plat is authorization for the subdivider
to proceed with the minimum improvements as specified in Subsection C of this § 10-2-18,
hereinafter referred to as "improvements." Prior to the construction of any improvements or to the
submission of any bond, the subdivider shall furnish the Commission and governing body with all
plans and data necessary for the construction of said improvements. These plans shall be
examined by the Commission and governing body and will be approved if in accordance with the
requirements stated in Subsections B and C below; following this approval, construction can be
started.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 213/346
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
A.
Installation assurance. Final plans for roadway and utilities shall be prepared by an engineer
registered in accordance with the laws of the State of New Mexico. The Village shall be assured of
the installation of these improvements in a satisfactory manner by one or more of the following
methods:
Complete installation of the improvement prior to approval of the final plat.
The subdivider shall provide a bond, letter of credit, escrow deposit or another type of security
acceptable to the Village in an amount not less than 125% of the estimated cost of the
required improvements to insure completion of the installation of the utilities and roadway
improvements as provided by the subdivision plat. Any funds remaining after completion of
the improvements will be refunded to the developer less administrative fees and costs,
including attorney fees, incurred by the Village to ensure compliance.
Installation of improvements. The subdivider may prepare and secure approval of the preliminary
plat and then install improvements in the area covered by the preliminary plat. Improvements must
be installed only in that part of the area for which a final plat will be submitted for approval and
filing. Phased development of a subdivision is permitted, provided all improvements in that phase
are completed and a surety has been secured to complete the improvements to the final plat. The
improvements to be installed shall include the following:
All subdivision boundary corners, and the four corners of all street intersections shall be
marked with permanent monuments. A permanent monument shall be deemed to be concrete
with a minimum dimension of four inches, extending three feet below the surface of the
ground. Should conditions prohibit the placing of monuments on line, offset marking will be
permitted; provided, however, that offset courses and distances are shown on the plat.
All streets shall be constructed in accordance with the design standards provided in this
Section 10-2.
The subdivider shall present evidence that adequate water and sewer service for each lot is
provided in compliance with the requirements of the New Mexico Environment Department
and in conformance with any applicable procedure and standards for centralized water as
more specifically set forth with the provisions of Section 9-2, Water, of the Village Code and/or
sewer systems adopted by the Village of Bosque Farms.
Drainage facilities or other means of stormwater management shall be addressed by the
subdivider and shall require assurances by a certified engineer that the subdivision
development will not adversely affect the surrounding properties due to stormwater runoff.
An inspection by a qualified and certified engineer is required during the stages of
construction of improvements to ensure compliance with the above requirements. The final
inspection report shall be made within 10 days of completion of the improvements. Such
inspection shall be conducted and documented at the expense of the subdivider and
delivered to the Village offices prior to final plat approval.
§ 10-2-19. Design standards.
All subdivisions shall conform to the following minimum design standards established by the Village.
Subdivisions outside the Village corporate limits shall be exempt from specific requirements for paving
as required by Subsection B(11) through (16) below.
Erosion. No subdivider shall remove or permit to be removed the existing ground cover in the
subdivision without making provisions to prevent wind and/or water erosion and resultant damage
to adjacent properties.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 214/346
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
B. Street standards. The character, extent, width and location of all streets shall conform to the
Village Master Plan or policies established by the governing body and shall be consistent and
appropriate in their relationship to existing and planned streets, topographic conditions, public
convenience, safety, and the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.
Where an arterial or collector street is not shown and defined in the Village Master Plan and
there is not an adopted future street line, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall
either:
Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing development where
topographic or other conditions make continuance of, or conformance to, existing streets
impractical; or
Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved by the Village to meet a particular
situation where topographic or other conditions make continuance of, or conformance to,
existing streets impractical.
Local streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing
streets within the jurisdiction of the Village. Street name changes shall be subject to the
approval of the governing body upon the recommendation of the Commission. A street name
shall only be changed if the applicant shows that there will be a public benefit which clearly
outweighs the public confusion which would be created by the name change.
Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at ninety-degree angles, and no
street shall intersect any other street at less than 60°.
At any place where there is a private gravel road in a minor subdivision, streets shall have a
minimum forty-foot paved apron at intersections onto a Village paved road. The apron shall
be measured from the roadway edge line.
Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of 25 feet, or of greater
radius where the governing body may deem it necessary. Comparable cut-offs or chords in
place of round corners may be permitted.
Culs-de-sac shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway
diameter of at least 90 feet.
All street gradients shall be subject to approval of the governing body. Within 100 feet of any
intersection, the maximum gradient shall be 5% to provide adequate and safe sight distance
and the intersection itself shall have a maximum gradient of 3%.
Streets and alleys shall be provided in accordance with the following minimum standards:
Street Type
Right-of-Way Width
(feet)
Arterial 80
Collector 55
Local 40
Alley 20
The minimum radius at the center line for horizontal curves on streets shall be as follows:
Street Type
Curve Radius
(feet)
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 215/346
(11)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(12)
(a)
(13)
Street Type
Curve Radius
(feet)
Arterial 400
Collector 200
Local 50
Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except that the governing body
may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service
access, such as off-street loading, unloading and parking adequate for the uses proposed.
Alleys may be provided in residential areas at the option of the subdivider, but are to be
discouraged where they would serve no useful public purpose or where easements would
better serve the purpose. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be
avoided, but, where necessary, corners shall be rounded to permit safe vehicular operation.
Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, adequate turnaround
space shall be provided.
Streets shall be constructed according to the following specifications:
The paved portion of all new streets shall have the following minimum lane widths:
Street Type
Minimum Lane Width
(feet)
Arterial 12
Collector 11
Local 10
All roads shall be crowned to facilitate drainage. Such crown shall be sloped at 1/4 inch
of rise per foot.
Culverts of adequate size shall be placed at all crossings of watercourses. If the
proposed crossing is a watercourse under the jurisdiction of the Middle Rio Grand
Conservancy District (MRGCD), the subdivider must consult with MRGCD and obtain the
proper permit prior to beginning any work on the culvert. The minimum culvert size shall
be 18 inches.
All streets shall have barrow ditches, except at driveways. The center line of barrow
ditches shall be no less than seven feet from the roadway edge and no less than one foot
below the crown height of the base course. The base course will be extended two feet
beyond the pavement edge at the same slope as the pavement. Where the right-of-way
permits, there will be a four-to-one slope from the edge of the base course to the flow line
(bottom center) of the barrow ditch. Where no curb or sidewalk exists, the driveway
construction shall not block the drainage ditch without providing proper drainage
structures.
All roads shall be constructed to meet or exceed the equivalent single-axle load (ESAL)
for 20 years.
Subgrade preparation for all new streets shall meet all recommendations reported in a soils
evaluation study which shall be prepared by an engineer registered in accordance with the
laws of New Mexico. The cost of the soil evaluation shall be paid for by the subdivider.
Subgrade preparations may exceed, but must meet, the following minimum requirements:
The roadbed and barrow ditch areas shall be scarified to a minimum depth of six inches.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 216/346
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(14)
(15)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(16)
(17)
All foreign matter, including but not limited to vegetable matter, scrap, etc., shall be
removed.
The roadbed and barrow ditch shall be shaped to the above required specifications.
For local streets, the top six inches of the subgrade roadbed area shall be compacted to
not less than 96% of maximum density, except high volume change soils shall be
compacted to 90% of maximum density. For collector streets, the top 12 inches of the
subgrade roadbed area shall be compacted to not less than 96% of maximum density,
except high volume change soils shall be compacted to 90% of maximum density. For
the purpose of this specification, a "high volume change soil" is defined as any soil
containing 35% or more of material passing a No. 200 sieve. Method of compaction
optional.
Base preparation for all new streets shall meet all recommendations reported in a soil
evaluation study which shall be prepared by an engineer registered in accordance with the
laws of New Mexico. The cost of the soil evaluation shall be paid for by the subdivider. Base
preparations may exceed, but must meet, the following minimum requirements:
All new streets shall be constructed with a depth of at least six inches of one-inch gravel
base course in accordance with the following graduations, to be placed upon a prepared
subgrade as specified above upon the entire length and width of the roadbed:
Sieve Size Passing by Weight
1" 100%
#4 40% to 60%
#10 30% to 45%
#40 15% to 25%
#200 2% to 6%
The gravel base course as specified above shall be compacted to not less than 96% of
maximum density.
All new arterial and collector streets shall be paved in accordance with acceptable design
procedures. Such procedures shall include the most current pavement design standards
published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
(AASHTO) and the local adaptation of those procedures developed by the New Mexico State
Department of Transportation.
All new local streets shall be paved in accordance with acceptable design procedures,
including but not limited to the following requirements:
Subgrade and base preparation shall be completed as specified above, or to a higher
standard if warranted by site conditions or traffic projections.
Pavement for all local streets, except culs-de-sac, shall consist of a minimum of two
inches of asphalt concrete, with tack coat if required, and at 1,500 pounds' stability.
Pavement for culs-de-sac shall be of the same construction, except shall consist of a
minimum of three inches of asphalt concrete applied in two lifts of 1 1/2 inches.
Pavement for all collector streets shall consist of a minimum of three inches of asphalt
concrete, with tack coat if required, and at 1,500 pounds' stability.
Alternative pavements may be approved by the governing body with the advice and
recommendation of a qualified and certified engineer.
The most current specifications for road and bridge construction established by the New
Mexico State Department of Transportation shall be used as the authority for questions
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 217/346
(18)
[1]
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
F.
(1)
(2)
G.
concerning street construction.
An inspection by a qualified and certified engineer is required within 10 days of completion of
new streets to ensure compliance with the above requirements. Such inspection shall be
conducted and documented at the expense of the subdivider and delivered to the Village
offices.
Drainage. Adequate provision shall be made for drainage of stormwater, subject to the approval of
the Village in accordance with the policy established by Section 10-1, Zoning, regarding retention
of localized stormwater; any specific area drainage plans; and any requirements pursuant to the
National Flood Insurance Program of the Federal Emergency Management Agency.[1]
Editor's Note: See Sec. 11-1, Flood Damage Prevention.
Easements. An adequate easement shall be dedicated along all important watercourses for the
purpose of widening, deepening, sloping, improving or protecting the channel for water-carrying
purposes. Easements for underground utilities shall be provided where necessary and shall be at
least 10 feet in width.
Blocks. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to provision
of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; to zoning
requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions; to needs for convenient access, circulation, control
and safety of street traffic; and to limitations and opportunities of topography.
Lots. The lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots will provide satisfactory and
desirable building sites properly related to topography and the character of adjacent development.
Depth and width of lots laid out for commercial purposes shall be adequate to provide offstreet
services and parking required by the type of use contemplated.
Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit appropriate building setback
from an orientation to both streets.
The subdivision of the land shall provide satisfactory access to an existing public right-of-way
by means of a public right-of-way. Lots within a minor subdivision may be accessed by either
a private way or a public right-of-way.
Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
Double-frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of a
residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of
orientation or topography.
Underground distribution regulations.
Residential. On all new residential subdivisions submitted to the Village for approval, the
electrical services will be underground, installed in accordance with rules and regulations
adopted by the Public Utility Commission. This policy should be applied only to new
subdivided areas where grading has been completed and before paving and electrical
facilities have been installed.
Commercial. On all new and remodeled commercial electrical services above 150 amperes
per leg, the service will be underground and installed in accordance with rules and regulations
adopted by the Public Utility Commission.
§ 10-2-20. Vacation of plats.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 218/346
A.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
D.
(a)
(1)
A.
Necessity. Nothing in this section requires that a vacation be undertaken if a replat, accomplishing
the elimination of lot lines, is duly approved. A vacation is required when no replatting is
undertaken but elimination of lot lines, rights-of-way, or easement lines dividing a parcel is to be
accomplished.
Application procedure. Any plat filed in the office of the County Clerk and within the planning and
platting jurisdiction of the Village may be vacated according to the following procedures:
The subdivider of land proposed to be vacated, exclusive of public rights-of-way, shall sign a
duly acknowledged statement declaring the plat or a portion of the plat is to be vacated and
shall apply to the Commission for approval.
Where a public right-of-way is proposed to be vacated:
The Commission shall mail letters to franchised utilities and to the owner(s) of record of
all lots adjacent to the public right-of-way to be vacated, informing them of the nature of
the proposed vacation, and notifying them of the date, time, and place of the hearing. At
least 15 days shall be allowed for such comments before a decision is reached.
If the public right-of-way proposed for vacation is paved, or if the entire width of the rightof-
way is proposed for vacation, the applicant shall post and maintain one or more signs,
as provided and where instructed by the Commission, at least 15 days prior to the date of
the hearing. The applicant is responsible for removing such signs within five days after
the hearing is completed. Failure to properly post signs is grounds for deferral of the
request. No one except the applicant, the agent of the applicant, or the Village shall
remove or tamper with any such required sign during the period it is required to be
maintained under this subsection.
In considering the vacation of all or part of a public right-of-way, the Commission shall
determine whether or not the vacation will adversely affect the interests of persons
owning abutting land or land within the subdivision being vacated.
The rights-of-way of any public or private utility, including drainage, existing prior to the
vacation, total or partial, of any plat are not affected by the vacation of a plat unless an
authorized representative of the utility involved agrees in writing to have the rights vacated.
Public hearing. A decision on approval and endorsement shall be made at a hearing by the
Commission. Public notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village shall be published
at least 15 days before the date of the hearing; the notice shall indicate the location of the
proposed vacation, where a map of the proposed vacation may be viewed and information on the
hearing. If approved by the Commission, the endorsement shall be within 10 days of the
conclusion of the hearing.
Recording. The vacation is in effect only after the approved statement declaring the vacation has
been recorded in the office of the County Clerk. The County Clerk shall be requested to mark the
original plat with the words "vacated" or "partially vacated" and refer on the plat to the volume and
page on which the statement of vacation is recorded. Submittal for recording is the applicant's
responsibility. The applicant shall also provide certified proof of the recording by the County Clerk
to the Village.
§ 10-2-21. Variances.
Circumstances.
A variance may be granted under the following circumstances:
Where varying from the normal requirements will encourage flexibility, economy, effective
use of open space, or ingenuity in design of a subdivision, in accordance with accepted
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 219/346
(b)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
principles of site planning; or
Where extraordinary hardship or practical difficulty may result from strict compliance with
the minimum standards.
The subdivider shall, at the time the preliminary plat is filed with the Planning and Zoning
Commission, submit a written application for a variance(s). The governing body, following
recommendation by the Commission, may vary or modify the requirements so that the
subdivider is allowed to develop the property in a reasonable manner, but at the same time so
that the public welfare and the interests of the Village are protected and the general intent and
spirit of this Section 10-2 is preserved. However, such relief may not be granted if it is
detrimental to the public good or impairs the intent and purpose of this Section 10-2 or the
desirable development of the community in accordance with plans and policies of the
governing body. Any variance granted shall be entered in the records of the governing body,
setting forth the reasons which justified the variance.
Application. A request for a variance shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Administrator/Officer on prescribed application forms, and upon payment of an administrative fee.
A completed, signed, and notarized application form must be received by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator/Officer at least 20 days prior to the Commission meeting date when the application
will be considered. Public notice shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation in the area at
least 15 days prior to the date of said meeting. The Commission will then make its
recommendations to the governing body, which at its regular meeting will either approve or
disapprove the variance request. The applicant shall post and maintain one or more signs on the
premises, as provided and where instructed by the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer, at
least 15 days prior to the date of the Commission meeting at which the application will be heard.
The purpose of the sign or signs is to provide public notice of the application for a variance.
Failure to properly post such signs is grounds for deferral or denial of the application. The
applicant is responsible for removing such signs within five days after a decision is made
regarding the application.
Requirements. The governing body may impose any necessary requirements or conditions in
approving a variance in order to assure that the requested variance:
Will cause no significant hazard, annoyance, or inconvenience to the owners or occupants of
nearby property;
Will not significantly change the character of the neighborhood or reduce the value of nearby
property;
Will not impose any significant cost burden upon the Village; and
Will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Section 10-2.
Evidence. An application for a variance shall be accompanied by evidence in writing from
landowners within 100 feet, excluding public rights-of-way, of the boundary of the property owned
by or controlled by the person for which the variance is requested stating whether the landowners
do or do not object to the variance, if granted. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
obtain such evidence.
Approval.
In approving variances, the governing body may require such conditions as will, in its
judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of this Section
10-2.
Any waiver of provisions of this Section 10-2 shall require notice of waiver as approved by the
Village of Bosque Farms governing body to be placed on the final subdivision plat and on a
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 220/346
F.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(d)
(5)
D.
separately recorded document.
Further, in granting modifications and exceptions, the governing body shall place conditions which
will, in its judgment, substantially secure the objectives of the standards or requirements involved.
§ 10-2-22. Recording information.
The final plat is in effect only after been duly recorded in the office of the County Clerk and copies
have been filed with the Village Clerk/Administrator or his/her designee. Approval of the final plat
shall become null and void if the plat is not so recorded within six months after the date of
approval. Submittal for recording is the subdivider's responsibility.
In the case of a replat, the subdivider shall request the County Clerk to mark the original plat with
the words "replatted" or "partially replatted" and refer on the original plat to the filed location of the
replat. The Village Clerk/Administrator or his/her designee shall mark the copies of the original plat
on file in the offices of the Village in a similar manner after having filed the original drawing of the
final plat with the County Clerk.
No development review permits shall be issued until copies of the recording of the final plat have
been placed on file with the Village.
The plat shall contain the following information for recording:
Name of proposed subdivision, if applicable, name and address of subdivider, agent, and
principal persons preparing the preliminary plat.
Scale, North arrow, name of registered land surveyor, and date established for formal
submittal.
Proposed benchmark locations, proposed location of the method of tie to permanent survey
monuments, and proposed location and type of subdivision control monuments; descriptions
of all monuments found or set.
Plat boundary lines: bearing in degrees, minutes, and seconds, with basis for bearings noted
or shown; distances in feet and hundredths.
Existing conditions of the site and the abutting lands, including the following:
Easements on site: location, width, and purpose.
Public rights-of-way on and adjacent to the site: name, dimensions, and type of paving
and/or drainage facilities.
Utilities on and adjacent to the site.
Ground elevation on the site based on mean sea level datum as established by the U.S.
Coast and Geodetic Survey:
For land that slopes less than 1%, contour lines at intervals of no more than one
foot.
For land that slopes between 1% and 5%, contour lines at intervals of not more than
two feet.
For land that slopes more than 5%, contour lines at intervals of not more than five
feet.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 221/346
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
Other conditions of the site: watercourses (irrigation ditches), major rock outcrops,
wooded areas, isolated preservable trees six inches or more in diameter, existing
structures, and other significant features.
Conditions on adjacent land significantly affecting design of the subdivision: approximate
direction and gradients of ground slope; character and location of development.
Zoning on and adjacent to the site.
Total area of the proposed subdivision and each lot to the nearest 1/10 acre.
Location map showing location of the site in relation to well-known landmarks and abutting
property owners.
Proposed lot lines and public right-of-way dimensions; roadways intended to be private;
locations, dimensions, and purpose of all easements, public or private; proposed names of
roadways.
Number or letter to identify each proposed lot and block.
Locations, dimensions, sizes, approximate areas, and purposes of lot proposed to be
dedicated or reserved for the public.
Proposed changes to ground elevations, to the standards specified herein.
Identification of improvements for the subdivision, if applicable, as required in § 10-2-18 of
this Section 10-2.
Proposed method for dedication of water rights as provided in this Section 10-2.
Proposed names of all streets and culs-de-sac, if applicable, within the subdivision. Names
shall conform to the street naming criteria as set forth in § 10-2-19B(3) of this Section 10-2.
§ 10-2-23. Administrative fees.
General subdivision fee. To cover general expenses related to processing subdivisions, an
administrative fee will be charged. The administrative fee shall be $100 plus $80 per lot, with the
exception of a minor subdivision, which shall require a fee of $80 per lot. The subdivider shall pay
any needed engineering fees.
Vacation and replat fees. To cover expenses related to processing, any replat or vacation of plat
shall require a fee of $50 upon application for each such action.
Variance. To cover expenses related to processing of a variance, an administrative fee of $100 will
be charged upon application for such action.
Method of payment. Fees shall be made payable to the Village. Fees are nonrefundable. All fees
shall be paid following completion of the preapplication procedure and upon application for
preliminary plat approval or, in the case of a minor subdivision, upon application for final plat
approval.
Editor's Note: Former § 10-2-23, Appeals, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
See now § 10-2-25.
§ 10-2-24. Violations and penalties.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 222/346
A.
B.
C.
General. No subdivision within the planning and platting jurisdiction of the Village shall hereafter
be carried out except in accordance with the provisions of this Section 10-2. No plat shall be
recorded with the County Clerk in violation of the provisions of this Section 10-2.
Transferring lots in unapproved subdivision and/or failure to comply with this Section 10-2. Any
owner, or agent of the owner, of any land located within the planning and platting jurisdiction of the
Village who transfers, sells, agrees to sell, or negotiates to sell land by reference to or exhibition of
a plat of such land before being duly approved by the governing body and duly recorded in the
office of the County Clerk shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of $100 per offense or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each and every lot
or portion thereof so transferred, sold, agreed to be sold, or negotiated to be sold shall be
prosecuted and treated as a separate offense. Such action shall be deemed null and void and the
appropriate legal action shall be taken. Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this Section
10-2 may cause the approval of a subdivision plat to be suspended and/or revoked in whole or in
part by the Commission and/or the governing body. All legal fees and costs incurred by the Village
as a result of violation of this Section 10-2 shall be paid by the violator.
Construction or site alteration. No grading or other alteration of a site shall take place prior to
approval of a preliminary plat, if the grading or site alteration is related to a proposed subdivision.
For minor subdivisions, grading or site alteration shall not take place prior to the completion of the
preapplication process.
§ 10-2-25. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any determination of the governing body acting under this Section 10-2 may
file an appeal to the District Court of Valencia County within 30 days of such action by the governing
body. An appeal is perfected by filing notice of appeal in the District Court. A copy of the appeal shall
be served upon the governing body.
§ 10-2-26. Amendments.
The governing body may, from time to time, amend or modify this Section 10-2 after public hearing,
due notice of which shall be given as required by law.
§ 10-2-27. Public records.
The governing body shall keep public records of findings, decisions, and recommendations concerning
all subdivision plats filed with it for review, including such actions as may be taken by the governing
body through appeals or amendments to this Section 10-2.
§ 10-2-28. Liability.
The Village may, from time to time, employee persons either in its Planning and Zoning Department, or
elsewhere, who may interact with persons who propose to subdivide certain property. Notwithstanding
any advice or assistance to persons seeking to develop or subdivide property, such employees may
provide advice or assistance to the subdivider. This Section 10-2, and the rulings of the Planning and
Zoning Commission, and ultimately, the governing body, serve as the decisions of the Village. The
Village accepts no liability for any advice given by a Village employee ultimately in conflict with the
decisions of the Commission or the governing body. Further, the Village accepts no liability for any
disputes which may arise between two or more private parties which relate to any advice given or
assistance rendered by Village employees related to this Section 10-2.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 223/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
[1]
Section 10-3. Address Regulations
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 2-5-1976 (Ch. 10-3 of
the 1980 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance  See Sec. 7-3.
Zoning  See Sec. 10-1.
Subdivision regulations  See Sec. 10-2.
§ 10-3-1. Uniform system established.
For the purpose of establishing a uniform and coordinated system of property numbering in the Village
of Bosque Farms, all numbering shall be done in conformity with the following requirements:
All houses and buildings abutting on any street, avenue, or public way shall be numbered in
reference to a uniform grid system of approximately 12 blocks per mile, with a range of 100
numbers allocated to each block.
The Village shall be divided into two bisections, east and west, with the center line of Highway 47
(Bosque Farms Boulevard) dividing east and west. All street names hereinafter shall include a
bisection designation in the form of a suffix to said name if such street shall lie both east and west
of this center line.
Bosque Farms' north boundary shall constitute the base line for all numbering on the streets
running north and south. State Highway 47 shall constitute the base line for all numbering on the
streets running east and west.
The numbering of buildings on each street shall originate and progress from its respective base
line. Grid lines, as shown on the official reference map on file at the Village Clerk's office, indicate
the point at which numbers will change from 100 to the next higher hundred.
As a general rule, numbers shall be assigned on the basis of one address for each 25 feet of
frontage along the street.
The properties situated on the north and east sides of streets and avenues shall be given even
numbers. Properties situated on the south and west sides of streets shall be given odd numbers.
§ 10-3-2. Reference map.
There is hereby established a master map with a grid overlay entitled "Address and Street Name
Reference Map," based on the County Assessor's platting maps, hereinafter adopted and made a part
of this Section 10-3 and filed in the Village Clerk's office.
§ 10-3-3. Approval of street names.
All existing street names shall be approved, revised, or renamed so as to conform to the official
reference map upon the adoption of this Section 10-3. Hereafter, every subdivision plat submitted to
the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Village of Bosque Farms for its approval shall show the
proper names of any and all streets, and these street designations shall be approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission before such new streets are officially named.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 224/346
[1]
A.
§ 10-3-4. Designation of numbers.
It shall be the responsibility of the Village Clerk to designate the respective property numbers for
buildings abutting on all existing streets and on all streets hereafter to be laid out or extended and to
formulate rules and regulations regarding such designation in accordance with this Section 10-3. A
record of such property numbering shall be maintained at the Village Clerk's office.
§ 10-3-5. Duty to request and affix numbers.
It shall be the duty of the owners of all properties containing buildings to number such properties at the
expense of said owners with durable numerals at least three inches high in such manner and location
as to be plainly visible from the street. Assigned numbers are to be requested by said owners from the
Village Clerk's office. Hereafter, it shall be the duty of each property owner to request the aforesaid
assigned number from the Village Clerk's office upon application for a state building permit.
§ 10-3-6. Street name changes.
The Village Council, by resolution, may change or rename an existing or newly established street
within the Village limits at any time after the adoption of this Section 10-3 upon request of the residents
or upon the recommendation of the Village Clerk.
Section 10-4. Annexation Policy
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms as Sec. 10-4 of the
1980 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning  See Sec. 10-1.
Subdivision regulations  See Sec. 10-2.
§ 10-4-1. Conditions for annexation.
The Village of Bosque Farms shall not annex any area, land, or property unless requested to do so by
the owners of the property or to safeguard against any threat to the health or safety of the citizens of
the Village of Bosque Farms.
§ 10-4-2. Spot zoning.
Any request for annexation of a relatively small area which would establish a zone district that is
inconsistent or incompatible with the adjoining area and which might bring about a detriment to that
area shall be considered inappropriate and shall be given a negative recommendation from the
Planning and Zoning Commission to the Village Council, unless it is demonstrated that the public
welfare will be served.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
§ 10-4-3. Requirements for consideration of annexation.
The only acceptable method of annexation to the Village shall be by petition of property owners in
accordance with NMSA 1978, § 3-7-17.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 225/346
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
All landowners petitioning annexation to the Village of Bosque Farms shall agree to pay all of the
Villages costs incurred by the annexation process and the cost to extend public utilities to their
properties.
In order to meet the access demands required for utilities, paved roadways, and emergency
services, no request for annexation shall be considered until the access easements of each
property meet the standards of the Village of Bosque Farms.
All properties petitioning annexation to the Village of Bosque Farms must provide documents of
recorded surveys.
§ 10-4-4. Annexation request procedures.
Application. Applications for annexation to the Village of Bosque Farms must be obtained from
and returned to the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer on prescribed forms, accompanied
by an administrative fee of $500. A completed, signed, and notarized application form must be
received by the Planning and Zoning Administrator/Officer at least 20 days prior to the
Commission meeting date when the application will be considered. Each application for
annexation shall contain the information necessary to fulfill the requirements listed in § 10-4-3.
Submission of inaccurate information with an application is grounds for denial.
Posting. Applicants requesting annexation to the Village of Bosque Farms shall post and maintain
one or more signs on the properties as provided and where instructed by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator/Officer, at least 15 days prior to the advertised special meeting date. Posting shall
be on a dedicated structure at least three feet high and large enough to receive the form. The sign
shall be placed in such a location that it can readily be viewed from the nearest roadway.
Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation. All applications for annexation to the Village
of Bosque Farms shall first be reviewed by the Commission. The Commission shall hold a public
meeting to evaluate all proposed annexation requests and shall submit its recommendation in
writing to the Bosque Farms Village Council. If the Commission fails to make such a written
recommendation to the Council within 45 days after receipt thereof, then the Council shall act
upon said application without a recommendation from the Commission.
Final public hearing. The Bosque Farms Village Council shall conduct a public hearing at which all
parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. The notice of public meeting
published 15 days before the Council meeting shall be considered sufficient notice if it also has
included the time and place of the public hearing to be held by the Council.
Decision. The final decision shall be by ordinance passed by the Bosque Farms Village Council at
a regularly scheduled Council meeting following proper advertising.
Section 10-5. Eminent Domain
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 10-20-2005 (Sec. 10-5
of the 1980 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 10-5-1. Definitions.
As used in this Section 10-5, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Any activity to increase tax revenue, the tax base, employment or general economic health when
that activity does not result in:
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 226/346
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
D.
The transfer of land to public ownership, such as for a road, hospital, or military base;
The transfer of land to a private entity that is a common carrier, such as a railroad or utility; or
The transfer of property to a private entity when eminent domain will remove a harmful use of
the land, such as the removal of public nuisances, removal of structures that are beyond
repair or that are unfit for human habitation or use, or acquisition of abandoned property.
FAIR MARKET VALUE
The current value of land and improvements based on what price the property would bring if the
owner did not have to sell and the buyer did not have to buy.
§ 10-5-2. Use of eminent domain.
Restrictions; authorized use.
The Village of Bosque Farms, or any agent of the Village, shall not use eminent domain, or
the threat thereof, to take private property from a private property owner.
The Village shall condemn property for public use only when the public health or safety of
Village residents is threatened or at risk.
Procedure.
Prior to enacting eminent domain to condemn property for the public use of the municipality,
the Village shall try to buy the property from the property owner by good-faith negotiation. The
Village shall make an unqualified offer to buy based on fair market value.
Any property purchases for condemnation must be approved by a majority of the entire
governing body in a regularly scheduled Council meeting.
All property owners of a proposed condemned property shall be notified by certified mail 90
days prior to the final determination by the governing body.
The Village shall ensure that parties displaced by the exercise of eminent domain shall be
justly compensated for real property taken, improvements and reasonably compensated for
relocation expenses incurred.
Prohibiting use of eminent domain for economic development. Notwithstanding any other provision
of law, neither the Village of Bosque Farms nor any of its subdivisions shall use eminent domain to
take private property to be used for economic development without the consent of the owner.
Prohibiting transfer of condemned property to private parties. Notwithstanding any other provision
of law, private property acquired through eminent domain due to threat or risk to public health and
safety without the consent of the owner shall not be dedicated, sold, leased in substantial part or
otherwise transferred to a private person, partnership, corporation or any other entity for any
reason.
11. HAZARD PREVENTION
Section 11-1. Flood Damage Prevention
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 7-15-2010 (Ch. 11-1 of
the 1980 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers  See Sec. 9-3.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 227/346
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
Zoning  See Sec. 10-1.
Subdivision regulations  See Sec. 10-2.
Article I. Statutory Authorization; Findings of Fact; Purpose
and Methods
§ 11-1-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Mexico has, in NMSA 1978, § 3-18-7, delegated the responsibility
of local governmental units to adopt regulations designated to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the
governing body of the Village of Bosque Farms, New Mexico does ordain as follows.
§ 11-1-2. Findings.
The flood hazard areas of the Village of Bosque Farms are subject to periodic inundation, which
results in the loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of
which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains, which cause
an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses
vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
§ 11-1-3. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this Section 11-1 to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to
minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
Protect human life and health;
Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken
at the expense of the general public;
Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone
and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone
areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
§ 11-1-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purpose, this Section 11-1 uses the following methods:
Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood or cause
excessive increases in flood heights or velocities.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 228/346
B.
C.
D.
E.
Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction.
Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters.
Control filling, grading, dredging and other development, which may increase flood damage.
Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or
which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
Article II. Definitions
§ 11-1-5. Word usage.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Section 11-1 shall be interpreted to
give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this Section 11-1 its most reasonable
application.
§ 11-1-6. Terms defined.
As used in this Section 11-1, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING
Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform, which originates at the
apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport,
deposition, and unpredictable flow paths.
APEX
A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that
formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
APPURTENANT STRUCTURE
A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the
use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
AREA OF FUTURE CONDITIONS FLOOD HAZARD
The land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual-chance (one-hundred-year)
flood based on future conditions hydrology.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING
A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) with a one-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one foot to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding
or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD
The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary
Map (FHBM). After detailed rate-making has been completed in preparation for publication of the
FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zone A, AO, AH, A1-A30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-A30, AE/A,
AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-V30, VE or V.
BASE FLOOD
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 229/346
The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE)
The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Zone A, AE, AH, A1-A30, A, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one-percent chance of equaling or
exceeding that level in any given year. Also called the "base flood."
BASEMENT
Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL
A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended, through its design
and construction, to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the
elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
CRITICAL FEATURE
An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood
protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations or storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING
For insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above
ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION
For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced
before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date. Existing construction may also be referred to as "existing structures."
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation
of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which
the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY
An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding
water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)
An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk-premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS)
See "flood elevation study."
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 230/346
A.
B.
A.
B.
FLOOD or FLOODING
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas
from:
The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood
damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and
other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA
Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of
"flooding").
FLOODPROOFING
Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM
Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and
expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the
extent of the area within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams,
reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed in
conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODWAY
See "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE
A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close
proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for
the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but
does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE
The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls
of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE
Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting
the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 231/346
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
LEVEE
A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance
with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide
protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM
A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as
closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound
engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR
The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built
so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of
Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is
designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL
For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION
For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever
is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain
management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation
of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 232/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
A vehicle which is:
Built on a single chassis.
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height.
RIVERINE
Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA
See "area of special flood hazard."
START OF CONSTRUCTION
For other than new construction of substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources
Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit
was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start" means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it
include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement,
footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction"
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE
For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE
Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does
not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State
Inventory of Historic Places.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 233/346
VARIANCE
A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full
requirements, see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
VIOLATION
The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's
floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)
(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that document is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION
The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum,
where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine
areas.
Article III. General Provisions
§ 11-1-7. Applicability.
This Section 11-1 shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the Village of
Bosque Farms.
§ 11-1-8. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard are identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the
current scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Valencia County,
New Mexico," dated August 19, 2010, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood
Boundary-Floodway Maps (FIRM and/or FBFM), Village of Bosque Farms No. 0350142, Panel 0230E
of Map 35061C0230E.
§ 11-1-9. Development permit required.
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this
Section 11-1 as per Section 10-1, Zoning, § 10-1-18, of the Village Code.
§ 11-1-10. Compliance required.
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance
with the terms of this Section 11-1 and other applicable regulations.
§ 11-1-11. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This Section 11-1 is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions. However, where this Section 11-1 and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or
deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 11-1-12. Interpretation.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 234/346
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
In the interpretation and application of this Section 11-1, all provisions shall be:
Considered as minimum requirements;
Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
§ 11-1-13. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this Section 11-1 is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods
can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Section
11-1 does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such
areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Section 11-1 shall not create liability on the part
of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this Section 11-1 or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
Article IV. Administration
§ 11-1-14. Designation of floodplain administrator.
The Planning and Zoning Officer is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and
implement the provisions of this Section 11-1 and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency
Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain
management.
§ 11-1-15. Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator.
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this Section
11-1.
Review permit applications to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project,
including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this
Section 11-1.
Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334) from which prior
approval is required.
Where interpretation is needed to as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions), the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, which is the
New Mexico Department of Homeland Security and Emergency Management (DHSEM), prior to
any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 235/346
G.
H.
I.
J.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is
maintained.
When base flood elevation data have not been provided in accordance with § 11-1-8, the
floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data
and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the
provisions of Article V.
When the regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require
that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be
permitted within Zones A1-A30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that
the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
one foot at any point within the community.
Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-A30, AE, AH,
on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more
than one foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section
65.12.
§ 11-1-16. Permit procedures.
Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator
on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to
scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing
and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the
foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is
required:
Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
and substantially improved structures.
Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which any nonresidential structure shall be
floodproofed.
A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of Article V, § 11-1-19B.
A description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
Maintenance of a record of all such information in accordance with Article IV, § 11-1-15A.
Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be
based on all of the provisions of this Section 11-1 and the following relevant factors:
The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its content to flood damage and the effect of
such damage on the individual owner.
The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others.
The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development.
The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 236/346
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
(1)
(a)
(2)
J.
The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems.
The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters
and effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site.
The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable.
The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use.
§ 11-1-17. Variance procedures.
The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and enter judgment on requests
for variances from the requirements of this Section 11-1.
The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an
error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this Section 11-1.
Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in
a court of competent jurisdiction.
The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall
report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on
the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to
the procedures set forth in the remainder of this Section 11-1.
Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a
lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided the relevant factors in § 11-1-16B of this article
have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this Section 11-1, the appeal
board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purpose and objectives of this Section 11-1 (Article I, § 11-1-3).
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during
the base flood discharge would result.
Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination
that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure.
Prerequisites for granting variances.
Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
Variances shall only be issued upon:
A showing of good and sufficient cause;
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 237/346
(b)
(c)
(3)
(1)
(2)
K.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to
the applicant; and
A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause
fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with exiting local laws or ordinances.
Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure
will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and
that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation.
Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and
for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
The criteria outlined in Subsections A through I are met; and
The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
Article V. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 11-1-18. General standards.
In all area of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required for all new construction and
substantial improvements:
All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices
that minimize flood damage.
All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to
flood damage.
All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
§ 11-1-19. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have been provided as set forth in
Article III, § 11-1-8, Article IV, § 11-1-15H, or Article V, § 11-1-20C, the following provisions are
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 238/346
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(3)
D.
required:
Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood
elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit certification
to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection, as proposed in Article IV, § 11-
1-16A(1), is satisfied.
Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to or above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional
engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for
the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification,
which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed, shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas below the
lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices,
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
Manufactured homes.
All manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall
be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purpose of
this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable
state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-A30, AH and
AE on the community's FIRM on sites outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, in
a new manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision, or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a
manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood shall be elevated
on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to
or above the base flood elevation and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
Manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-A30, AH and AE on the community's
FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of Subsection D of this section shall be elevated
so that either:
The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 239/346
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation
elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above
grade and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
Recreational vehicles.
Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AH, and AE on the community's
FIRM shall either:
Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
Meet the permit requirements of Article IV, § 11-1-16A, and the elevation and anchoring
requirements for manufactured homes in Subsection D of this section.
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick-disconnect-type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions.
§ 11-1-20. Standards for subdivision proposals.
All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions,
shall be consistent with Article I, §§ 11-1-2, 11-1-3 and 11-1-4, of this Section 11-1.
All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions, shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of Article III, § 11-
1-9; Article IV, § 11-1-16; and the provisions of Article V of this Section 11-1.
Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed
development, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is
greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, if not otherwise provided pursuant to Article
III, § 11-1-9, or Article IV, § 11-1-15H, of this Section 11-1.
All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions,
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions,
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located
and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
§ 11-1-21. Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH
Zones).
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Article III, § 11-1-8, are areas
designated as areas of shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood
depths of one foot to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:
All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two
feet if no depth number is specified).
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 240/346
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall:
Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or
the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the
community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or
Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base
specified flood depth in an AO Zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH Zone, the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and effects of buoyancy.
A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain
administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in Article IV, § 11-1-16, are satisfied.
Within Zone AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures, are required.
§ 11-1-22. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Article III, § 11-1-8, are areas designated as
floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which
carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other
development, within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice
that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
If Subsection A above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply
with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article V.
Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory
floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community
first completes all the provisions required in Section 65.12.
§ 11-1-23. Penalty.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this Section 11-1 and other applicable regulations. Violation of the
provisions of this Section 11-1 by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor.
Any person who violates this Section 11-1 or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500 and/or be subject to 90 days' imprisonment for each
violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the governing body from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.
Section 11-2. (Reserved)
Section 11-3. Open Burning
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 241/346
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms as Ch. 11-3 of the 1980
Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance  See Sec. 7-3.
Solid waste  See Sec. 9-1.
§ 11-3-1. Title.
This Section 11-3 shall be known and may be cited as the "Open Burning Ordinance."
§ 11-3-2. Purpose.
This Section 11-3 is intended to promote the general health, safety, and welfare of the people of the
Village of Bosque Farms and preserve the aesthetic beauty of the Village by prohibiting the open
burning of combustible materials, except as may be permitted by the Mayor.
§ 11-3-3. Definitions.
As used in this Section 11-3, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
Any law enforcement officer employed by the Village and any other person(s) who may be
designated by the Mayor to enforce this Section 11-3, issue the appropriate citations, and carry
out enforcement as provided herein.
OPEN BURNING
Any manner of burning not in a device or chamber designed to achieve combustion where the
products of combustion are emitted, directly or indirectly, into the air.
OPEN BURNING PERMIT
The written document issued by the authorized officer of the Village, along with specific
operational requirements which grant permission for open burning.
PERSON IN CHARGE OF PROPERTY
The person in charge of the property, including, but not limited to, the owner, tenant, lessee,
manager, occupant, or agent thereof.
REFUSE
Anything rejected as worthless or useless, including, but not limited to, common household
garbage, rubbish, hydrocarbon-based material, preservative-treated scrap lumber, paper products,
and animal waste.
VILLAGE
The Village of Bosque Farms, New Mexico.
§ 11-3-4. Open burning permits.
Open burning permits may be issued for religious and ceremonial events, outdoor cooking (except as
provided in the definition of "open burning" in § 11-3-3), and the disposal of totally dried vegetation
aftermath, such as, but not limited to, leaves, grass clippings, ditches, agricultural fields and woody
cuttings from shrubs and trees. Application shall be made on the form, with specific operational
requirements provided by the Village. When approved by an authorized Village official, the form will
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 242/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
[1]
constitute the open burning permit. The Mayor or his designee will determine the duration the burn
permit will be in effect and when such burn permit is to be issued.
§ 11-3-5. Permit required; operating restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the Village to fail, refuse and/or neglect to obtain an open
burning permit prior to starting an open burning activity, and/or to fail, refuse or neglect to comply with
these specific operational requirements:
Open burning shall be attended at all times.
Hours during which burning will be permitted shall be one hour after sunrise to one hour before
sunset.
Material to be burned shall have low moisture content such that the burning shall sustain open
flame combustion.
Refuse shall not be burned.
The permittee shall establish and maintain means of fire control such as a fire line, water source
or other method of extinguishment.
Weather conditions shall be considered by the permittee prior to ignition.
§ 11-3-6. Penalty.
Any person who shall fail, refuse, and/or neglect to comply with the provisions of this Section 11-3
and/or who shall resist or obstruct the enforcement officer from carrying out the duties and
responsibilities as provided herein shall be issued a citation by the enforcement officer to appear in the
Village Municipal Court for a hearing on the citation. Upon conviction thereof, the violator shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $500, or imprisonment for not more than 90 days in jail, or both.
12. TRAFFIC
Section 12-1. Uniform Traffic Code
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 10-19-2017.[1]
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalty assessments  See Sec. 12-2.
Use of hand-held cellular phones  See Sec. 12-3.
Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Section 12-1, Uniform Traffic Code, adopted 6-16-
2016.
§ 12-1-1. Adoption by reference; penalty assessments.
The 2017 Compilation of the New Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance and all changes through July 1,
2017, are herewith adopted by reference, pursuant to NMSA 1978, § 3-17-6. Where penalty amounts
contained in the UTO differ from those enacted by Penalty Assessment Ordinance 12-12-1.2 of the
Village of Bosque Farms as amended on October 19, 2017, the amounts contained in said Penalty
Assessment Ordinance shall control.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 243/346
A.
§ 12-1-2. Availability of code.
This Section 12-1, as adopted, shall be available for inspection in the office of the Municipal Clerk
during regular and normal business hours of the Municipal Clerk. A copy of the code shall be available
upon request and payment of a reasonable charge.
Section 12-2. Penalty Assessments
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 6-18-2015.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Traffic Code  See Sec. 12-1.
Use of hand-held cellular phones  See Sec. 12-3.
§ 12-2-1. Penalty assessment program.
The Village of Bosque Farms hereby adopts the penalty assessment schedule set forth in this
Section 12-2 as penalties to be imposed for enforcement of this Section 12-2 and the Uniform
Traffic Code. "Penalty assessment misdemeanor" means violation of the following listed sections
of the New Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance for which the listed penalty assessment is
established.
[Amended 5-19-2016; 10-19-2017]
Common Name of Offense Section Violated Penalty Assessment
Driver's License
Operator to be licensed (none) 12-6-12.5 $87
Operator to be licensed
(lost/forgot)
12-6-12.5 $87
Unlawful use/lending to others 12-6-12.6(2) $87
Unlawful use/using license of
another
12-6-12.6(3) $87
Unlawful use/permitting use 12-6-12.6(5) $87
Permitting child to drive 12-6-12.23a $87
Permitting unlicensed to drive 12-6-12.23b $87
Registration/Insurance
Failure to provide proof of
insurance
12-10-6 $156
Evidence of registration to be
signed and exhibited on
demand
12-10-5 $87
Display of expired license plate 12-10-4 $87
Display of plate for another
vehicle
12-10-4 $87
Illegible license plate 12-10-4 $87
Equipment
Brake light not working 12-10-1.9 $87
Headlights to be on 12-10-1.3 $87
Headlight burned out 12-10-1.5 $87
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 244/346
Common Name of Offense Section Violated Penalty Assessment
Dimming of lights 12-10-1.6 $87
Horn required to work 12-10-1.17 $87
License plate light out 12-10-1.7 $87
Mirror/Rearview mirror
required
12-10-1.18 $87
Muffler-noise too loud 12-10-1.10 $87
Muffler-excessive smoke 12-10-1.10 $87
Taillight burned out 12-10-1.7 $87
Taillight glaring 12-10-1.7 $87
Turn signal not working 12-10-1.9 $87
Windshield obstructed 12-10-1.12 $87
Moving Violations
Avoiding traffic signals 12-6-5 $87
Backing: limitations on 12-6-12.9 $87
Backing: from driveways 12-6-12.9 $87
Careless driving 12-6-12.4 $130
Child restraint 12-6-13.12 $130
Destructive or injurious
material on roadway
12-6-13.5 $168
Drivers to exercise due care 12-6-14.8 $87
Driving - must be in lane 12-6-2.12 $87
Driving - anything that
interferes
12-6-12.18 $87
Driving on divided highways 12-6-2.14 $87
Racing on streets 12-6-12.19 $87
Flashing signals 12-5-8 $87
Fleeing/eluding police 12-6-12.7 $130
Following too close 12-6-2.13 $87
Approaching/entering
intersection
12-6-4.1 $87
Left turn at intersection 12-6-4.2 $87
Red light 12-5-6 $87
Overtaking a vehicle on the left 12-6-2.3 $87
Lamp or flag on projecting load 12-10-1.11 $87
Limitations on overtaking on
the left
12-6-2.4 $87
Limitations on turning around 12-6-5.5 $87
Littering 12-6-13.15 $422
Parking in designated disabled
parking spaces
12-9-9 $307
Parties to an unlawful act 12-6-12.24 $87
Passing/no passing zone 12-6-2.7 $87
Passing/school zones 12-6-2.7 $87
Passing/pedestrian crosswalk 12-6-2.7 $87
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 245/346
B.
Common Name of Offense Section Violated Penalty Assessment
Pedestrian violation 12-6-14 $87
Seatbelt - mandatory use 12-6-13.13 $92
Starting a parked vehicle 12-6-5.7 $87
Stop sign 12-6-4.3 $87
Stopping, standing and
parking outside of business or
residential districts
12-6-6.14 $87
Stop sign/intersection 12-6-4.3 $87
Stop for school bus 12-6-7.3 $169
Turn signal - no use 12-6-5.8 $87
Use of hand-held cellular
phone while driving a vehicle
12-3-3 $307
U-turn in business district 12-6-5.5 $87
Yield sign 12-6-4.3 $87
Yield intersection 12-6-4.3 $87
Yield from driveway/business 12-6-7.1 $87
Possession or Consumption of
alcoholic beverages in open
containers-open/broken seal -
first offense
12-6-13.14 $108
Speeding (mph)
1 to 10 12-6-1.2a $87
11 to 15 12-6-1.2b $106
16 to 20 12-6-1.2c $147
21 to 25 12-6-1.2d $190
26 to 30 12-6-1.2e $220
31 to 35 12-6-1.2f $250
36 and over 12-6-1.2g $310
Failure to obey established
zone
12-6-1.3 $220
As used in the Off-Highway Motor Vehicle Act (NMSA 1978, § 66-3-1001 et seq.), "penalty
assessment misdemeanor" means violation of any provision of the Off-Highway Motor Vehicle Act
for which a violator may be subject to the following:
[Amended 10-19-2017]
Class 1 Violations Section Violated Penalty Assessment
Failure to possess a
registration certificate or
nonresident permit
12-7-9.1 $73
Violations involving headlights
or taillights; failure to possess
an off-highway motor vehicle
safety permit
12-7-9.8 $73
Selling a vehicle that produces
noise in excess of 96 decibels
12-7-9.9E $73
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 246/346
Class 1 Violations Section Violated Penalty Assessment
Any violation of the Off-
Highway Motor Vehicle Act not
otherwise specifically defined
elsewhere in this section
12-7 $73
Class 2 Violations Section Violated Penalty Assessment
Failure to complete a required
off-highway motor vehicle
safety training course
12-7-9.8 $127
Operating a vehicle in excess
of 10 miles per hour within 200
feet of a business, animal
shelter, horseback rider,
bicyclist, pedestrian, livestock
or occupied dwelling
12-7-9.9 $127
A person under the age of 18
but at least 15 years of age
who operates an off-highway
motor vehicle in violation of the
supervision requirements of
the Off-Highway Motor Vehicle
Act
12-7-9.9C $127
Operating an off-highway
motor vehicle that produces
noise that exceeds 96 decibels
12-7-9.9 $127
Unauthorized installation,
removal, destruction or
defacing of a motor vehicle
sign
12-7-9.2E $127
Class 3 Violations Section Violated Penalty Assessment
Operating a vehicle that is not
equipped with an approved
spark arrester
12-7-9.9 $193
Operating an off-highway
motor vehicle while in pursuit
of and with intent to hunt or
take a species of animal or
bird protected by law, unless
otherwise authorized by the
State Game Commission
12-7-9.9 $193
Operating an off-highway
motor vehicle in pursuit of or
harassment of livestock in any
manner that negatively affects
the livestock's condition
12-7-9.9 $193
Operating an off-highway
motor vehicle on or within an
earthen tank or other structure
meant to water livestock or
wildlife
12-7-9.9 $193
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 247/346
(1)
(2)
C.
Class 3 Violations Section Violated Penalty Assessment
Operating a motor vehicle in a
manner that has a direct
negative effect on or interferes
with persons engaged in
agricultural practices
12-7-9.9 $193
A person under the age of 18
operating an off-highway motor
vehicle without wearing eye
protection and a safety helmet
12-7-9.9B $193
A person under the age of 18
operating an off-highway motor
vehicle while carrying a
passenger
12-7-9.9B $193
A person under the age of 15
but at least 10 years of age
who operates an off-highway
vehicle in violation of the
supervision requirements of
the Off-Highway Motor Vehicle
Act
12-7-9.9C $193
A person under the age of 10
operating an all-terrain vehicle
or recreational off-highway
motor vehicle that is not an
age-appropriate size-fit or who
operates an off-highway motor
vehicle in violation of the
supervision requirements of
this section
12-7-9.9D $193
Class 4 Violations Section Violated Penalty Assessment
Operating an off-highway
motor vehicle in a careless,
reckless or negligent manner
so as to endanger the person
or property of another
12-7-9.9 $326
Operating an off-highway
motor vehicle on any road or
area closed to off-highway
motor vehicle traffic under
local, state or federal
regulations
12-7-9.2 $326
Operating an off-highway
motor vehicle on a limitedaccess
highway or freeway
12-7-9.2 $326
The penalty for second, third and subsequent violations within a three-year period shall be
increased as follows:
A second violation in a Class 1 penalty category involving failure to possess a registration
certificate or nonresident permit shall be increased to a Class 2 penalty category;
Any Class 2 or Class 3 violation for a second or greater infraction within a three-year period
shall be increased to the next-highest penalty assessment category; and
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 248/346
(3)
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
Each subsequent violation in a Class 4 penalty category will result in an additional penalty of
$200.
Multiple violations for the same incident shall be treated as a single event and shall not result in
graduated penalties.
The term "penalty assessment misdemeanor" does not include any violation which has caused or
contributed to the cause of an accident resulting in injury or death to any person.
When an alleged violator of a penalty assessment misdemeanor elects to accept a notice to
appear in lieu of a notice of penalty assessment, no fine imposed upon later conviction shall
exceed the penalty assessment established for the particular penalty assessment misdemeanor
and no probation imposed upon a suspended or deferred sentence shall exceed 90 days.
The penalty assessment for speeding in violation of Section 12-6-1.2(4) of the Uniform Traffic
Ordinance is twice the penalty assessment established in Subsection A of this section for the
equivalent miles per hour over the speed limit.
In addition to this penalty assessment established for each penalty assessment misdemeanor
pursuant to this section, there shall be assessed the following fees for each penalty assessment
misdemeanor: a corrections fee of $20; a court automation fee of $6; and a judicial education fee
of $3. These fees are included in the penalty assessment.
In addition to the penalties and fees established in this Section 12-2, the first $25 of every penalty
assessment collected will be dedicated to the Village Traffic Safety Fund.
§ 12-2-2. Option to accept assessment; payment; records.
Unless a warning notice is given, at the time of making an arrest for any penalty assessment
misdemeanor, the arresting officer shall offer the alleged violator the option of accepting a penalty
assessment. The violator's signature on the penalty assessment notice constitutes an
acknowledgement of guilt of the offense stated in the notice, and payment of the prescribed
penalty assessment is a complete satisfaction of the violation.
Payment of any penalty assessment can either be made in person to the Municipal Court Clerk or
by mail to the Municipal Court in the Village of Bosque Farms, New Mexico within 30 days from
the date of arrest. Payments of penalty assessments are timely if postmarked within the time limits
set from the date of arrest.
No record of any penalty assessment payment is admissible as evidence in any court in any civil
action.
§ 12-2-3. Failure to pay assessment.
If a penalty assessment is not paid within 30 days from the date of arrest, the violator shall be
cited into Municipal Court for failure to pay.
In addition to the prosecution provided for in Section 4A of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance, it is a
misdemeanor for any person who has elected to pay a penalty assessment to fail to do so within
30 days from the date of arrest.
The Office of the Municipal Court shall notify the Motor Vehicle Division of the State of New
Mexico when a person fails to pay a penalty assessment within the required period of time. The
Motor Vehicle Division shall report the notice upon the driver's record and shall not renew the
person's license to drive until the Municipal Court notifies the Motor Vehicle Division that the
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 249/346
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
penalty assessment, or its equivalent, as well as any additional penalties imposed are properly
disposed of.
Section 12-3. Use of Hand-Held Cellular Phones
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 2-17-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-01. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Traffic Code  See Sec. 12-1.
Penalty assessments  See Sec. 12-2.
§ 12-3-1. Authority.
This Section 12-3 is enacted under NMSA 1978, § 3-17-1.
§ 12-3-2. Purpose and intent.
It is the intent of the governing body that the enactment of this Section 12-3 will establish
procedures that will:
Protect residents from the known dangers of operating a motor vehicle while utilizing a handheld
mobile device;
Establish certain fees and costs related to this Section 12-3 pursuant to the New Mexico
Criminal and Traffic Law Manual and NMSA 1978, § 35-14-11;
Prescribe penalties for violation of this Section 12-3 pursuant to the New Mexico Criminal and
Traffic Law Manual and NMSA 1978, § 66-8-7; and
Provide for the safety, preserving the health, promoting order, comfort and convenience of the
municipality and its inhabitants.
It is the intent of the Council that § 12-3-3 applies to any driver operating a vehicle on a public
highway, whether the vehicle is in motion or stopped on the roadway due to traffic signals, signs or
conditions. It is the intent of the Council that a driver wishing to use a hand-held mobile telephone
shall pull off of the public highway before manually using the mobile telephone to engage in a call
or to create, send or read text messages. It is the intent of the Council to allow the operation of a
"hands-free" mobile telephone.
§ 12-3-3. Prohibited conduct.
Except as otherwise provided below, no person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a public highway
while using a mobile telephone to engage in a call or create, send or read text messages.
§ 12-3-4. Definitions.
As used in this Section 12-3, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ENGAGE IN A CALL
Talking into, dialing or listening on a hand-held mobile telephone, but shall not include holding a
mobile telephone to activate or deactivate such telephone.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 250/346
A.
B.
C.
HAND-HELD MOBILE TELEPHONE
A mobile telephone with which a user engages in a call using at least one hand (or prosthetic
device or aid in the case of a physically disabled person).
HANDS-FREE MOBILE TELEPHONE
A mobile telephone that has an internal feature or function, or that is equipped with an attachment
or addition, whether or not permanently part of such mobile telephone, by which a user engages in
a call without the use of either hand (or prosthetic device or aid in the case of a physically disabled
person), whether or not the use of either hand (or prosthetic device) is necessary to activate or
deactivate such telephone.
MOBILE TELEPHONE
The device used by subscribers and other users of wireless telephone service to access such
service and shall include personal digital assistants.
PERSONAL DIGITAL ASSISTANT
A device operated using a wireless telecommunications service that provides for data
communication other than by voice.
WIRELESS TELEPHONE SERVICE
Two-way real-time voice telecommunications service that is interconnected to a public switched
telephone network and commonly referred to as "cellular service" or "personal communication
service."
§ 12-3-5. Presumptions.
An operator of a motor vehicle who holds a mobile telephone to, or in the immediate proximity of, his or
her ear is presumed to be engaging in a call within the meaning of this Section 12-3. The presumption
established by this section is rebuttable by evidence tending to show that the operator was not
engaged in a call. "Immediate proximity" shall mean that distance as permits the operator of a mobile
telephone to hear telecommunications transmitted over such mobile telephone, but shall not require
physical contact with such operator's ear.
§ 12-3-6. Exceptions.
Section 12-3-3 shall not apply to:
The use of a mobile telephone for the sole purpose of communicating with any of the following
regarding an emergency situation: an emergency response operator; a hospital, physician's office
or health clinic; an ambulance company or corps; a fire department, district or company; or a
police department;
Any law enforcement, public safety or police officers, emergency services officials, first aid,
emergency medical technicians and personnel, or any fire safety officials in the performance of
duties arising out of and in the course of their employment as such; or
The use of a hands-free mobile telephone when being used in a hands free manner.
13. FRANCHISES
Section 13-1. Public Service Company of New Mexico
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 1-16-1975 (Sec. 13-1 of
the 1980 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 251/346
A.
B.
C.
A.
§ 13-1-1. Franchise grant.
The Village of Bosque Farms, New Mexico, hereinafter called the "Village," duly incorporated under the
laws of the State of New Mexico, hereby grants to Public Service Company of New Mexico, a
corporation, having its principal office in the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, and authorized to do
business in the State of New Mexico by virtue of and pursuant to the statutes of New Mexico,
hereinafter called the "Company," its legal representatives, successors, lessees and assigns, a
franchise and right to locate, build, construct, purchase, maintain and operate into, within and through
the said Village, a plant or plants and system or systems, for the purchase, manufacture, production,
generation, transmission and distribution of electricity for light, heat and power, and other useful
service, with the right and privilege to furnish, sell and distribute, supply, conduct and serve the same
to the said Village, the inhabitants thereof, and to others, by means of pipes, mains, conduits, cables,
appliances, towers, piers, abutments, stations and structures, and lines, poles with wire strung thereon,
and otherwise over, under, along and across, any and all streets, alleys, roads, lanes, viaducts,
underpasses, bridges, public ways and places as may now exist or hereafter be laid out, opened,
located and constructed within the Village, or hereafter by extension, addition, or incorporation to
become annexed to or included within the said Village of Bosque Farms.
§ 13-1-2. Rights.
The Village hereby grants to Public Service Company of New Mexico the right to use and occupy
said streets, alleys, roads, lanes, viaducts, underpasses, bridges, public ways and places for the
purposes herein set forth; this right shall not be exclusive.
All poles within said Village erected by the Company shall be located so as to cause minimum
interference with proper use of streets and alleys, and in such a way that will not seriously impede
or endanger public travel, or unnecessarily interfere with the reasonable use of the highway by the
members of the public.
The Village shall have the right to use, without cost, all poles within said Village erected by the
Company, for the purpose of fire alarm and police signal systems, provided that the Company
shall assume no liability or be put to any additional expense in connection therewith, except
maintenance of poles, and the use of said poles by the Village therefore shall be in such manner
as not unnecessarily to interference with the Company's use of same.
§ 13-1-3. Maintenance.
The said Public Service Company of New Mexico shall put and keep in order all such poles, posts,
lamps, wires and other apparatus as have heretofore been erected or in use by it, or which may
hereafter be erected, so long as the same shall be kept for use and shall always be prepared to furnish
and shall furnish, to the Village and its inhabitants, a good quality of electricity for power and
illuminating purposes.
§ 13-1-4. Authority.
Said Company is hereby authorized, licensed and empowered to do any and all things necessary
and proper to be done and performed in executing the power and utilizing the privileges herein
mentioned and granted by this Franchise, including the making of excavations, the right to
acquire, erect, maintain and operate its poles, wires and appliances in and on any and all streets,
alleys, viaducts, underpasses, bridges, roads, lanes, public ways and places of said Village by
said Company, provided that all work done in said streets, alleys, viaducts, underpasses, bridges,
roads, lanes, public ways and places of said Village by said Company shall be performed with
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 252/346
B.
A.
reasonable diligence; and the Company shall promptly restore same to as good condition as
before working thereon or to the reasonable satisfaction of said Village Council of the said Village
of Bosque Farms.
The right, license, privilege and permission is hereby granted to the Company to trim trees upon
and overhanging the streets, alleys, sidewalks, parkways and public places of the Village so as to
prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the
Company, and when so ordered by the said Village, such trimming shall be done under the
supervision and direction of such Village official to whom such duties have been or may be
delegated.
§ 13-1-5. Reasonable notice.
The said Village shall give the Company reasonable notice of the change of any grade, relocation of
any street, or alley, closing or opening of any street or alley made for the purpose of street
improvements which requires the moving of poles, conduits or other construction, and the costs of
such relocation of the poles, lines and conduits or other construction made by the Company because
of street improvements shall be borne by the said Company. This section shall not require the
Company to pay the expense of the foregoing if any applicable ordinance or law provides for payment
to the Company, either direct or by reimbursement of such costs.
§ 13-1-6. Term of franchise.
Upon passage, approval and acceptance of this Franchise, said Franchise shall be in effect for 25
years after the adoption of Ordinance No. 23, enacted upon.
§ 13-1-7. Compensation.
As full compensation for the franchise rights and privileges herein conferred, the Company shall pay to
the Village the amount of 2% of its gross sales within the limits of the Village. Said compensation shall
be paid monthly not later than the 20th day of the month following that in which revenues shall have
accrued to the Company. Such payments shall be in lieu of any and all other franchise, license,
privilege, interest, occupation (except if the Company does a merchandising business in appliances,
etc., then an occupation tax may be assessed), excise or revenue taxes and all other exactions
(except general ad valorem property taxes and special assessments for local improvements) upon the
business, revenue, property, lines, installations, systems, conduits, pipes, fixtures or other
appurtenances of the Company and all other property or equipment of the Company or any part
thereof in said Village during the term of this Franchise, and it is further agreed that above said
consideration shall by the Village be considered and recognized as an operating expense on the part
of the Company.
§ 13-1-8. Rates.
The rates to be charged by the Company for providing electricity shall be those presently being
charged by it and presently in effect as now on file with the New Mexico Public Service Commission,
until and unless changed in accordance with law.
§ 13-1-9. Acceptance.
The Company shall within 30 days after the passage and approval of this ordinance file in the
office of the Village Clerk a written statement of acceptance duly signed and acknowledged by the
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 253/346
B.
proper officers of said Company authorized to execute such acceptance.
In the event that such acceptance is not filed within the said period, this ordinance and the rights,
privileges and franchise herein granted shall ipso facto be and become terminated and void;
provided, however, the Village Council of the Village may by resolution extend the time herein
allowed for the filing of such acceptance for an additional period of 30 days and no longer.
§ 13-1-10. Acquisition of property.
In the event that the Village shall at any time hereafter acquire by purchase or otherwise the property
of the Public Service Company of New Mexico in the Village, it is agreed that in any negotiations or
proceedings looking toward the acquisition of said property by the Village, the value of this franchise
shall be arbitrarily fixed and determined at the sum of $1 and no more.
§ 13-1-11. Indemnity.
By the acceptance of this ordinance and the privileges granted therein, the Company hereby expressly
agrees that it will indemnify and save harmless the Village, its officers, agents and servants from any
and all damages and liabilities it may have or sustain by reason of the carrying out or the breach of the
terms hereof by the Company.
§ 13-1-12. Definition.
Whenever "Company" is used in the franchise it is intended to include not only the Public Service
Company of New Mexico, but also its legal representatives, lessees, successors and assigns.
§ 13-1-13. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase, or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any part
of the provisions hereof, other than the part so described to be invalid or unconstitutional.
§ 13-1-14. Repeal.
All ordinances in direct conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
Section 13-2. Public Service Company of New Mexico
(Gas)
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 1-16-1975 (Sec. 13-2 of
the 1980 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 13-2-1. Franchise grant.
[Amended 9-18-1997]
The Village of Bosque Farms, New Mexico (hereinafter called "Municipality") hereby grants to and
vests in Public Service Company of New Mexico, a corporation organized and existing under and by
virtue of the laws of the State of New Mexico, with a permit to transact and actually transacting
business in the State of New Mexico (hereinafter called the "Company"), its legal representatives,
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 254/346
successors, lessees and assigns, a franchise and the authority, license, power and privilege to
maintain, construct, equip, extend, alter and otherwise establish and operate in the Municipality, as
now or hereafter constituted, works, systems, plants, pipes and all related facilities (including those
now in service) necessary and appropriate to sell, manufacture, store, distribute, convey or otherwise
conduct, serve, supply and furnish the inhabitants of the Municipality and others, and to the
Municipality, whenever the Municipality may desire to contract therefor, gas for light, fuel, power, heat
and any and all other useful purposes, and the said Company is hereby granted passage, right-of-way
in, under, along and across, and the right to occupy and use in any lawful way during the life of this
franchise any and all streets, avenues, easements, rights-of-way in, under, along and across, and the
right to occupy and use in any lawful way during the life of this franchise any and all streets, avenues,
easements, rights-of-way, alleys, highways, sidewalks, bridges and other structures and places and
public grounds of the Municipality now or as may hereafter exist, for every and any such service, use,
effect, and lawful purpose as herein mentioned.
§ 13-2-2. Rights.
The Company is hereby authorized, licensed and empowered to do any and all things necessary and
proper to be done and performed in executing the powers and utilizing the privileges herein mentioned
and granted by this franchise, provided the same do not conflict with water pipes, sewers or other
authorized preexisting installations, and provided that all work done in said streets, avenues,
easements, rights-of-way, alleys, highways, sidewalks, bridges and other structures and places and
public grounds of the Municipality by the Company shall be done with the utmost diligence and without
unnecessary inconvenience to the public or individuals, and the Company shall, within a reasonable
time, restore all places excavated by it to their original condition as nearly as practicable.
§ 13-2-3. Transfers.
The Company shall have the right and privilege of transferring this franchise and all rights and
privileges granted herein, and whenever the word "Company" appears herein, it shall be construed as
including its successors, assigns and lessees.
§ 13-2-4. Compensation.
The Company, for and in consideration of the granting of this franchise and as rentals for the
occupation and use or easement over, upon and beneath the streets, avenues, easements, rights-ofway,
alleys, highways, sidewalks, bridges and other structures and places and public grounds in the
Municipality, shall through the term of this franchise pay to the Municipality each year during all the
time this provision shall remain in force and effect a total aggregate sum of 2% of the Company's gross
receipts (exclusive of sales or gross receipts taxes) collected during each year from users and
consumers on account of gas sold and consumed within the corporate limits of the Municipality under
the Company's rates effective from time to time, excepting therefrom, however, the gross receipts from
gas sold to industrial consumers under special contract and the gross receipts for gas sold to the
Municipality for its own use. The Company shall make such payments semi-annually on or before the
last day of January and July in each calendar year while this provision shall remain in force and effect.
For the purpose of determining said gross receipts, the books of the Company shall at all reasonable
times be subject to inspection by duly authorized officials of the Municipality. The payments by the
Company provided for above in this section shall be in lieu of any and all "other Municipal taxes" as
hereinafter defined and, anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, said payments shall continue
only so long as the Company is not prohibited from making the same by any lawful authority having
jurisdiction in the premises and only so long as the Municipality does not charge, levy or collect or
attempt to charge, levy or collect any such "other municipal taxes," and if any lawful authority having
jurisdiction in the premises hereafter prohibits the making of said payments or if the Municipality
charges, levies or collects or attempts to charge, levy or collect any such "other municipal taxes" the
Company's obligation to continue making said payments shall forthwith cease. As used in this section,
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 255/346
the term "other municipal taxes" means and includes any and all franchise, license, privilege,
instrument, occupation, excise or revenue taxes and any and all other fees, charges or exactions
(except municipal occupation taxes lawfully assessed and collected on the Company's retail sale of
appliances, general ad valorem taxes and special assessments for local improvements) upon all or any
portion of the business, revenue, property or activities of the Company located or conducted within the
Municipality during the term of this franchise.
§ 13-2-5. Acceptance.
This franchise shall be accepted by said Company in writing, which acceptance shall be filed with the
Clerk of said Municipality within 30 days after the taking effect of this ordinance, and when so accepted
this ordinance shall be a contract duly executed by and between the Municipality and the said
Company.
§ 13-2-6. Term of franchise.
This franchise shall take effect and be in force from and after 30 days from the date of its passage,
during which thirty-day period this ordinance shall be published in a manner provided by law, and shall
continue in full force and effect for a period of 25 years from the date of its passage.
§ 13-2-7. Repeal.
After the passage of this ordinance and upon its acceptance by the Company, all rights and privileges
heretofore granted by said Municipality in and by its ordinance or ordinances granting and/or
supplementing gas franchise rights to the Company or its predecessors in interest, shall be
superseded by this ordinance.
Section 13-3. Us West Communications, Inc.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 1-16-1975 (Sec. 13-3 of
the 1980 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 13-3-1. Franchise grant of authority.
[Amended 9-18-1997]
There is hereby granted by the Village of Bosque Farms, hereinafter called the "Village," to the US
West Communications, Inc., hereinafter called the "Company," the nonexclusive right and privilege to
construct, erect, operate and maintain, in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the streets,
alleys, public ways and public places now in use or dedicated, and all extensions thereof, and
additions thereto, in said Village, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other
telephone fixtures necessary or proper for the maintenance and operation in said Village of a
telephone exchange and lines connected therewith; provided, however, that no poles or other fixtures
shall be placed where the same will interfere with any electric light, water hydrant or water main, and
shall be placed in such manner as to cause a minimum interference with the rights or reasonable
convenience of property owners who adjoin any of said streets, alleys, or public ways and places, and
all such poles or other fixtures placed in any street shall be placed at the outer edge of the sidewalk
and inside the curbline, and those placed in alleys shall be placed close to the line of the lots abutting
on said alley and then in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on said streets, alleys
and public ways.
§ 13-3-2. Use of system by municipality.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 256/346
The Village shall have the privilege, during the life of this franchise, free of charge, where aerial
construction exists, of maintaining upon the poles of the Company within the Village limits wire and
pole fixtures necessary for a police and fire alarm system, such wires and fixtures to be placed and
maintained under the supervision of the Company. The Village, in its use and maintenance of such
wires and fixtures, shall at all times comply with the rules and regulations of the Company, and the
provisions of the latest edition of the National Electrical Safety Code, so that there may be minimum
danger of contact or conflict between the wires and fixtures of the Company and the wires and fixtures
of the Village. It is further agreed, in order to avoid danger to life and property, that the above privilege
is granted on condition that no such police or fire alarm wires or fixtures of the Village shall be placed
on poles carrying electric light or power wires, nor shall said police or fire alarm wires or other fixtures
be exposed, without the consent of the Company, to the danger of contact with any conductor carrying
a voltage greater than the normal telephone voltage. The Village shall be solely responsible for all
injury to persons or damage to property arising out of the construction or maintenance of said police
and fire alarm fixtures, or arising out of the attachment, maintenance or removal of said wires and
fixtures to the poles of the Company. In cases of rearrangement of the Company's plant, or removal of
poles or fixtures, the Village shall care for or remove its own fixtures, and shall save the Company
harmless from any damage or injury to persons or property, including property of the Village, arising
out of the removal or construction of its wires or other fixtures.
§ 13-3-3. Company liability.
The said Company shall, at all times during the life of this franchise, be subject to all lawful exercise of
the police power by the Village and to such reasonable regulations as the Village may, by resolution or
ordinance, hereafter provide. It is expressly understood and agreed by and between the said Company
and the Village that said Company shall save the Village harmless from all loss sustained by the
Village on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever, resulting from
negligence on the part of said Company in the construction or maintenance of its telephone system in
the Village. The Village shall notify the Company's representative within five days after the presentation
of any claim or demand, either by suit or otherwise, made against the Village on account of any
negligence as aforesaid on the part of the Company.
§ 13-3-4. Repairs.
In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway other surfacing, the Company shall, at its
own cost and expense and in a manner entirely satisfactory to the Village, and subject to the
jurisdiction of said Village, respecting the subject, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway or
surface of any streets or alley disturbed, in as good condition as before said work was commenced.
§ 13-3-5. Reasonable notice.
Any person or corporation desiring to move a building or other structure along, or to make any unusual
use of the streets, alleys and public ways of the Village which shall interfere with the poles, wires or
fixtures of said Company, shall first give notice to the said Company, and before a permit is given by
the Village therefor, the applicant shall present a receipt from the Company showing said payment;
thereupon, the said Company, upon presentation of said permit, shall within 48 hours thereafter
provide for and do such cutting, altering and moving of said wires and fixtures as may be necessary to
allow such moving or unusual use of the streets, alleys and public ways of the Village.
§ 13-3-6. Compensation.
As a further consideration for this franchise, the Company shall pay to the Village an amount equal to
2% of the gross revenues, exclusive of all federal and state excise taxes, received for local exchange
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 257/346
telephone service furnished to subscribers of the Company within the Village of Bosque Farms.
Payment shall be made in semiannual installments within 60 days after January 1 and July 1 of each
year during the term of this franchise.
§ 13-3-7. Inspection of records.
The Village shall have the right, at all reasonable times, to inspect the books and records of the
Company pertaining to the Company's gross revenue for local exchange service received from
telephone subscribers located within the limits of the Village.
§ 13-3-8. Rates.
The Village agrees to pay to the Company, in accordance with standard tariff schedules, the rates and
charges for all telephone service of any description whatsoever rendered by the Company to the
Village, except the cost, value or rental of attachments made by the Village to the poles of the
Company as provided in § 13-3-2 hereof.
§ 13-3-9. Payments.
In consideration of the payments hereinabove provided for, it is expressly understood and agreed by
the Company and the Village that the payments above specified be in lieu of any and all franchise,
license, occupation, or any other form of excise or revenue tax (except general ad valorem property
taxes and special assessments for local improvements), based upon or measured by the revenue,
employees, payroll, property, poles, wires, instruments, conduits, pipes, fixtures or other
appurtenances of the Company, and all other property or equipment of the Company or any part
thereof, provided that said payments shall continue only so long as the Company is not prohibited from
making the same by any lawful authority having jurisdiction in the premises, and so long as the Village
does not charge, levy or collect, or attempt to charge, levy or collect, any of the forms of taxes
specified above in this paragraph; and if any lawful authority having jurisdiction in the premises shall
hereafter prohibit such payment or payments, or if the Village does levy, charge or collect or attempt to
levy, charge or collect any of the forms of taxes specified in this paragraph, the obligation to make such
payments as hereinabove provided shall forthwith cease.
§ 13-3-10. Term of franchise.
The franchise and rights herein granted shall continue in force and effect for a term of 25 years after
the effective date of this franchise.
§ 13-3-11. Acceptance.
This ordinance shall take effect and be in full force and effect 30 days after its passage and approval;
provided the Company, within said 30 days, shall have filed with the Village Clerk of the Village of
Bosque Farms an unconditional acceptance thereof. Within 10 days after the filing of said acceptance,
the Village Clerk shall acknowledge in writing the receipt of said acceptance.
Section 13-4. Jones Communication of New Mexico, Inc.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms as Sec. 13-4 of the
1980 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 258/346
A.
[1]
B.
C.
D.
§ 13-4-1. Grant of franchise.
[Amended 9-16-1999]
Per NMSA 1978, § 3-4-2-1, the Village of Bosque Farms, New Mexico hereby grants to Jones
Communication of New Mexico, Inc. (hereinafter called the "Grantee") and to Grantee's heirs, personal
representatives, successors, lessees and assigns, for the term October 13, 1999 to October 13, 2004,
a nonexclusive franchise granting the right, authority and power, permit and license to construct,
acquire, maintain and operate a Community Antenna Television System and a Closed Circuit
Electronics System within the community known and designated as the "Village of Bosque Farms, New
Mexico" within Valencia County, New Mexico (hereinafter called the "Community"); to render, furnish
and sell the service from such system to inhabitants of the Community and its environs and to use and
occupy the streets, alleys, and other public places within the limits of the Community as now exist and
may hereinafter exist; to construct and operate the System, including the right to enter and construct,
reconstruct, erect, re-erect, relocate, repair and rebuild in, on, under, along, over and across the
streets, alleys, avenues, parkways, bridges and other public places of the Community, on towers,
poles, cables, amplifiers, conduit and other facilities owned, leased or otherwise used by Grantee for
the furnishing of Community Antenna Service and Closed Circuit Electronics Service; provided,
however, Grantee and its successors shall, whenever practicable, refrain from installing additional
poles, but shall rather use existing utility structures. Grantee and its successors shall provide
underground facilities for the System in all areas, subdivisions, etc. where underground utilities
currently exist or in future subdivisions or other areas where underground utilities are installed.
§ 13-4-2. Term.
The term of this agreement shall be extended until October 13, 2004.
§ 13-4-3. Performance requirements.
The Grantee, in the construction and operation of the System, shall perform its work in such
manner as to give the least inconvenience to the inhabitants of the Community and the public
generally, and shall repair at Grantee's expense all damage to public or private property resulting
from their use. The Grantee shall construct the System so that it makes the service available to
the entire Community. The Grantee will start to make the System available to the residents of the
Community within 36 months of the effective date of this ordinance.
The Grantee is required to obtain an excavation permit from the Village for all work requiring an
excavation of any kind. The Village shall provide the permit on the same day that the actual
excavation will occur. The Grantee shall notify the Village when a crew is on its way to allow the
Village Utility Department personnel to be present to approve the permit. Section 9-3-17 of the
Sewer System Ordinance shall apply to the Grantee.[1]
Editor's Note: See Sec. 9-3, Sewers.
Cablevision lines installed after the effective date of this ordinance shall be installed at a depth of
18 inches within the Village right-of-way.
The use of the public ways and all utility easements of the Community by the Grantee, when in
conflict with existing uses or the use of the Community, shall be subject to the control and direction
of the Community as to location thereof.
§ 13-4-4. Commencement of construction.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 259/346
A.
B.
If, after 180 days from the effective date of this ordinance, bona fide construction of the System
contemplated hereunder has not begun, the Community may serve notice by certified mail upon the
Grantee, requiring such construction to be commenced forthwith; and if, after the expiration of 30 days
from the date of mailing such notice, such construction has still not been begun, the Community may
elect to terminate all rights of the Grantee and its successors in interest hereunder.
§ 13-4-5. Liability; insurance.
It is expressly understood and agreed by and between the Grantee and the Community that the
Grantee shall hold the community harmless from all loss sustained by the Community on account
of any suit, judgments, execution, claim or demand whatsoever resulting from negligence on the
part of Grantee in the construction, operation or maintenance of its System in the Community. The
Community shall notify the Grantee's representative within 30 days after the presentation of any
claim or demand either by suit or otherwise made against the Community on account of any
negligence as aforesaid on the part of the Grantee.
To effectuate the foregoing, Grantee agrees to obtain and keep in force with an insurance
company authorized to do business in the State of New Mexico, policies of liability insurance with
a minimum coverage of $300,000 per person, $500,000 per accident, and property damage limits
of $100,000, with the Community named as an additional insured thereon, and to file certificate of
said policy with the Clerk/Treasurer of the Community.
§ 13-4-6. Trimming of trees.
The Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and
other public places of the Community so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming into
contact with the wires and cables of the Grantee. All trimming shall be done under the supervision and
direction of the Community and at the expense and liability of the Grantee.
§ 13-4-7. Wire changes to move buildings.
The Grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a valid building moving permit, temporarily
raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of the buildings; the expense of such temporary removal,
raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the Grantee shall
have the authority to require such payment in advance. The Grantee shall be given not less than 48
hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
§ 13-4-8. Wire changes when street grades are changed.
In the event that at any time during the period of the operation of this System the Community shall
lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street, alley, or other public way, the Grantee, upon
reasonable notice by the Community, shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables,
underground conduits, manholes, and other fixtures at its own expense.
§ 13-4-9. Compensation.
In consideration of the rights hereby granted and as compensation to the Community for its
cooperation in granting easement on land it owns, the Grantee shall, on the 15th day of each month,
pay to the Community a sum equal to 5% of its gross monthly revenues, for the preceding month, from
the sale of its Community Antenna Service and Closed Circuit Electronics System within the Village of
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 260/346
A.
B.
Bosque Farms. Gross monthly receipts shall not include any compensation for installation, or any
taxes imposed on services furnished by the Grantee or receipts derived therefrom.
§ 13-4-10. Review of records.
The Community shall have the right, at its own expense, at reasonable times and places, to audit such
records of the above-named Grantee, and representatives and assigns as may be reasonably required
for the purpose of determining whether or not the payment made by said Grantee, its representatives
and assigns shall constitute the percent of the gross revenues from the operation as above set forth.
As to each payment, it shall be conclusively presumed three years after the payment is received that
such payment is correct.
§ 13-4-11. Public, educational and governmental service.
The Grantee and its successors hereby agree to furnish, at the Community's request, the Fire
Department, Public Hospital, Police Department, and to each Public School Building within the
Community one free tap, line or cable to each such building.
This service will be furnished so long as the Grantee or its assigns carry on this operation or
service at no charge whatsoever.
§ 13-4-12. Rate schedules.
Rate schedules, domestic or commercial, shall be submitted to the Community for written approval and
retained on file in the office of the Clerk/Treasurer.
§ 13-4-13. Assignment of franchise.
Any assignment of this franchise shall be subject to approval by the Community, which approval shall
not be unreasonably withheld. In this connection, assignment, transfer, or hypothecation of shares of
stock shall be subject to this disclosure provision and assignment or transfer of a majority of the
outstanding stock shall be subject to approval by the Community.
§ 13-4-14. Effect of franchise on Grantee.
All provisions of this franchise shall be binding upon the Grantee and its successors, lessees and
assigns, whether expressly stated herein or not. All the rights, authorities, powers, grants and
privileges secured by this franchise to the Grantee shall be held to inure to the benefit of the Grantee,
its heirs and personal representatives and all successors, lessees and assigns of the Grantee.
§ 13-4-15. Technical support.
Grantee further covenants and agrees that it will at all times during the term hereof maintain adequate
technical personnel and satisfactory equipment to properly render, furnish and sell service to the
inhabitants of the Community.
§ 13-4-16. Limitation on additional charges.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 261/346
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
Grantee further agrees that no charge additional to those hereafter stated shall be made to any
subscriber for viewing any station or program of the Grantee without prior written approval of the
Community.
§ 13-4-17. Services to be provided.
Grantee specifically undertakes and agrees to construct the Cable TV System in accordance with
this ordinance. Grantee will offer the Community a minimum of the following sources of
entertainment and information:
Four Albuquerque TV stations, including all three networks.
Education channel.
Grantee intends to provide, subject to prevailing FCC Rules and Regulations:
Two distant stations.
A religious channel.
A sports channel.
Also, Grantee will provide:
Home movie channel, optional to subscribers. (This channel will offer first-run movies and
other entertainment and sports for an extra charge to those persons wishing to subscribe.)
A time and temperature channel, at no extra charge.
As the Cable and Telecommunications Industry expands there is a good possibility of offering
other informational and entertainment channels and/or services. Some of these may be at no extra
charge and some may be optional at an extra charge.
§ 13-4-18. Service outside Community.
In all cases where the Grantee desires to furnish service to inhabitants who reside outside of the
boundaries of the Community, the Community shall use its best efforts to aid the Grantee in making
such service available, including its aid in securing any necessary consent or approval from any
governmental body or agency or private developer.
§ 13-4-19. Effective date.
[Amended 9-16-1999]
The effective date of this ordinance shall be September 27, 1999.
Section 13-5. Solid Waste Franchise
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms as Sec. 13-5 of the
1980 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste  See Sec. 9-1.
§ 13-5-1. Definitions.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 262/346
As used in this Section 13-5, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT
All structures other than residences, together with the surrounding premises, on which any person
produces or generates solid waste.
COMPANY
Waste Management of New Mexico, Inc.
DESIGNATED LANDFILL
The sanitary landfill designated from time to time by the governing body as the site at which
residents of the Village may dispose of solid waste.
FRANCHISE
The franchise to collect solid waste granted by this Section 13-5.
RESIDENCE
A home, trailer, mobile home or other freestanding structure used or capable of use as a human
habitation, together with the surrounding premises, on which any person produces or generates
solid waste; a residence may include a guest house and other outbuildings on the same premises
which are not continuously inhabited.
SOLID WASTE
Any garbage, rejected or waste food, swill, ashes, manure, dirt, slop, wastepaper, trash, rubbish,
and waste or unwholesome material of any kind.
§ 13-5-2. Franchise granted.
The Village grants a franchise to the Company to collect, remove and dispose of solid waste from all
premises located within the corporate limits of the Village.
§ 13-5-3. Sole and exclusive solid waste collector.
Subject to termination as provided in § 13-5-6, the Company is designated and appointed as the sole
and exclusive solid waste collector for the Village, except that any person may sell to or purchase from
any other person any bona fide salvage material if the salvage material is segregated and sold
separately from other solid wastes.
§ 13-5-4. Use of public ways.
The Village grants the Company the right to use any and all streets, bridges, and public ways within
the corporate limits of the Village.
§ 13-5-5. Term.
Subject to termination as provided in § 13-5-6, the term of the franchise is three years commencing on
May 1, 1999 ending April 30, 2002, with a possible three-year extension.
§ 13-5-6. Termination.
For violation of this Section 13-5, or other good cause, the Village may terminate the franchise or
assume the obligations of the Company under Section 13-5 of the Code and perform and execute the
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 263/346
same at the cost and expense of the Company. In either event, the Company shall immediately be
liable to the Village for all loss, expense or damage incurred by the Village by reason of the Company's
failure to perform its obligations under Section 13-5 of the Code. Before terminating the franchise or
assuming the obligations of the Company under Section 13-5 of the Code, the Village shall give the
Company 15 days' written notice stating that the Company has failed to perform its obligations under
Section 13-5 of the Code and specifying the things required to be done by the Company to correct
such failure. The Company shall have the right to prevent the termination of the franchise by correcting
the specified deficiencies within the fifteen-day notice period. If the Company becomes insolvent or
bankrupt, the franchise shall terminate immediately. The performance bond, required by § 13-5-15A(1)
shall, among other things, secure the payment of sums accruing under this section.
§ 13-5-7. Reservation of rights.
The franchise is subject to all limitations now or hereafter provided by the Constitution and laws of the
United States and of the State and the Code. The Village reserves the right to amend the Code,
including Section 13-5, in any manner necessary to protect the safety and welfare of the public, or the
public interest.
§ 13-5-8. Assignment of franchise.
The Company shall not assign the franchise, either voluntarily or by operation of law, without the
consent of the governing body.
§ 13-5-9. Subcontracting.
The Company shall not subcontract the work which has been granted to it by Section 13-5 of the Code
without the consent of the governing body.
§ 13-5-10. Independent contractor status.
The Company shall carry out the terms of the franchise as an independent contractor, and not as an
agent, servant, employee or partner of the Village.
§ 13-5-11. Hold harmless.
If, by reason of any act or omission of the Company, the Village is made or becomes a party to any
legal proceeding, including but not limited to a proceeding before the State Environmental
Improvement Division, or a proceeding concerning payment of wages or salary, federal, state or local
taxes, or contributions required under the Social Security Act, the State Workmen's Compensation Act
or the State Unemployment Compensation Law, the Company will indemnify and defend the Village
against all loss, liability, costs or expenses in connection with the proceeding. The Village may choose
its own attorney to defend it. This covenant shall be guaranteed by the public liability and property
damage insurance policy and the workmen's liability insurance policy required by § 13-5-15A(2) and
A(3) respectively.
§ 13-5-12. Franchise fee.
The Company shall pay to the Village an annual Franchise Fee in the amount of $5,000. The
Franchise Fee shall be in lieu of all occupation taxes and license fees imposed by the Village. If
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 264/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
circumstances warrant, the franchise fee may be renegotiated from time to time. Any change agreed
upon by the Village and the Company may be made by resolution.
§ 13-5-13. Duties of Company.
In addition to other duties which may be imposed by the Village from time to time, the Company shall:
Provide complete and adequate solid waste collection service to all residences and commercial
establishments in the Village.
Collect, remove, and dispose of all solid waste in the Village.
Render free solid waste collection service to the Village, including the servicing of solid waste
receptacles placed for public use by authority of the governing body.
Furnish all labor, tools, office facilities, machinery and equipment necessary to provide solid waste
collection service.
Provide regularly scheduled solid waste collection service to residences at least once per week.
Provide regularly scheduled solid waste collection service to commercial establishments at least
once per week and more often as necessary as determined by the governing body.
Provide solid waste collection service, in addition to that set forth in Subsections E and F, as
needed to prevent any accumulation of solid waste in the Village which would constitute a
nuisance or health hazard.
Respond within 24 hours to any request of the Village Mayor or Village Clerk for special solid
waste collection service.
Not litter any street or premises in the process of providing solid waste collection service, and
promptly clean up and remove any solid waste which has spilled in the collection process, or
which has fallen or blown from any collection vehicle.
Subject to reasonable modifications which the governing body may require, begin residential solid
waste collection service no earlier than 7:30 a.m. and end it no later than 5:00 p.m.
Exercise reasonable care in the handling of solid waste receptacles.
Without delay, after removing solid waste from a receptacle, return the receptacle to the position
from which it was picked up and return the receptacle's lid or cover to its proper place.
Require its employees to avoid crossing private or public planted and landscaped areas and to
avoid climbing or jumping over hedges, fences or shrubbery.
Require its employees to make all collections in a quiet and orderly manner, and to avoid
unnecessary yelling or shouting, banging or throwing of receptacles, squealing of tires or brakes,
blowing of horns and other noise.
Employ only closed collection trucks, except where access to a residence may be difficult for a
large truck, in which case a smaller open truck may be used to pick up closed bags or boxes of
trash, but an open truck shall not be used to collect open or blowing solid wastes.
Before commencing operations under Section 13-5, and thereafter before each change in
collection schedule, cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation and posted within
the Village a collection schedule identifying the collection day for particular neighborhoods.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 265/346
Q.
R.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
Look for and notify the Village Clerk of deterioration in road surfaces or road conditions requiring
repair, and immediately notify the Village Clerk of any road which becomes impassable.
Comply with all laws of the United States and the State, with the Code, and with applicable
regulations of all governmental agencies, including, but not limited to, the Solid Waste
Management Regulations of the State Environmental Improvement Board, all as may be amended
from time to time.
§ 13-5-14. Records and other information.
The company shall provide the Clerk/Administrator with records, financial statements, or other
information bearing the Company's operations under Section 13-5 of the Code, as the Village Clerk
may reasonably require from time to time.
§ 13-5-15. Performance bond; insurance; registration with
governmental agencies.
Before commencing operations under Section 13-5 of the Code, and throughout the duration of the
franchise, the Company shall:
Obtain from a company satisfactory to the governing body, and maintain in effect:
A performance bond in the minimum amount of $50,000, naming the Village as obligee. The
bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance by the Company of its obligations
under Section 13-5 of the Code and shall provide that the Company shall immediately be
liable to the Village for all loss, expense or damage incurred by the Village by reason of the
Company's failure to perform its obligations under Section 13-5 of the Code and that the
issuer of the bond shall notify the Village Clerk in writing not less than 60 days before
cancellation of the bond.
A public liability and property damage insurance policy or policies in the minimum amount as
follows: comprehensive, general and vehicle liability insurance, $300,000 for bodily injuries for
each occurrence with $500,000 aggregate coverage; and $100,000 for property damage for
each occurrence with $500,000 aggregate coverage. Each such policy shall name the Village
as an additional insured, and shall insure the Village in the same general terms and to the
same general effect as the agreement of the Company to hold harmless the Village under
§ 13-5-11. Limits provided in this section shall be reviewed at the time the Franchise Fee is
reviewed under § 13-5-12, and may be increased at any one time, at the option of the Village,
to the limits of liability specified in the Tort Claims Act, NMSA 1978, §§ 41-4-1 through 41-4-
27, as amended from time to time. Each such policy shall contain a provision requiring the
insurer to notify the Village Clerk in writing not less than 60 days before cancellation of the
policy.
Workmen's liability insurance in accordance with the Workmen's Compensation Act, NMSA
1978, §§ 52-1-1 through 52-1-69, as amended from time to time. Such insurance shall include
coverage for safety devices permitted under NMSA 1978, § 52-1-10, as amended from time
to time. The Company shall also file a certificate of such insurance with the State
Superintendent of Insurance. If any class of workmen is not protected under the Workmen's
Compensation Act, the Company shall provide employer's liability insurance adequate to
protect the Company and Village against any claims resulting from injuries to and death of
workmen arising from operations under the Franchise. Each policy identified in this section
shall contain a provision requiring the insurer to notify the Village Clerk in writing not less than
60 days before cancellation of the policy.
Register and maintain good standing with the State Corporation Commission.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 266/346
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Before commencing operations under Section 13-5 of the Code, and annually thereafter, furnish
the Village Clerk with proof satisfactory to the Village Clerk that the Company is in compliance with
§ 13-5-15A and B.
Before any subcontractor, who may have been approved under § 13-5-9, commences operations,
require the subcontractor to furnish the Village Clerk with proof satisfactory to the Village Clerk
that the subcontractor is in compliance, independently of the Company, with the provisions of
Section 13-5 of the Code, as may be amended from time to time, including but not limited to § 13-
5-15A and B.
§ 13-5-16. Use of designated landfill.
The Company shall dispose of solid waste collected in the Village only at the designated landfill and
shall, upon request by the Village Clerk/Administrator, offer proof of compliance with this section.
§ 13-5-17. Collection equipment.
The Company shall use only serviceable collection equipment, as determined by the Village Clerk. All
trucks and other equipment used in solid waste collection shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once
each week and deodorized or disinfected when necessary to maintain them in a sanitary and nonoffensive
condition. No solid waste material shall be allowed to remain in a truck while parked
overnight. All trucks and other equipment shall be clearly identified, with the Company's name and
telephone number affixed thereto. Trucks shall be painted uniform colors, shall be equipped with safety
devices and warning lights as required by State law or the Code, and shall be equipped with a fire
extinguisher, a first aid kit, a shovel, and a broom.
§ 13-5-18. Company personnel.
The Company shall:
Provide adequate operating and safety training for all its employees;
Reprimand any employee who is not sober, uses indecent language, has been negligent, rude or
discourteous in the performance of his or her duties, is unnecessarily noisy or violates the Motor
Vehicle Code;
Assure that each of its employees who drives or operates vehicles or equipment possesses
appropriate licenses; and
Not discriminate against any employee or applicant because of race, religion, color, sex, or
national origin.
§ 13-5-19. Billing of customers and collection of accounts.
The Company shall bill and collect from the person owning or controlling each occupied or previously
occupied residence and each commercial establishment the fee established by the Code for solid
waste collection service rendered by the Company. Bills may be rendered on a quarterly or triannual
basis, and may cover service rendered or to be rendered. If any account becomes thirty-days
delinquent, the Company may, after providing 15 days' notice, employ any lawful means to collect the
account. The Company shall make a good-faith effort to collect delinquent accounts. The Company
shall not deny service to delinquent accounts.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 267/346
§ 13-5-20. Clerk/Administrator as contact; complaints.
Except as otherwise provided in Section 13-5 of the Code, the company shall report to and deal with
the Village Clerk, who shall also receive from any person and pass on to the Company complaints and
suggestions concerning the solid waste collection service provided by the Company.
§ 13-5-21. Other matters.
Matters relating to the franchise or the operation of the franchise not otherwise provided for in Section
13-5 of the Code shall be governed by a contract or contracts entered into from time to time by the
Village and the Company and adopted by resolution of the governing body.
§ 13-5-22. Acceptance of franchise by Company; contract.
The Company shall file with the Village Clerk/Administrator a written statement accepting the franchise
and agreeing to comply with the terms of Section 13-5 of the Code. The acceptance shall be
accompanied by proof, satisfactory to the Village Clerk/Administrator, of the Company's compliance
with § 13-5-15. Upon filing its statement of acceptance, the Company shall be deemed to have
contracted with the Village to perform the work which has been granted to it by Section 13-5 of the
Code, and, upon acceptance of the Company's statement of acceptance by the Village
Clerk/Administrator, the Village shall be deemed to have contracted with the Company to perform such
work. If the Company does not file its statement of acceptance as provided by this section, Section 13-
5 of the Code and Franchise shall be terminated and become void.
§ 13-5-23. Publication.
The Company shall pay the costs of publication of Section 13-5 of the Code by making payment
directly to the publisher upon presentation of the publisher's statement.
APPENDIX
Section A1. Personnel Policy Manual
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Bosque Farms 2-20-1992 by Ord. No.
92-2. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Job descriptions  See Sec. A2.
Article 1. General Provisions
1.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Personnel Policy Manual is to establish consistent, basic policies and practices
concerning relations between the Village of Bosque Farms and its employees. This Personnel Policy
Manual further establishes the formal appeals procedure available to regular employees to hear
disciplinary action appeals with respect to demotions, dismissals and suspensions, and provides the
method by which the Personnel Board hears formal appeals. The provisions of this Personnel Policy
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 268/346
[1]
Manual shall apply to all Village employees, except that the provisions governing merit and the appeal
of disciplinary actions do not apply to the Village Clerk/Administrator, the Treasurer, or the Police Chief.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
1.2. Scope.
Definite rules and regulations cannot be readily formulated for every possible problem and situation.
This manual serves as a general basis and guide for the proper, efficient, and effective administration
of personnel matters of the employees of the Village of Bosque Farms. The personnel rules contained
herein replace and supersede all previously issued personnel rules and regulations applicable to
employees of the Village of Bosque Farms, including but not limited to the Village of Bosque Farms
Personnel Handbook adopted in 1984, and all amendments and regulations related thereto.
1.3. Amendment of policy.
There shall be no resolution or other action of the Village Council or other Village officials which is
inconsistent with this policy, except by amendment of this manual as required by law. The Village
Council reserves the right to amend this Personnel Policy Manual at its discretion.
1.4. Employee knowledge and review of policy.
The Village Clerk/Administrator shall provide a copy of this policy to present employees and to all new
employees with instructions to read and know the provisions of these rules. Employees shall sign an
acknowledgement that they have reviewed the manual.
1.5. Equal employment opportunity policy.
Individuals will not be discriminated against on the basis of race, age, religion, color, national origin,
ancestry, sex, physical or mental handicap or medical condition, in consideration for employment,
duration of employment, compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment by the Village of
Bosque Farms.
1.6. Administration by Village Clerk/Administrator.
The Village Clerk/Administrator shall administer the personnel system and the terms of this Personnel
Policy Manual and its amendments, and all future approved personnel policies and operating
procedures.
1.7. Word usage.
All pronouns used in this Personnel Policy Manual shall include the masculine, feminine, and neuter
gender, shall include the singular and plural, and the context of this Personnel Policy Manual shall be
read accordingly.
Article 2. Definitions
2.1. Administrative leave with pay.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 269/346
[1]
Leave with pay granted at the Village Clerk/Administrator's discretion for good cause.
2.2. Anniversary date.
A day 12 months from an employee's date of hire.
2.3. Annual leave.
Leave with pay granted to a regular or qualified appointed employee after accrual at a specific rate to
be used by an employee at the employee's discretion.
2.4. Appeal.
A written request that a decision of a formal disciplinary action be reconsidered at a further stage in the
appeal procedure.
2.5. Applicant.
A person who has made formal application on an official Village personnel application form for a
position in the Village service.
2.6. Appointed employee.
Appointed employees include the Village Clerk/Administrator; Treasurer; and Police Chief.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
2.7. Casual employee.
An employee paid by the hour who may be called on short notice and/or on an occasional basis.
2.8. Days.
Wherever the term "days" is used in this manual, it shall mean calendar days and not working days,
unless otherwise specifically stated.
2.9. Demotion.
A personnel action which reduces the employee's responsibilities and pay. Demotions may be
voluntary or may be the result of disciplinary actions.
2.10. Department head.
The Village Council appointee or Village employee who has responsibility for supervising or
administering a department of Village government as determined and designated by the Village
Council.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 270/346
2.11. Disciplinary action appeal.
A formal complaint of an employee concerning actions taken by a supervisor or other employee in
dissatisfaction with the working conditions or relationships.
2.12. Dismissal.
An action, recommended by the department head for whom the employee works and the Village
Clerk/Administrator, and approved by the Mayor and a majority of the Village Council, which terminates
an individual's employment with the Village.
2.13. Due process.
The right granted to a full-time or part-time regular employee who has completed the probationary
period, to pre- and post-disciplinary hearings, for actions of suspension, demotion, or dismissal.
2.14. Elected official.
An individual elected by popular vote or appointed to fill vacancies in elective office (i.e., Village
Councilor, Mayor, and Municipal Judge).
2.15. Exempt employees.
All executive, administrative, and professional employees as defined in Department of Labor
regulations relating to the Fair Labor Standards Act, and whose compensation/wage is based on a
fixed annual salary. Once an exempt employee uses all accrued leave, the employee will not be paid
for time absent from work.
2.16. Full-time.
[Amended 12-20-2012]
All employees who work a minimum of 34 hours per week are considered full-time employees.
2.17. Immediate family.
[Amended 5-17-2012]
A spouse, parent, child, grandchild, grandparent or sibling; or spouse's parent, child, grandchild,
grandparent or sibling.
2.18. Layoff or reduction in force.
The involuntary separation of an employee from Village service without fault on the part of the
employee, due to reorganization, lack of work, or lack of funds.
2.19. Medical disability termination.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 271/346
The termination of an employee from Village employment when the employee is unable to perform the
essential functions of the position due to a medical condition.
2.20. Nonexempt employees.
All employees who are not exempt employees as defined in Department of Labor regulations relating
to the Fair Labor Standards Act. Nonexempt employees shall receive overtime pay for actual hours
worked in a normal workweek in excess of the hours set forth in § 10.5.
2.21. Part-time employee.
[Amended 12-20-2012]
A position in which the employee works fewer than 34 hours per week.
2.22. Performance evaluation.
The written objective review made by the employee's supervisor of an employee's performance
relating to the employee's assigned duties.
2.23. Post-disciplinary hearing.
A formal hearing conducted by the Personnel Board at the request of an employee who is appealing a
suspension or demotion, or a former employee who is appealing a dismissal, held after the predisciplinary
hearing conducted by the Mayor.
2.24. Pre-disciplinary hearing.
A hearing conducted by the Mayor before the imposition of the disciplinary actions of suspension,
demotion, or dismissal.
2.25. Probationary employee.
A full-time or part-time employee hired to fill a regular position who has not yet completed the sixmonth
probationary period of employment during which time the employee is terminable at will. Law
enforcement personnel shall serve a one-year probationary period.
2.26. Promotion.
Transfer to a position requiring higher responsibilities and salary.
2.27. Regular employee.
A full- or part-time employee who has completed the probationary period, who shall be disciplined only
for cause, and who is entitled to all the rights and benefits of the Village of Bosque Farms Personnel
Policy Manual. A regular employee must be specifically designated as such on a personnel action
form, which will be made part of the employee's personnel file. Regular employees shall include the
Library Director, Water Superintendent, Zoning Administrator, and Maintenance Supervisor.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 272/346
2.28. Sick leave.
Leave with pay granted to a regular or qualified appointed employee, after accrual at a specific rate,
when personal illness or quarantine keeps the employee from performing the duties of the position.
2.29. Sick leave abuse.
Use of accrued sick leave at a rate faster than 50% of the hours being accrued on a monthly basis for
non-major medical problems. Employees abusing sick leave shall be disciplined up to and including
dismissal.
2.30. Suspension.
An enforced leave of absence without pay for disciplinary reasons which becomes effective after the
Mayor has conducted the pre-disciplinary hearing and rendered his decision.
2.31. Temporary/Seasonal position.
A position which is vacant due to the temporary absence of an employee or a position which is
seasonal in nature. Temporary/Seasonal employment will not exceed a four-month period.
2.32. Terminable at will.
A terminable-at-will employee is one who fills an appointed, temporary, or casual position, or an
employee who has not completed his probationary period. A terminable-at-will employee serves at the
discretion of the Village, and his employment can be terminated without cause. A terminable-at-will
employee cannot appeal suspension, demotion, dismissal, or other disciplinary actions.
2.33. Transfer.
The transfer of an employee from one department or office to another department or office in the
Village service, or to a position in another geographic location or to a position having the same salary.
2.34. Village business.
The performance of duties of a Village position at an employee's normal workstation or at a location
authorized by the Village.
Article 3. Employment Status
3.1. Full-time regular employee.
[Amended 12-20-2012]
A full-time regular employee is one who has completed the probationary period and who normally is
scheduled to work a minimum of 34 hours per week. A full-time regular employee is eligible for all
rights and benefits provided by the Village.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 273/346
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
B.
3.2. Part-time regular employee.
[Amended 12-20-2012]
A part-time regular employee is an employee who has completed the probationary period and who
works fewer than 34 hours per week. Part-time regular employees are eligible for leave at a prorated
basis and participate in the Public Employees Retirement Association of New Mexico (PERA), but do
not receive health or life insurance benefits, except those that are statutorily required.
3.3. Other classes of employees.
Appointees of elected officials. The appointees of elected officials are as follows: Village
Clerk/Administrator, Treasurer, and Police Chief. Appointees of elected officials shall receive a
salary or hourly wage set by the Village Council. Appointed employees are terminable at will and
cannot avail themselves of the disciplinary action appeal procedure set forth herein, but are
entitled to all other benefits provided by the Village.
Probationary employee. The purpose of the probationary period is to evaluate the employee's
ability, potential, and performance. A full-time or part-time probationary employee is one who is
hired to fill a regular position who has not yet completed the probationary period of employment
during which time he is terminable at will, and may not avail himself of the disciplinary action
appeal procedure set forth herein, but is entitled to all other Village benefits provided herein.
A probationary employee accrues leave, but may not use annual leave time accrued until the
probationary period is completed.
To determine whether an employee has satisfactorily completed the probationary period, the
employee's department head will evaluate the employee's performance and the employee's
ability to work with the public, peers, supervisors, and management. A probationary employee
will be evaluated at the end of the probationary period and may be evaluated at any other
time during the probationary period.
During the probationary period, an employee hired to fill a law enforcement position shall
obtain the statutorily required certification for the position. Failure to obtain such certification
within the one-year period bars the employee from becoming a regular employee and shall
result in the employee's dismissal.
If an employee does not satisfactorily complete the probationary period, the employee will be
dismissed. Proposed dismissal of a probationary employee must be discussed with the
Village Clerk/Administrator, who will discuss the situation with legal counsel. The Mayor and
the Village Council must approve dismissals.
[Amended 2-15-1996]
An employee who fills a temporary position and is subsequently hired to fill a regular position
shall serve the required probationary period. The beginning date of the probationary period is
the date the employee changes from temporary to probationary status.
A regular employee who transfers to a new position shall serve the normal probationary
period.
A former Village employee rehired more than six months after termination, or rehired at any
time to fill a different position, shall serve the required probationary period.
A probationary employee may not apply for other positions in any Village office.
If the employee is hired to a full-time or part-time regular position, the first day of work in that
position shall be used in computing the beginning of the probationary period.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 274/346
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Temporary/Seasonal employee. A temporary/seasonal employee is hired on either a full-time or
part-time basis to a seasonal position or to a temporary position established for a period of no
more than four months. A temporary employee is terminable at will, is not entitled to appeal
personnel actions, does not receive benefits, and does not accrue leave.
Casual employee. A casual employee is an employee paid by the hour who may be called on
short notice, on an emergency basis or on an occasional or irregular basis. A casual employee is
terminable at will, is not entitled to appeal personnel actions, does not receive benefits, and does
not accrue leave.
Article 4. Recruitment and Selection
4.1. Recruitment posting procedure.
Whenever filling a regular position, the department head will notify the Village Clerk/Administrator of
the position to be filled. The vacancy will be posted in the Village Office for five days and advertised in
a newspaper of general circulation at least once.
4.2. Exceptions to posting.
Posting is waived, with the approval of the Village Clerk/Administrator, when an applicant is authorized
to perform the duties of a position on a temporary or casual basis.
4.3. Permission for transfer.
No Village employee or department head can deny another Village employee who has completed the
probationary period and who is not the subject of disciplinary action permission to apply for a job
vacancy in any other Village office or department for which the employee is qualified.
4.4. Applicant responsibility.
Submission of applications. Applications for employment shall be accepted in the Village
Clerk/Administrator's office during normal business hours. Applicants shall be considered for
positions for which they have applied and are qualified. Applications must be submitted on the
employment application form provided by the Village.
Proof of qualification. The applicant is responsible for furnishing proof of qualifications or
possession of any license, certificate, or degree when these requirements are necessary and set
forth in the job description.
Immigration act compliance. The applicant is responsible for furnishing proof of identification and
right to work in accordance with the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986.
Certification. The applicant is responsible for signing the employment application and certifying as
to the truth of all statements made in the application.
Referral to department head. The Village Clerk/Administrator will refer applicants, who have met
the qualifications, to the department head for interviews.
4.5. Selection.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 275/346
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
B.
Selection shall be made by the Mayor, in consultation with the department head and the Village
Clerk/Administrator, and will be based on the following: skills, educational background, experience,
personal interview, references, and results of pre-employment examinations when required. The
Village Council shall approve the appointment for budgetary purposes.
Employment reference checks. References provided by the applicant shall be checked. Applicants
will be asked by the Village to sign a written authorization for the Village to check references. Only
those applicants who sign this written authorization will be considered for the position for which
they have applied.
Physical examinations and drug testing. Applicants to whom positions have been offered may be
required to undergo medical examinations, which may include urinalysis, blood testing and
radiographic examinations. Drug testing will be done for specifically identified safety-sensitive
positions, including heavy road equipment operators and law enforcement officers. Preemployment
medical examinations will generally be completed and reviewed before actual
employment begins. Offers of employment are contingent upon the physician's statement that the
individual can perform the assigned duties and tasks of that position and is drug free. Preemployment
medical examinations will be paid for by the Village.
4.6. Ineligibility for hire and rehire.
An applicant shall be considered ineligible for hire or rehire by the Village of Bosque Farms if the
applicant has:
Made any false statement or omission on the employment application.
Not met the requirements of the position.
Failed to complete pre-employment examinations or other requirements as directed by the
Village.
Not met the criteria for insurance or bonding as required by law.
Been dismissed from Village service as a disciplinary measure.
Not been certified by a physician that the applicant can perform the physical requirements of
the position.
Been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor which would affect the employee's ability to
perform the job's essential functions, or convicted of an infamous crime.
The above list is not necessarily exhaustive, and may not include all of the reasons which would
make an applicant ineligible for hire or rehire.
4.7. Ineligibility of applicants for law enforcement positions.
No person under indictment, or who is generally known for having a bad character or as a disturber of
the peace, shall be eligible to serve as a law enforcement officer.
Article 5. Changes in Employment Status
5.1. Promotion.
[Amended 12-19-2002]
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 276/346
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
B.
Employees are encouraged to take advantage of promotional opportunities and apply for higher paying
positions for which they qualify. The Village Council shall have final approval of all in-house
promotions.
5.2. Demotion.
An employee may be demoted to a vacant position for which the employee is qualified when the
employee would otherwise be terminated because the employee's position is being abolished due to a
lack of funds or lack of work and there are no appropriate vacancies at the same level; when the
employee does not possess the necessary ability to render satisfactory performance in the position
presently held; or when the employee voluntarily requests such a demotion. Demoted employees will
receive a reduction in pay. Only a regular employee demoted due to an inability to render satisfactory
performance in the position presently held is entitled to disciplinary action appeal proceedings.
5.3. Transfer.
Employees may be moved from one position to another at the same rate of pay either voluntarily or
involuntarily. An employee may be transferred if it is in the best interest of the Village. Involuntary
transfers are not appealable.
5.4. Resignation.
An employee voluntarily resigning shall submit, in writing, a two-week notice of resignation. Failure to
provide written two-week notice of resignation may be grounds for refusal of future employment with
the Village. Unauthorized absence from work for a period of three consecutive regularly scheduled
working days shall be considered a voluntary resignation.
5.5. Reduction in force/layoff.
If it is necessary for the Village to reduce the number of Village employees because of lack of
funds or lack of work, the Village Clerk/Administrator, after consulting with the relevant department
head, shall make recommendations to the Mayor, who shall make the determination of the
necessity for layoffs. The reduction will occur in the following manner:
Casual, temporary, and probationary employees will be laid off before full- or part-time regular
employees unless they are filling positions which require specific skills and knowledge.
Layoff of regular employees shall be determined by the department head, based on the
employees' suitability for the jobs remaining, ability to perform available work, past job
performance, and length of service with the Village.
Employees to be laid off shall be notified at any time during the pay period and shall be
allowed to work through the end of that regular pay period or receive pay to the end of that
period.
Accrued annual leave shall be paid on the final day of employment.
An employee on layoff must reapply to be considered for future employment.
A laid-off employee returning to Village employment within six months of layoff will not serve a
probationary period if hired to the same position.
Reductions in force will be approved by the Village Council and are not appealable.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 277/346
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
C.
D.
[1]
E.
5.6. Dismissal.
The department heads, in consultation with the Village Clerk/Administrator, may recommend to the
Mayor dismissal of regular employees for just cause, which shall include, but not be limited to,
unsatisfactory performance or illegal activity or unacceptable conduct on the job. Employees, other
than regular employees, may be dismissed with or without cause. In compliance with state statute, all
dismissals of employees are subject to approval by the Mayor and the Village Council. (NMSA 1978,
§ 3-11-6)
Article 6. Conditions of Employment
6.1. Performance evaluations.
Probationary period evaluations. The department head shall discuss performance with the
employee during the probationary period as required in § 3.3B(2). The employee must receive a
performance evaluation of satisfactory or better at the end of the probationary period before the
employee can become a regular employee entitled to all of the rights and benefits of that status.
Other evaluations. Other employees may be evaluated upon the following conditions:
On an annual basis. Department heads will initiate annual reviews of their employees at a
time 12 months from the date of hire or 12 months from the date on which an employee
transfers to a new position, and annually thereafter.
A change of status.
Recommendations of any type of salary increase.
Demotion or suspension.
Any other time that a department head or immediate supervisor wishes to make the
particularly good or poor performance of an employee a matter of record.
Contents of evaluation. A performance evaluation shall contain an overall appraisal of the
employee's performance, such as "satisfactory," "outstanding" or "unsatisfactory." The
performance evaluation shall state areas of responsibilities and standards of performance.
Employee rebuttal. The employee may submit a rebuttal statement to the performance evaluation,
which will be attached to and become a part of the performance evaluation. The rebuttal shall be
submitted within 10 days of the evaluation.
Unsatisfactory evaluation. In the event a regular employee receives an overall evaluation of
unsatisfactory, the employee shall be provided with written information in the evaluation as to
specific areas of deficient performance and steps for improvement, and also shall be warned that
failure to meet reasonable performance standards of the position within a set time period (not to
exceed 90 days) shall result in dismissal. An employee who receives an overall evaluation of
unsatisfactory shall be reevaluated at any time during the time period set above following the
unsatisfactory evaluation and, if performance remains unsatisfactory, shall be dismissed pursuant
to the procedures in these rules.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
6.2. Prohibited political activities.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 278/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
A.
[1]
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
All employees are prohibited from:
Using official authority or influence for the purpose of interfering with or affecting the result of an
election or a nomination for office, or for any other political purpose.
Directly or indirectly coercing, attempting to coerce, commanding or advising a state or Village
officer or employee to pay, lend, or contribute anything of value to a party, committee, or
organization, agency, or person for a political purpose.
Threatening to deny promotions to any employee who does not vote for certain candidates,
requiring employees to contribute part of their pay to a political fund, influencing subordinate
employees to buy tickets to political fund-raising events and similar events, advising employees to
take part in political activity and matters of a similar nature.
Engaging in political activity while on duty or campaigning on Village property.
6.3. Nepotism.
Definition of nepotism. For purposes of this Personnel Policy Manual, "nepotism" is defined as the
practice of giving preferential treatment in areas of employment, including, but not limited to,
selection, benefits, pay, promotion, and discipline, to an employee's near-relatives. For purposes
of this nepotism policy, "near-relatives" are defined as the employee's spouse, children, parents,
siblings, grandparents, grandchildren, aunts, uncles, first cousins, and all like relations of the
employee's spouse and any former spouse(s), or unrelated persons sharing a spousal
relationship. This definition is to cover any person related to the employee by birth, adoption, or
marriage.
Prohibited practices. The practice or appearance of nepotism is prohibited. Near-relatives shall not
work in the same department when there is a supervisory relationship between them. Any
problems arising from such a situation should be referred to the Village Clerk/Administrator for
review. Near-relatives cannot fill or be promoted into a position which requires supervision by a
near-relative; neither shall any elected official or appointee, or Village employee give employment
as clerk, deputy, or assistant, or other class of departmental employee to any near-relative when
that person's compensation is $600 or more per year. (NMSA 1978, § 10-1-10) Any exceptions to
this rule must be approved by the Village Council.
6.4. Conflicts of interest; outside employment.
Conflict ban. No employee shall engage in any business or transaction or accept private
employment or other public employment which is incompatible with the proper discharge of the
employee's responsibilities, or which gives the appearance of impropriety.
Outside employment. Because each employee represents the Village of Bosque of Farms in the
performance of the employee's duties, the Village requires each employee to obtain the express
written permission of the Village Clerk/Administrator for each position of outside employment. The
approval document will be placed in the employee's personnel file.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Approval of outside employment. The Village Clerk/Administrator shall determine whether:
The duties or services of the proposed supplemental/outside employment will create a conflict
of interest for the employee or the employee's subordinates while serving in an official
capacity with the Village.
The proposed supplementary/outside employment will defame, embarrass, or reflect discredit
upon the Village.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 279/346
(3)
(4)
D.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
The employee is serving the Village satisfactorily and will be able to continue to do so if the
employee undertakes supplementary/outside employment.
The employee's sick leave usage does not in any way reflect or give the appearance of
abuse.
Termination of outside employment. Upon the request of the Village Clerk/Administrator and/or the
Mayor, no employee shall continue in supplementary/outside employment if such employment has
a negative impact on the employee's job performance. A determination that such employment has
a negative impact on an employee's job performance is not subject to the formal disciplinary
action appeal procedure.
6.5. Sexual harassment.
Prohibition of sexual harassment. Employees of the Village of Bosque Farms are prohibited from
sexually harassing any other Village employee(s). Sexual harassment is any unwanted sexual
attention or such attention when submission to such conduct is made, either explicitly or implicitly,
a term of an individual's employment; submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual
is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or such conduct has the
purpose of affecting or unreasonably interfering with an individual's work performance or creating
an intimidating, hostile, or offensive working environment.
Policy regarding sexual harassment. The Village of Bosque Farms is committed to enforcing a
policy prohibiting sexual harassment that:
Provides for a work environment free from all forms of sexual harassment.
Applies to the actions of all Village employees, elected and appointed officials, and
volunteers.
Ensures that appropriate corrective measures, up to and including dismissal and appropriate
legal action, will be taken if this policy is violated.
Establishes a complaint procedure that is fair and confidential, and protects against retaliation
for filing, or testifying as a witness to a complaint.
Ensures that all complaints are investigated promptly, thoroughly, and fairly.
Ensures that all elected officials, department heads, and supervisors are fully aware of their
responsibilities under this policy.
Sexual harassment complaint procedures.
Employees of the Village of Bosque Farms are encouraged to resolve complaints of sexual
harassment by reporting them to the Village Clerk/Administrator. The Village
Clerk/Administrator shall document the complaint and provide a copy to the complaining
employee. All such complaints shall be kept in a confidential file.
The Village Clerk/Administrator shall meet with the alleged harasser immediately and in no
event more than three working days from the filing of the complaint. The purpose of the
meeting will be to investigate the matter and, if necessary, take prompt corrective action. The
investigation shall be complete, confidential, and well documented. The principles of
progressive discipline, up to and including dismissal from Village employment, shall be
followed by the supervisor for a person who is determined to have violated the sexual
harassment policy. The discipline will vary depending on the nature of the activity for which a
complaint was filed.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 280/346
(3)
[1]
[2]
A.
B.
C.
D.
Nothing in these procedures shall prohibit the employee from filing a complaint directly with
the Federal Equal Employment Opportunity Office or the New Mexico Human Rights Division.
This avenue should be used when the employee feels that the employee cannot obtain
appropriate relief within the steps as explained above. However, employees are encouraged
to seek consultation with the Village Clerk/Administrator before filing a formal sexual
harassment complaint.
6.6. Drug testing policy.
The Village of Bosque Farms is committed to the goal of a drug-free workplace in compliance with the
Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988. Drug testing of employees will not be conducted by the Village
except in compliance with legal requirements or with consent.[2]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Editor's Note: Original §§ 6.7, Refusal to submit to drug testing, 6.8, Positive results of alcohol and drug
testing, 6.9, Retesting, and 6.10, Confidentiality, which immediately followed this section, were repealed
at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Article 7. Employee Discipline
7.1. Basis for discipline.
Just cause discipline. Disciplinary actions for regular employees are based on just cause in order
to promote the efficiency of the services rendered by the Village and the operation of its respective
departments and offices. Disciplinary actions will be consistent with governing laws and
regulations and will be taken without regard to race, age, religion, color, national origin, ancestry,
sex, physical or mental handicap or medical condition. No employee will be disciplined for refusing
to perform an unlawful act.
Definition of "just cause." "Just cause" is defined as any conduct, action or inaction arising from, or
directly connected with, the employee's work which is inconsistent with the employee's obligation
to the Village and reflects the employee's disregard of the Village's interest. Just cause includes,
but is not limited to, inefficiency, incompetency, misconduct, negligence, insubordination,
performance which continues to be inadequate after reasonable efforts have been made to correct
the performance problems, or conviction of a felony or misdemeanor as described in NMSA 1978,
§ 28-2-1 et seq.
Disciplinary action. Any department head may take disciplinary action in the form of a verbal or
written reprimand, or may recommend suspension, demotion, or dismissal of an employee under
the department head's authority, consistent with departmental policies and this Personnel Policy
Manual. Copies of any documented disciplinary action must be furnished to the Village
Clerk/Administrator's office for placement in the employee's file, with the signature of the recipient
acknowledging receipt of the action.
Consultation with Village Clerk/Administrator. Dismissal, involuntary demotion, and suspension
require consultation with the Village Clerk/Administrator before the action is recommended to the
Mayor. Whenever such consultation is not practical because of urgent circumstances, necessary
action may be taken and the situations reviewed with the Village Clerk/Administrator as soon as
practical. Recommendations by department heads for dismissals will be discussed by the Village
Clerk/Administrator with the Village's insurer and/or the Village Attorney. Dismissals, involuntary
demotions, and suspensions require approval by the Mayor and a majority of the Village Council in
accordance with the procedures set forth below.
7.2. Progressive discipline.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 281/346
(1)
(2)
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
D.
E.
A regular employee shall be progressively disciplined whenever possible. Each case of inadequate
performance or act of misconduct shall be judged individually. All actions involving substandard work
performance, leading up to and including dismissal, require progressive warnings. The step of
corrective action used depends on the severity of the infraction and the employee's previous work
record. Because of the serious nature of some infractions, the first disciplinary action may be
dismissal.
Verbal reprimand. A verbal reprimand is used for minor infractions such as informing the employee
that his actions, behavior or conduct needs to change. Department heads will keep written
notations of verbal reprimands, and these will not be placed in the employee's personnel file. A
verbal reprimand is not appealable. Causes of verbal reprimands include, but are not limited to:
Substandard work performance.
Repeated absence or tardiness.
Written reprimand.
[Amended 2-15-1996]
An employee shall receive a written reprimand because the deficiency or infraction is of a
greater degree than that for which a verbal reprimand may be used or if a verbal reminder
was not effective. Causes for written reprimands include, but are not limited to:
The causes listed for verbal reprimands.
Refusal to carry out orders.
Sleeping on the job.
Failure to follow safety rules.
Failure to follow other Village rules and procedures.
Written reprimands shall be placed in the employee's personnel file by the employee's
department head after providing the employee with a copy of the statement. The employee
will be asked to acknowledge having read the comments by signing the statement. The
employee may respond by noting on the reprimand that he does not agree or with a written
rebuttal, which shall be placed in the employee's personnel file. The placement of a written
reprimand in an employee's file is not eligible for appeal.
Suspension. An employee may be suspended without pay for a single serious offense or for
continued inadequate job performance or misconduct after previous attempts to correct the
conduct have failed. Such suspension will not exceed 10 working days. Suspension of a regular
employee is subject to the formal disciplinary action appeal procedures. Causes for suspensions
include, but are not limited to:
The causes listed for written reprimands.
Continued instances of poor performance.
Negligent damage to property and/or person(s).
Demotion. An employee may be demoted for continued inadequate job performance after previous
attempts to correct the conduct have failed. Demotion is not an appropriate disciplinary action for
an employee who has a record of excessive absences or tardiness. The demotion of a regular
employee is subject to the formal disciplinary action appeal procedures.
Dismissal.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 282/346
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
Dismissal is the final consequence when progressive discipline has failed to change
unacceptable behavior or performance. Dismissal is also the appropriate disciplinary
measure, despite the absence of previous disciplinary actions, when the employee has
engaged in behavior that is of a serious nature which is unacceptable for Village employees.
The dismissal of a regular employee is subject to the formal disciplinary action appeal
procedure. Causes for dismissal shall include, but are not limited to:
All causes listed for the previous four disciplinary actions if continuing after attempts to
correct have failed.
Theft of Village property or unapproved use of Village property for personal reasons.
Conviction of a job-related felony or misdemeanor as described in the Criminal Offender
Employment Act (NMSA 1978, § 28-2-1 et seq.).
Serious acts of negligence causing damage to Village property or to persons.
Conduct unbecoming an employee of the Village of Bosque Farms.
Deliberate falsification of information on the employee's job application or other Village
records.
Unlawful manufacturing, distributing, dispensing, possessing or using controlled
substances or alcohol on the job or reporting to work under the influence of an unlawful
controlled substance or alcohol.
Intentional abuse or destruction of Village equipment.
Refusal to carry out reasonable orders when a threatening condition exists.
Failure to meet standards of substance abuse rehabilitation programs.
The above examples are typical of the types of infractions sometimes encountered but are not
inclusive of all situations which may arise. The Village reserves the right to exercise judgment
and render disciplinary action or dismissal as determined appropriate based on the
circumstances of each case.
7.3. Approval by Mayor and Council.
The Mayor, as the pre-disciplinary hearing officer, will approve or disapprove all suspensions,
demotions and dismissals. Suspensions without pay and demotions become effective when the Mayor
approves the action. Dismissals become effective after Council approval. If an employee does not
appeal a suspension, demotion, or dismissal to the Personnel Hearing Board, the Village Council will
either approve or disapprove the Mayor's suspension, demotion, or dismissal of the employee. The
employee will not be given an opportunity to speak at this meeting. The employee must follow the
disciplinary action appeal procedure set forth in Article 8 if he wishes to pursue an appeal. If the Village
Council does not approve the Mayor's action, the employee will be reinstated and paid the wages he
lost as a result of the disciplinary action.
7.4. Conditions or actions not eligible for appeal.
The following matters are not eligible for appeal:
Disputes as to whether or not an established Village practice or policy is good.
Matters where a method of review is mandated by law.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 283/346
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
Matters where the Village is without authority to act or does not have the ability to provide a
remedy.
Temporary/Seasonal employees released prior to or at the end of their anticipated employment
period.
Probationary employees dismissed prior to the expiration of their probationary period.
Appointed employees dismissed at any point during their employment with the Village.
Performance evaluations, preferences for employment promotions, transfers, temporary
assignments, removal from temporary assignments, and layoffs.
Article 8. Formal Disciplinary Action Appeal Procedures
8.1. Initial steps.
This formal disciplinary action appeal procedure applies to the suspension, involuntary demotion, and
dismissal of regular employees.
Written notification. The Village Clerk/Administrator shall present the employee with written
notification of intent to suspend, demote or dismiss at least three working days in advance of the
proposed action. The written notification shall explain the reasons for the proposed action, the
employee's right to a pre-disciplinary hearing, and contain the scheduled time and place of the
pre-disciplinary hearing. The notification shall be hand-delivered to the employee, receipt of which
shall be acknowledged by the employee. The pre-disciplinary hearing shall not be set less than
three working days after the hand delivery of the notice.
Immediate suspension. In cases where Village property, other employees, or citizens are at risk
because of the employee's actions, the department head, in consultation with the Village
Clerk/Administrator, shall put the employee on administrative leave with pay while the appropriate
disciplinary action is contemplated and until the pre-disciplinary hearing is held and the decision is
rendered.
8.2. Pre-disciplinary hearing.
An employee shall pursue appeals according to the rules contained herein.
Request for pre-disciplinary hearing. Within two working days of the receipt of the disciplinary
notice, the employee is required to notify the Village Clerk/Administrator, in writing, and advise
whether or not the employee will participate in the pre-disciplinary hearing. The time, place, and
date of the pre-disciplinary hearing can be rescheduled upon the written agreement of the parties.
Pre-disciplinary hearing procedure. The Mayor shall meet with the employee, the employee's
department head, and the Village Clerk/Administrator at the appointed time. At this pre-disciplinary
hearing, the employee shall have the opportunity to respond to the proposed disciplinary action.
The parties may be represented by counsel at the pre-disciplinary hearing at their own expense.
Pre-disciplinary hearing decision. The Mayor will issue a decision in writing within three working
days of the hearing. The written decision shall include the time, date, and location of the meeting;
persons present; and the determination. The written decision shall be either delivered directly to
the employee (obtaining employee's signature of receipt of the decision) or be sent by certified
mail, return receipt requested. The employee has a right to appeal the decision to the Village
Personnel Board.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 284/346
D.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
Effect of decision. Demotions and suspensions will become effective at the time that the predisciplinary
hearing decision is issued. A dismissal appealed by an employee will not become
effective until the Village Council approves the dismissal following a post-disciplinary hearing.
8.3. Post-disciplinary hearings; appeals to Personnel Board.
Notice of appeal. Within three working days of receipt of the written pre-disciplinary decision, the
appellant must give written notice to the Village Clerk/Administrator of the appellant's intent to
pursue a post-disciplinary hearing.
Post-disciplinary hearing scheduled. The post-disciplinary hearing must be held within 10 working
days of the receipt of notification of intent to pursue a post-disciplinary hearing by the Village
Clerk/Administrator. The parties must agree in writing to any postponement of the appeal hearing
beyond 10 working days. At this hearing, the appellant shall have an opportunity to present
witnesses and physical evidence and cross-examine the Village's witnesses before the Village
Personnel Board. The appellant and the Village may be represented by legal counsel. Each party
bears its own costs and expenses with respect to the retention of legal counsel and the pursuit of
post-disciplinary actions.
8.4. Post-disciplinary hearing procedures.
Rules of procedure.
The Village Clerk/Administrator will determine the date and time of the post-disciplinary
hearing and any continuances. Such hearings will be conducted at a time and place which is
mutually convenient to all parties concerned. Requests for continuances of hearings shall be
made at least five working days prior to the scheduled hearing, absent extenuating
circumstances. Requests for continuances of hearings shall be made in writing directly to the
hearing officer, with copies to all parties involved.
Post-disciplinary hearings shall be conducted as open meetings, with notice given to the
public pursuant to the New Mexico Open Meetings Act, unless the appellant requests a
closed hearing.
A quorum of the Personnel Board shall, by majority vote:
Make rulings on procedural and substantive issues of the hearing.
Determine the admissibility of evidence and testimony, all of which must have a direct
bearing on the issue before the Board.
Follow the evidentiary standards for administrative agencies.
Issue a written ruling, including findings of fact and conclusions of law.
The following persons are required to be present at all appeal proceedings unless otherwise
excused by the Personnel Board or by agreement of the parties: the appellant, appellant's
representative (if any), and the department's designated representative.
The parties shall stipulate to the facts and issues to the greatest extent possible prior to the
hearing.
Prior to the hearing, representatives shall prepare copies of all exhibits and evidence which
are expected to be presented. Representatives shall stipulate to exhibits to the extent
possible and bring to the hearing adequate copies for the Personnel Board as well as the
opposing representative.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 285/346
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(1)
[1]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
B.
C.
At least five calendar days prior to the hearing, all parties must submit to the Personnel Board
a statement identifying the issues to be heard, a witness list, and a complete list of documents
to be admitted as evidence.
Witnesses in appeal hearings are not admitted into the hearing room until called upon to
testify. This ban excludes those individuals listed in Subsection A(4) above.
[Amended 4-15-1993]
Notice of the hearing will be sent by certified mail to the appellant and postmarked at least
five days prior to the scheduled hearing. Copies of the hearing notice shall be sent
concurrently to all relevant parties.
Either a tape-recorded or stenographic record of all post-disciplinary appeal hearings will be
made.
Conduct of hearings.
The Village, which carries the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence, shall
present its statements of issues involved in the case, followed by the appellant. Opening
statements are limited to the pertinent issues of fact and law and shall not exceed 10 minutes
without permission of the Personnel Board.
Order of presentation.
The Village will present its case first. Witnesses for the Village may be called and
questioned on their involvement in, or knowledge of, the case. Following each witness'
testimony, the appellant will have the opportunity to cross-examine the witness. The
Personnel Board will then have the opportunity to question the witness on matters related
to the witness' testimony. The Personnel Board shall restrict its questions to those
necessary to clarify the testimony previously given. Follow-up or redirect questioning will
be allowed at the discretion of the Personnel Board.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Section 1-1).
Witnesses for the appellant may be called and questioned on their involvement in, or
knowledge of, the case. Following each witness' testimony, the Village will have the
opportunity to cross-examine the witness. The Personnel Board will then have the
opportunity to question the witness on matters related to the witness' testimony. The
Personnel Board shall restrict its questions to those necessary to clarify the testimony
previously given. Follow-up or redirect questioning will be allowed at the discretion of the
Personnel Board.
[Amended 4-15-1993]
Following presentation of the appellant's position, the Village may offer rebuttal
testimony. Such testimony shall be brief, and shall address only the issues brought forth
in the appellant's presentation.
The Village's closing statement shall be presented, followed by that of the appellant.
These statements shall not exceed 10 minutes without the permission of the hearing
officer, and at a minimum shall contain a request for the desired outcome. The Village
shall have the opportunity to make a final statement, not to exceed five minutes, which
shall be limited to issues brought forth in the appellant's closing statement.
Communication of Personnel Board's decision. The Personnel Board's recommendation to the
Village Council shall include findings and conclusions, shall be issued within five days of the
hearing, shall indicate whether the decision was unanimous or whether particular members
dissented, and shall be transmitted to the appellant, department head, and the Village
Clerk/Administrator, who shall notify the Village Council. The Personnel Board may only
recommend upholding, modifying, or reversing the decision, and may recommend reinstating the
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 286/346
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
(1)
(2)
A.
employee and awarding back pay and benefits. The record of the proceedings will be retained by
the Village Clerk/Administrator's office or the certified court reporter for a period of not less than
one year from the hearing date, along with all of the physical evidence admitted by the Personnel
Board. The verbal record shall be transcribed only in the case of appeal to the District Court by
one of the respective parties. The party requesting the transcription shall make arrangements to
pay for the transcription.
Approval/Disapproval of recommendation. The Village Council will approve or disapprove the
recommendation by majority vote. The Village Council's vote will be based solely on the Personnel
Board's findings and conclusions and its recommendation; no further testimony will be heard at
the Council meeting at which the vote is taken. The Village Council will meet to vote on a
recommendation of the Personnel Board within five working days after the Personnel Board issues
its decision.
[Amended 4-15-1993]
Appeal of Village Council's decision.
Either party may appeal the Village Council's decision in the Thirteenth Judicial District Court
by filing a notice of appeal within 30 days of the decision.
This Personnel Policy Manual may be included in the record on appeal at the request of any
one of the respective parties at any time before forwarding the record to the District Court.
8.5. Procedure for appealing working conditions and other workrelated
problems.
[Amended 4-15-1993]
With respect to those conditions which an employee wishes to appeal, but which are not subject to the
formal disciplinary action procedure set forth in Sections 8.1 through 8.4, the employee shall discuss
the problem with the department head in an attempt to work out a solution. Included in this type of
appeal are complaints charging discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin,
physical or mental handicap, or medical condition. If the employee is not satisfied with the proposed
solution, the employee may address the problem to the Village Clerk/Administrator, whose decision
shall be final.
Article 9. Personnel Board
9.1. Purpose.
The Personnel Board shall be responsible for making recommendations to the Village Council
concerning personnel policies, and shall conduct post-disciplinary hearings with respect to the
disciplinary action appeal procedure set forth in Article 8.
9.2. Membership; compensation.
The Personnel Board shall consist of the following:
One member of the Village Council elected by the Village Council. The term shall be two
years, with an indefinite number of terms allowed. The Village Council member will not
participate or vote in employee appeals.
The Village Clerk/Administrator will be a nonvoting member of the Personnel Board except for
the purpose of breaking a tie when the Personnel Board is considering issues other than
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 287/346
(3)
(4)
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
employee appeals.
Two employees of the Village of Bosque Farms elected by the Village employees at a public
meeting published pursuant to the requirements of Resolution #1 of the Village of Bosque
Farms. One of the employee members will be from the Police Department and the other
employee member will be from one of the other Village departments. The term of the
employee members of the Board shall be two years, with an indefinite number of terms to be
allowed. In cases of termination of Village employment or resignation from the Board by the
employee member of the Board, the employees shall elect a replacement for a full term.
Three residents of the Village of Bosque Farms appointed by the Mayor at a regular or special
public meeting of the Village Council. These appointments shall be with the advice and
consent of the Village Council. The term of the resident members shall be two years, with an
indefinite number of terms allowed. In cases of resignation from the Board by a resident
member, or termination of residency within the Village, the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the Village Council, shall appoint a replacement for a full term.
Personnel Board members perform their duties on a voluntary basis and shall not receive payment
for their services.
9.3. Chairperson.
The Board shall elect a Chairperson, who shall conduct the business of the Board and who shall
provide timely reports to the Village Council. Neither the Village Council member nor the Village
Clerk/Administrator shall serve as Chairperson.
9.4. Powers and duties.
Personnel policies.
The Board shall recommend to the Village Council such personnel policies which may be
necessary and desirable. Such policies, procedures, regulations, definitions, and rules may
include, but are not limited to: provisions governing hiring, promotion, transfers, separation,
employee evaluations, demotions, suspensions, dismissals, probation, reprimands, fringe
benefits, hours and conditions of work, holidays, and retirement for Village of Bosque Farms
employees.
Rules and regulations recommended by the Personnel Board shall be subject to approval by
the Village Council.
Amendments to the Personnel Manual. The Village Council shall review for consideration the
recommendations or amendments made by the Personnel Board for adoption and inclusion into
the Personnel Manual. After the Village Council has reviewed and considered the same, the
Village Council may adopt or reject in total or in part those recommendations or amendments
presented to it. The Village Council may adopt personnel policies, procedures, regulations,
definitions, rules, and the like, either upon the recommendation of the Personnel Board, or sua
sponte (of their own mind). The proposed recommendations or amendments shall be incorporated
into the Personnel Manual by majority vote of the Village Council at a duly called meeting of the
Council at which a quorum is present. The Village Council shall provide reasonable notice of the
same, in accordance with law. The Personnel Manual and all changes thereto shall be binding on
all parties from the time employment is approved by the Village Council.
Appeals. The Personnel Board shall hear appeals of employees pursuant to Article 8.
Article 10. Compensation and Benefit Program
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 288/346
A.
B.
10.1. Hours of work.
Employees will work their scheduled hours pursuant to work schedules established by the
administration. The standard workday for Village employees will be from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., unless
otherwise directed by the department head. Employees will not be paid for travel time from home to the
site of their work within the Village of Bosque Farms or from the work site to their home. Actual work
periods may fluctuate at the discretion of the department heads. Part-time employees are scheduled to
work pursuant to scheduling set forth by their department heads. Part-time employees will generally
work the same number of hours each week.
10.2. Breaks.
Full-time employees take a one-hour lunch break. Full-time employees are entitled to two fifteenminute
breaks per day; employees working four hours or less per day are entitled to one fifteen-minute
break per day. Supervisors may limit or delay breaks if continuous work is required because of an
emergency or unusual conditions. No breaks shall be taken until 1 1/2 hours after the shift has begun
or after 1 1/2 hours before the shift ends.
10.3. Pay periods.
Employees shall be paid every two weeks.
10.4. Tour of duty.
"Tour of duty" is defined as the established forty-hour workweek of an employee. An employee
normally works eight hours during the day, usually from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., with a designated one
hour off for lunch. Occasionally, some employees are called on to perform job functions outside the
normal tour of duty. When this occurs, it is the policy of the Village that the employee will take off time
the following workday, said time to be equal to the extra time worked. The employee must schedule the
time off with his/her supervisor. Exceptions to this policy are:
A police patrolman and their tour of duty remains the same.
When an emergency occurs within a department the supervisor may allow the employee to take
the time off on another day within the pay period.
[Amended 4-15-1993]
10.5. Overtime pay.
[Amended 12-19-2002]
Subject to the limitations set forth in § 10.4, overtime pay shall be paid only when overtime work is
authorized by the department head. Employees working overtime work without proper authority may be
subject to disciplinary action. The rate shall be 1 1/2 times regular pay for each hour of overtime, and
such payment shall be made only in cases when a nonexempt employee works over 40 "actual work
hours" in a normal workweek. Overtime pay for law enforcement employees shall be paid when the
employee works over 80 actual work hours in a normal pay period. Holiday, vacation, sick, educational,
and other leave hours shall not be considered actual working hours. Fair Labor Standards Act exempt
employees shall not receive overtime pay.
10.6. Final paycheck.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 289/346
An employee who resigns shall receive a final paycheck on the first regularly scheduled payday
following the employee's effective date of resignation. Any employee who is dismissed shall receive a
final paycheck by 5:00 p.m. on the fifth day following dismissal. Day one begins the day of dismissal
and includes Saturday and Sunday. In case of death, final salary and compensation for unused annual
leave shall be paid to the employee's named beneficiary or, if unnamed, to the employee's estate.
10.7. Clothing allowance.
An employee in a designated job with the Village may be required to wear special clothing to perform
the job function. An employee who is required to wear special clothing shall receive a clothing
allowance from the Village.
10.8. Gratuities.
All employees are prohibited from accepting gifts or other considerations from vendors given with the
intent of modifying the employees' performance of duties or encouraging the employees to make
purchases from the vendor involved. Employees will maintain the highest moral standards, and any
attempt to influence an employee's performance by a vendor or other person will be reported to the
department head.
10.9. Per-diem and mileage.
All payments of per-diem and mileage allowance to Village employees will be made pursuant to
policies established by the State of New Mexico. In no event shall any per-diem or mileage allowances
be made for travel by a Village employee in connection with the employee's regular job duties within
the boundaries of the Village of Bosque Farms without the express prior written consent of the Village
Clerk/Administrator.
10.10. Time cards.
At the end of each pay period, and upon approval by the Village Clerk/Administrator or the Police
Chief, the time cards will be forwarded to the Village Clerk/Administrator's office. The Village
Clerk/Administrator will keep a cumulative record of all leave time accrued and used. Weekly time
cards will be signed by the employee's immediate supervisor. Time cards must be submitted prior to
issuance of the paychecks. Upon receipt of the paycheck, the employee will review the paycheck and
time card and sign the time card unless either is inaccurate.
10.11. PERA benefits.
All Village employees, except casual and temporary employees, are required to join the Public
Employees Retirement Association of New Mexico (PERA). Copies of the latest PERA rules and
provisions may be obtained in the office of the Village Clerk/Administrator.
10.12. Insurance benefits.
The Village provides medical and life insurance benefits to its full-time regular and qualified appointed
employees. Insurance plans may be changed at the discretion of the Village Council. Specific benefits
of the current policy may be obtained from the Village Clerk/Administrator's office.
10.13. Education benefits.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 290/346
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
The Village of Bosque Farms supports the further education of its employees. When the education
assists the employee in the performance of his job, the employee may request reimbursement of the
tuition from the Village. The Mayor may approve payment of the tuition or, if the Mayor deems it
appropriate, he may seek approval from the Village Council. Denial of payment is not subject to
disciplinary action appeal procedures. For those courses in which an employee will be graded by the
educational institution, the employee will be reimbursed for the tuition at the end of the course,
provided the employee passes the course. If the Village has paid the tuition for a course and the
employee either resigns or is dismissed within the six-month period following the Village's payment of
the tuition, the employee shall reimburse the Village for the amount of the tuition. This reimbursement
provision shall not apply if the employee is laid off or terminated for medical reasons.
Article 11. Leave and Holidays
11.1. Authorized leave.
[Amended 7-18-2013; 12-21-2017]
Leave is absence from work, with or without pay, during regularly scheduled work hours, which
has been prearranged and approved by the employee's department head. The department head is
responsible for the maintenance and transmittal of leave records to the Village
Clerk/Administrator's office.
Examples of authorized leave include, but are not limited to:
Annual leave with pay.
Sick leave with pay.
Bereavement leave.
Administrative leave with pay.
Occupational injury or workers' compensation leave.
Civic duty leave.
Military leave.
Lack of work or inclement weather leave.
Leave without pay.
11.2. Unauthorized leave.
[Amended 7-18-2013; 12-21-2017]
Unauthorized leave is absence from work taken by an employee which is not authorized leave.
Examples of unauthorized leave include, but are not limited to:
Leaving work without permission.
Taking time off within 24 hours of a work assignment or work shift without adequate
justification.
Unexcused tardiness.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 291/346
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
Sick leave use after having a leave request denied.
Unscheduled sick leave adjoining scheduled days off.
Unscheduled sick leave adjoining holidays.
Willful failure to perform assigned duties while at work.
Failure to accept offers of overtime when required by the employee's supervisor.
Persons who utilize unauthorized leave are subject to disciplinary action, up to and including
termination.
[Amended 4-19-2018]
11.3. Holidays.
[Amended 4-21-1994; 7-18-2013]
All full-time employees of the Village are eligible for the legal holidays as adopted annually by
resolution at their regular rate of pay.
All part-time employees working 20 hours or more will receive holiday benefits at their regular rate
of pay on a basis pro-rated to the full-time (thirty-four-hour) workweek. Employees on leavewithout-
pay status will not be paid for holiday time. Casual employees, temporary employees, or
part-time employees working fewer than 20 hours per week are not entitled to holiday pay.
Employees required to work on a holiday will be compensated for the holiday at 2 1/2 times their
rate of pay for the holiday hours actually worked, not to exceed 12 hours. The holiday will begin at
6:00 p.m. of the eve of the holiday and end at 6:00 a.m. the day following the holiday, unless
otherwise specified.
When a holiday occurs during an employee's use of annual leave, the day shall be counted as a
holiday, and not a day of annual leave.
Employees on a normally scheduled day off when the holiday occurs will not be charged a holiday.
Such employees shall request in advance a day of leave to be taken and charged as a holiday.
Holiday time earned on a normal day off must be used within four weeks of the date of time
accrued. If not taken within the four-week time period, the employee will be paid straight time for
the day. The floating day for the employee's birthday must be used within the birthday month.
Holidays that fall on Saturday will be taken off on Friday of the same week. Holidays that fall on
Sunday will be taken off on Monday.
11.4. Annual leave with pay.
[Amended 1-17-2008; 7-18-2013]
Annual leave will accrue on a monthly basis from the date of employment. Upon termination of
employment, an employee shall be compensated for accrued annual hours.
No annual leave will be granted or taken before it is accrued. When a legal holiday that would
have been a regular workday for the employee occurs during annual leave, the leave for that day
will be charged as a holiday.
Hours worked in addition to the regularly scheduled workweek (such as overtime) will not entitle
an employee to additional annual leave hours.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 292/346
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Annual leave must be requested in advance of the time it is to be taken, except under approved
instances. Leave request forms should be submitted to the supervisor at least two weeks prior to
the leave date to allow for proper coverage within the department and office. Leave requests will
be approved contingent upon appropriate staff coverage within the Village offices.
Annual leave is accrued at the following rates:
Employee Years of Service
Regular
Workweek
(hours)
Monthly
Accrual
(hours)
Yearly
Accrual
(hours)
Maximum
Accrual
(hours)
1 to 5 40 8 96 120
6 to 10 40 8 96 150
11 to 15 40 10 120 180
16 or more 40 10 120 200
Part-time employees will receive annual leave benefits on a basis prorated to the full-time (thirtyfour-
hour) workweek. Employees on leave-without-pay status will not accrue annual leave time.
Temporary and casual employees do not accrue annual leave.
Any employee within 24 hours of his/her maximum accrual will be notified in writing by the Village
Clerk/Administrator, with a copy of the notice being sent to his/her supervisor. In the event an
emergency occurs, an extension of time may be approved by the Mayor.
A probationary employee shall accrue annual leave, but shall not be able to use accrued annual
leave hours until completion of the employee's probationary period. However, if a probationary
employee resigns or is dismissed before completing the probationary period, the employee shall
be compensated for annual leave hours accrued.
11.5. Sick leave with pay.
Sick leave may be granted for absences from work because of personal or immediate family
illness, injuries, and scheduled doctor's appointments for treatment, examinations, and
evaluations, provided the employee has sufficient sick leave hours accumulated. Sick leave will
accrue on a monthly basis from the date of employment at a rate of eight hours per month for fulltime
employees, and part-time employees will receive sick leave at their regular rate of pay on a
basis prorated to the full-time workweek. Temporary and casual employees do not accrue sick
leave. Sick leave may be taken during the probationary period.
[Amended 1-17-2008]
An employee who has been dismissed or is resigning his employment will not be compensated for
unused sick leave hours accrued, except for an employee who meets the requirements for
retirement. Such an employee will receive full compensation for sick leave hours, not to exceed
the annual hours accrued in 12 months.
Hours worked in addition to the regularly scheduled workweek will not entitle an employee to
additional sick leave benefits. Employees on leave-without-pay status will not accrue sick leave.
When an employee is absent from work for five or more days, and such absence is chargeable to
sick leave, the employee shall provide his or her supervisor with a doctor's statement certifying the
reason for the illness. Any employee taking sick leave of fewer than five days may be requested
by his or her supervisor or the Mayor to provide a doctor's statement certifying the reason for such
leave.
[Amended 1-17-2008; 4-19-2018]
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 293/346
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
F.
G.
An employee claiming sick leave who makes a false claim; or fails to cooperate in any
investigation by the Village of his or her claim for sick leave; or refuses to be examined by a doctor
selected by the Village if requested to do so; or signs a statement falsely certifying the reason for
sick leave shall not be entitled to any leave with pay for the time in dispute and shall be subject to
disciplinary action.
The Village Clerk/Administrator may authorize employees to donate a portion of their accrued sick
leave to another employee who is suffering from or has an immediate family member suffering
from an unforeseeable severe illness, injury or physical or mental condition which has caused or is
likely to cause the employee to take leave without pay or to terminate employment with the
Village. Donations of time are completely voluntary. Such donations shall be made under the
following terms and conditions:
[Amended 5-19-2011]
The employee receiving donated leave must be a regular full- or part-time employee.
The employee receiving donated leave must not be eligible for temporary disability payments
under the Workers' Compensation Act.
The employee receiving donated leave must have exhausted all accrued sick and vacation
leave.
The employee receiving donated leave must provide appropriate medical documentation
justifying the necessity for the leave and the time for which the employee can reasonably be
expected to be absent from work.
Donated leave will be in one-hour increments and will be transferred hour for hour. The
receiving employee shall be paid at his/her hourly rate of pay for the donated time, not at the
donor's rate. All donated leave must be used within 30 days of the donation. Any unused
leave at the end of the 30 days will expire.
[Amended 4-19-2018]
Donations of time shall be made on forms provided by the Village, which will be signed by the
donating employee, witnessed by the department head and approved by the
Clerk/Administrator.
[Amended 4-19-2018]
Terminated employees are ineligible to receive donations.
Violation of any sick leave procedures or requirement will be sufficient cause for dismissal and will
be referred to the Village Clerk/Administrator for action.
11.6. Bereavement leave.
[Amended 1-17-2008]
In the event of the death of an employee's immediate family member as defined in § 2.17, the
employee shall be entitled to bereavement leave with pay not to exceed three days. Bereavement
leave for part-time personnel will be prorated.
11.7. Administrative leave with pay.
[Amended 12-21-2017]
Administrative leave with pay may be granted by the Village Clerk/Administrator and approved by the
Mayor.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 294/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
G.
H.
11.8. Occupational injury time/workers' compensation.
Workers' compensation. Employees injured on the job or suffering from occupational diseases, as
defined in the New Mexico Workers' Compensation statute, shall receive workers' compensation
benefits as prescribed by law.
Preexisting injury. All newly hired employees shall be required to complete a certificate of
preexisting condition form for submittal to the State of New Mexico Superintendent of Insurance.
Injury leave pay. An employee injured on the job may use accrued annual or sick leave for each
regularly scheduled workday after the injury occurs for all such days not paid by workers'
compensation. If the employee is on workers' compensation time for more than four weeks, and is
entitled to compensation for the first seven days and has used accrued annual or sick leave for the
first seven days of injury, the workers' compensation payments received for all such days shall be
paid directly to the Village by the workers' compensation carrier. In that event, annual or sick leave
used by the employee, in lieu of workers' compensation, shall be re-credited to the employee upon
the Village's receipt of the reimbursement by workers' compensation after the expiration of the
statutory waiting period.
Reporting procedure. All work-related injuries requiring medical attention must be reported to the
employee's department head as soon as possible. A first report of injury form must be filed with
the Village Clerk/Administrator within 15 days of the injury. The report shall be signed by the
employee and the employee's department head. In addition, the department head's accident
investigation report must be filed on the day following the day the department head receives the
employee's first accident report. All accidents shall be reported, however minor.
Medical procedure. In the event that an employee of the Village is injured at work, or otherwise
suffers a workers' compensation injury, the employer will not initially select or direct health care for
the worker. The worker will initially select/direct his/her own medical treatment by selecting a
health-care provider (HCP). Pursuant to the rules of the New Mexico Workers' Compensation
Administration, the Village of Bosque Farms may request, at a later date, to change the worker's
health-care provider.
[Amended 1-17-2008]
Return to work. An employee shall return to his former position or be reassigned to a comparable
position if the employee's physician certifies that the employee can return to work within four
months.
Modified work schedule.
An employee returning from workers' compensation disability may return to light duty if an
appropriate position is available and the employee's physician certifies that the employee can
return to a modified work schedule.
"Light duty" is defined either as performing the same job as the employee held before the
injury, or as performing the duties of another position for which the employee is qualified, for
fewer than eight hours each day or having reduced physical requirements for the full day or
less than the full day.
The times and conditions of light duty will be determined by the employee's department head
in conjunction with the Village Clerk/Administrator.
Reemployment of Village employees injured on the job. If the Village is hiring, a regular full-time
employee who has received, or is due to receive, benefits pursuant to the Workers' Compensation
Act, and who was unable to return to work during the four-month period for which the Village shall
hold the employee's position open, may apply for his pre-injury job, a modified job similar to the
pre-injury job, or any job that pays less than the pre-injury job, provided that the employee is
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 295/346
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
qualified for the job. The Village shall rehire the regular full-time employee, provided that the
employee's treating health-care provider certifies that the employee is fit to carry out the job
without significant risk of injury.
11.9. Civic duty leave.
An employee shall be given necessary time off with pay for the following:
Jury duty. If an employee is summoned to jury duty, the Village will compensate the employee for
up to 24 hours in a calendar year. If excused by the court during a working day, the employee shall
return to duty if at least four hours of Village duty can be served in that workday. If the employee
does not return to work, the balance of the day will be charged to annual leave or leave without
pay. The fee the employee receives for serving as a juror while being on paid jury duty leave shall
be turned in to the Village.
[Amended 12-21-2017]
Court appearance time: when required by Village duties or subpoenaed to appear before a court,
Personnel Board hearing, public body or Village Council for the purpose of testifying in regard to
Village matters.
Voting. For purposes of a national, state, or local election, an employee who is registered to vote
will be granted up to two hours of paid leave for voting, between the time of opening and the time
of closing polls. The employee's supervisor may specify the hours for the leave. This leave will not
be granted to any employee whose workday begins more than two hours subsequent to the time
of the opening of the polls or ends more than three hours before the closing of the polls.
11.10. Military leave for reserve or National Guard duties.
Paid military leave for reserve or National Guard activities. Paid military leave is granted for
authorized reserve or National Guard activities for a maximum of 15 working days during a oneyear
period. Military leave must be requested 20 days in advance. The employee must furnish
proof of duty orders or other documentation prior to leave being granted unless the leave is for
emergency purposes.
Unpaid military leave. Employees voluntarily or involuntarily serving on active duty for more than
15 working days shall be placed on leave without pay. The employee taking military leave will not
first be required to exhaust annual and sick leave.
Employees returning from unpaid military leave. Any employee who leaves a position he has held
with the Village, other than a temporary position, to enter the Armed Forces of the United States,
National Guard or organized reserve, and who serves on active duty and is honorably discharged
or released from active duty to complete his remaining service in a reserve component, and who is
still qualified to perform the duties of the Village position previously held, shall be reemployed in
such position or to a position of like seniority, status, and pay. To be reemployed in such position,
the employee must make application for reemployment within 90 days after he is relieved from
training or duty, or from hospitalization continuing after discharge for a period of not more than one
year.
The returning employee will be deemed to have accrued seniority and length-of-service rights
as though his employment with the Village had been continuous since the date of initial
employment.
The returning employee shall have all annual and sick leave accrued at the time of his
departure for military service restored.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 296/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
11.11. Lack of work and inclement weather.
The Village may, at its discretion, send an employee home when there is no work available as
determined by the Village Clerk/Administrator, and may close offices and send employees home due to
inclement weather declared by the Mayor or, in his absence, the Village Clerk/Administrator.
Employees who are sent home by the Village due to inclement weather, or other circumstances not
covered in this policy manual, shall not be charged with leave for all normal work hours missed. Hours
paid pursuant to this provision shall not be counted as hours worked for the computation of overtime.
11.12. Leave without pay.
The Mayor may grant regular employees leave without pay (LWOP) for a period not to exceed three
months, when the Mayor deems that such leave without pay is in the best interest of the Village.
Reasons for such a leave may include, but are not limited to: education; medical disability; pregnancy
or birth or adoption of a child; and the need to care for a family member, including a newborn. Leave
without pay is subject to the following conditions:
Re-employment upon return. If an employee returns to work within three months, the employee
will be returned to the same position.
[Amended 12-21-2017]
Use of all leave. Prior to going on leave without pay, an employee requesting leave without pay
shall use all available annual leave, except those going on military leave without pay. If the
employee is seeking leave without pay for medical or pregnancy-related reasons, the employee
shall first use all available annual and sick leave.
Physician's certificate. Leave without pay requested because of medical reasons or pregnancyrelated
reasons must be accompanied by a physician's written statement indicating the estimated
time of disability or recommended time for post-natal recovery. An employee returning to work
from leave without pay due to medical or pregnancy-related reasons must be released by the
employee's physician to return to work. Proof of release must be presented to the employee's
department head.
Benefits at employee's expense. An employee on leave without pay does not accrue leave, nor
does the employee receive Village benefits. An employee wishing to continue receiving insurance
benefits may do so at the employee's expense by submitting the employee's and the Village's
share of the premium to the Village Clerk/Administrator on the regular payday.
Article 12. Privately Owned Vehicles
12.1. Use authorized.
It is the policy of the Village of Bosque Farms to permit employees to use privately owned vehicles on
Village business, when Village-owned vehicles are not available or appropriate. Permission to use said
vehicle must be obtained in advance and authorized by the Mayor. The Village may reimburse
employees for mileage at the current authorized rate upon submission of a mileage report which
includes date, beginning and ending odometer readings, number of miles traveled, origination point
and destination point of each trip. The form shall be signed by the employee requesting reimbursement
and approved by the appropriate department head prior to submission to the Mayor. Employees
utilizing a privately owned vehicle in conducting Village business and who are compensated through
the use of Village-paid gasoline to operate such vehicle will not be eligible to recover mileage
reimbursement.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 297/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
12.2. Insurance requirements.
Only privately owned vehicles covered by liability insurance with no less than limits of liability of
$25,000 for bodily injury or death to one person in one accident; $50,000 for bodily injury or death
to two or more persons in one accident; and $10,000 for injury or damage to property of others in
one accident required by NMSA 1978, § 66-5-206 and § 66-5-207, are authorized to be used on
Village business.
[Amended 5-19-2016]
Privately owned vehicles not covered by liability insurance as required above may not be used for
Village business purposes.
The Village assumes no responsibility for damage to the employee's vehicle while on Village
business.
Noncompliance with this policy and certification may result in immediate dismissal.
Article 13. Miscellaneous
13.1. Designated work areas.
All employees are to be at their designated work areas on time and ready to work. They shall work until
the scheduled quitting time, unless permission of the supervisor has been obtained for different work
hours. Employees shall not litter work areas and will keep them neat and clean.
13.2. Personal business.
Personal business shall not be conducted during work hours while on Village premises.
13.3. Safety.
The Village is committed to having all work conducted in a safe manner. All safety precautions shall be
followed.
13.4. Village property.
Employees shall not misuse Village property, records, or other material in their care, control, or
custody; nor shall any Village property, records, or other material be removed from the premises of the
Village offices unless written permission has been given. Employees shall not use Village property,
records or equipment for personal use.
13.5. Return of Village property upon termination of employment.
At the time that an employee is voluntarily or involuntarily terminated, the employee shall return all
Village property to the appropriate department head, including, but not limited to: any keys, vehicles,
supplies, equipment, and uniforms that may be in the employee's possession.
13.6. Use of Village vehicles.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 298/346
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
No Village vehicles will be taken out of the Village of Bosque Farms without permission of the Village
Clerk/Administrator, and employees shall notify the Village Clerk/Administrator of their destinations and
itineraries. Village vehicles may be used only for Village business and commuting to and from work, if
required for a work-related purposes. Village vehicles shall not be used for personal business, except
as is incidental in commuting as determined by the employee's department head.
13.7. Dress and appearance.
Employees are constantly in the public eye; consequently, it is important that the employees present
the best possible image to the public. Employees should always be clean and neatly dressed in
clothing suitable for their work assignments.
13.8. Contents of employee files.
Subsequent to hiring, two separate files shall be prepared and maintained for each employee: a
personnel file and an evaluation file. These records shall be kept in the Village Clerk/Administrator's
office. It is the responsibility of each department head to ensure that the records of the employees are
completed and up-to-date.
Personnel file. The personnel file shall contain the following records:
The original application form.
The originating personnel action showing occupation, date of beginning employment and
salary.
Records or certificates of educational training or orientation achievement completion.
Application for retirement program.
Other related actions/forms concerning payroll deductions, insurance payment records, etc.
Evaluation file. The evaluation file shall contain the following records:
Medical examination form.
Copies of personnel action forms.
Copies of all performance evaluations.
Copies of all favorable or unfavorable letters or memoranda such as letters or certificates of
appreciation or records of other outstanding achievements, regardless of origination.
Records of disciplinary actions such as reprimand, suspension, demotion, or termination.
13.9. Maintenance of employee files.
Records in employee files shall be considered confidential and not available for public inspection.
Physical access to an employee's records shall be in the control of the Village Clerk/Administrator. An
employee's records may be reviewed by the employee, the employee's department head, the
department head of the department to which an employee may be transferred, and the Mayor. If an
employee wishes someone other than those authorized to have access to the employee's file, he must
request so in writing.
13.10. Additional rules.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 299/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
Employees shall obey all additional rules, directives and requests stated verbally or in writing by their
supervisors. Employees are generally required to follow all standards, rules, procedures and policies
that are similar or normally expected in the workplace.
Section A2. Job Descriptions
Article 1. Village Clerk/Administrator
1.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this position is to provide the Village of Bosque Farms with support services to assist
the Mayor in planning, managing, coordinating, directing and controlling the administrative, personnel,
and budgetary activities of Village business. This position functions under the supervision of the Mayor.
All duties and responsibilities are assigned or removed at the discretion of the Mayor.
1.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Village Clerk/Administrator:
Plans, coordinates and directs the administration of Village government in accordance with
policies and procedures set forth by the governing body.
Prepares and submits to the Village Council the annual budget.
Implements and controls the approved budget, including accountability for all department receipts,
expenditures and purchases.
Oversees the financial activities of the Village including the receipt, safekeeping, deposit and
expenditures of all monies belonging to the Village.
Supervises centralized internal services and programs; including office administration,
water/sewer services delivery and billing, recreation facilities, community center, law enforcement,
street and road maintenance, animal control, library services, purchasing, engineering, legal and
the maintenance of public health.
Develops, documents and implements operating procedures and administrative controls for the
operation of Village activities.
Prepares public notice requirements, governing body agendas, minutes, ordinances, resolutions,
correspondence, documents or other municipal records.
Prepares and submits monthly activity reports to the governing body.
Ensures the safekeeping and maintenance of all Village records and shall, in accordance with
state laws, make such information available to the public upon request.
Issues or certifies business registrations, itinerant vendor and liquor licenses; including the proper
receipt, completion and submission of all related reports, forms or notices in a timely manner.
Serves as grant administrator for federal and state funds awarded to the Village, including the
development and submission of grant proposals.
Coordinates and serves as liaison to the public or other agencies in the development and
implementation of special programs and projects as assigned by the Mayor.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 300/346
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
R.
S.
T.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
Performs selected duties as Planning and Zoning Administrator, Treasurer, Police/Court Clerk or
other Village functions and duties as required to cover periods of absence.
Performs duties as required by state law during municipal elections.
Maintains a current notary public and voter registration certification.
Serves as personnel manager in the administration of policies and practices associated with the
Village merit ordinance and Personnel Manual. In this capacity, the Administrator will serve as a
resource to the Village Personnel Board.
Oversees the general supervision of Village staff and makes recommendations to the Mayor on
matters relating to hiring, advancement, discipline and dismissal of employees.
Directs the implementation of all actions passed by the governing body.
Responds to the needs and complaints of the Village residents and communicates and informs the
governing body of related activities.
Performs other duties as assigned.
1.3. Minimum requirements.
The minimum requirements for the Village Clerk/Administrator are:
Bachelor's degree in public administration or closely related field from an accredited university or
college, and a minimum of six years of management-level experience in federal, state, county or
municipal government. Additional experience performing the duties of a municipal
clerk/administrator or municipal management/administration, including staff supervision, may be
substituted for the college degree with four years of experience being equal to 30 hours of college
credit.
Knowledge of federal codes and regulations and New Mexico state statutes.
Ability to interpret Village ordinances.
Experience developing and implementing government budgets.
Experience administering federal and state grants.
Good oral and written communication skills.
Ability to establish working relationships with Village staff, the general public, the Mayor and the
governing body.
Knowledge of computer word processing applications.
Extensive knowledge of electronic spreadsheets and accounting/bookkeeping programs.
General knowledge of common office equipment such as computers, typewriters, calculators,
copiers, fax machines, phones, postage machines, etc.
Ability to attend frequent meetings, during and after business hours.
Must pass a background check and be bondable.
Valid New Mexico driver's license.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 301/346
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
1.4. Physical demands.
The physical demands are representative of those that must be met by an employee to
successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be
made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.
The employee is frequently required to walk, sit, talk and hear. Employee is required to use hands
to finger, handle, feel, or operate objects, tools or controls; and reach with hands and arms. The
employee is required to stoop, kneel and crouch.
The employee must occasionally lift and/or move up to 25 pounds. Specific vision abilities required
include close vision, distance vision and the ability to adjust focus.
1.5. Annual leave.
Annual leave may be granted after six months of service in the position.
Article 2. Assistant Village Clerk
2.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this position is to provide the Village of Bosque Farms with supplementary clerical
support services to the Clerk/Administrator. This position functions under the supervision of the
Clerk/Administrator and is intended to provide support to all areas of Village business as assigned.
2.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Assistant Village Clerk:
Is responsible for processing the utility billing and maintaining the records.
Handles customer concerns related to the utility billing.
Performs routine clerical duties, to include: incoming and outgoing mail; maintaining Village
records; and typing of general correspondence as needed by the Clerk/Administrator and/or
Mayor.
Provides assistance in searching records and files as needed to meet informational needs of the
public, staff and governing body.
Develops correspondence, announcements, reports and other Village material for the public, staff
and governing body as required.
Performs duties of the Village Clerk as assigned.
Assists in answering phones and front desk duties as required.
Performs other duties as assigned.
2.3. Minimum requirements.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 302/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
The minimum requirements for the Assistant Village Clerk are:
High school diploma or GED and a minimum of two years' accounting experience.
Ability to type 50 words per minute.
Ability to work with several types of computer software.
Ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships with the public, staff and governing
body.
2.4. Physical demands.
The physical demands are representative of those that must be met by an employee to
successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be
made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.
The employee is frequently required to walk, sit, talk and hear. The employee is required to use
hands to finger, handle, feel, or operate objects, tools or controls; and reach with hands and arms.
The employee is required to stoop, kneel and crouch.
The employee must occasionally lift and/or move up to 25 pounds. Specific vision abilities required
include close vision, distance vision and the ability to adjust focus.
2.5. Probationary period.
There will be a six-month probationary period, at which time an evaluation of job performance will be
conducted and discussed with the employee. At this time, the employee will be either made a regular
employee, be allowed to continue on probationary period, not to exceed one year total, or be
terminated based on evaluation results.
Article 3. Treasurer
3.1. Minimum qualifications.
The minimum qualifications for the Treasurer are:
Ability to type accurately at the rate of 45 words per minute.
Knowledge of spelling, punctuation and grammar.
Two years of full-charge bookkeeping and office experience.
Ability to understand and carry out oral and written instructions and accept supervision.
Ability to work alone without constant supervision.
Ability to operate simple office equipment, i.e., adding machine, copy machine, etc.
Ability to work with the public.
Neat appearance; neat workmanship.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 303/346
I.
J.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
Liaison with state and county officials, Department of Finance and Auditor regarding financialrelated
items.
Knowledge of computer word processing and other program applications.
3.2. Functions and duties.
The Treasurer shall supervise the depositing and safekeeping of all money belonging to the
Village and, with the advice and consent of the governing body (Municipal Board of Finance),
designate banks qualified to receive on deposit money entrusted to his/her care.
The Treasurer shall be the finance officer for the municipality unless another officer is directed by
ordinance to be the finance officer. The Treasurer shall:
Receive all money belonging to the municipality.
Keep all accounts and records in the manner prescribed by the governing body.
Keep the money of the municipality separate from any other money in his/her possession.
Expend the money only as directed by the governing body.
Submit monthly, or more often as required by the governing body, a report of the receipts and
expenditures of the municipality.
Prepare annually, at the close of the fiscal year, a financial report showing the receipts,
expenditures and balances of each fund. A copy of the financial report shall be filed in the
office of the Municipal Clerk as a public document.
Perform additional duties as assigned.
Function under the supervision of the Clerk/Administrator.
The records of the Treasurer shall be open to inspection by any citizen during regular business
hours of the municipality, subject to any limitations imposed by state statute.
3.3. Annual leave.
Annual leave may be granted after six months' service in the position.
3.4. Physical demands.
The physical demands are representative of those that must be met by an employee to
successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be
made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.
The employee is frequently required to walk, sit, talk and hear. The employee is required to use
hands to finger, handle, feel, or operate objects, tools or controls; and reach with hands and arms.
The employee is require to stoop, kneel and crouch.
The employee must occasionally lift and/or move up to 25 pounds. Specific vision abilities required
include close vision, distance vision and the ability to adjust focus.
Article 4. Planning and Zoning Officer
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 304/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
4.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this position is to provide the Village of Bosque Farms with administrative expertise
relating to the enforcement of land use ordinances and codes. The position functions under the
supervision of the Clerk/Administrator.
4.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Planning and Zoning Officer:
Under general direction, implements procedures that enforce zoning, land use and other related
ordinances of the Village, including the issuance of building and sign permits.
Oversees applications for commercial, agricultural, residential land use, including reviews for
conformance with ordinances, the provision of on-site inspections and accurate and complete
recordkeeping.
Participates as the Village's representative for assigned committees, projects and meetings
related to land use, and follows through on all phases of enforcement, processing, interpretation
and administration of Village codes as guided by the Planning and Zoning Commission and
directed by the Mayor.
Performs field inspections for possible code violations, investigates complaints and issues letter of
information, citations and warrants as necessary to enforce Village Code ordinances.
Functions as a resource person to the governing body, the Planning and Zoning Commission, and
the public on all land use matters, including the preparation of Commission agendas and minutes,
the clarification and interpretation of Village codes, and the research and development of special
reports or projects as assigned.
Is responsible for typing all correspondence, reports, agendas and other materials as required for
the enforcement of planning and zoning ordinances.
Performs other duties as assigned.
4.3. Minimum requirements.
The minimum requirements for the Planning and Zoning Officer are:
Knowledge of and ability to interpret land use codes and ordinances.
Ability to type at least 40 words per minute.
Ability to establish working relationships with the Village Planning and Zoning Commission, the
governing body, employees and the general public.
Ability to communicate effectively both orally and in writing.
Ability to plan, organize and initiate work procedures with minimum supervision.
Knowledge of computer word processing and other program applications desirable.
4.4. Physical demands.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 305/346
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
The physical demands are representative of those that must be met by an employee to
successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be
made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.
The employee is frequently required to walk, sit, talk and hear. The employee is required to use
hands to finger, handle, feel, or operate objects, tools or controls; and reach with hands and arms.
The employee is require to stoop, kneel and crouch.
The employee must occasionally lift and/or move up to 25 pounds. Specific vision abilities required
include close vision, distance vision and the ability to adjust focus.
4.5. Probationary period.
There will be a six-month probationary period, at which time an evaluation of job performance will be
conducted and discussed with the employee. At this time, the employee will either be made a
permanent employee, be allowed to continue on probationary period, not to exceed one year in total,
or be terminated based on evaluation results.
Article 5. Administrative Assistant
5.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this position is to provide the Village of Bosque Farms with supplementary clerical
support services to the Clerk/Administrator. This position functions under the supervision of the
Clerk/Administrator and is intended to also provide support to the Utility and Animal Control
Departments as assigned.
5.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Administrative Assistant:
Is responsible for greeting customers, answering phones and front desk duties as required.
Handles customer concerns related to utilities and animal control.
Is responsible for receiving and logging in utility payments.
Performs routine clerical duties to include: incoming and outgoing mail; maintaining Village
records and typing of general correspondence as needed by the Clerk/Administrator and/or Mayor.
Provides assistance in searching records and files as needed to meet informational needs of the
public, staff and governing body.
Develops correspondence, announcements, reports and other Village material for the public, staff
and governing body as required.
Is responsible for daily bank depositing and other errands as assigned.
Performs other duties as assigned by Clerk/Administrator.
Is responsible for the quarterly Village newsletter.
5.3. Minimum requirements.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 306/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
The minimum requirements for the Administrative Assistant are:
High school diploma or GED and a minimum of one year of accounting and/or bookkeeping
experience.
The ability to type on a typewriter and computer keyboard.
The ability to work with several types of computer software.
The ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships with the public, staff and
governing body.
5.4. Physical demands.
The physical demands are representative of those that must be met by an employee to
successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be
made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.
The employee is frequently required to walk, sit, talk and hear. The employee is required to use
hands to handle, feel or operate objects, tool or controls; and reach with hands and arms. The
employee is required to stoop, kneel and crouch.
The employee must occasionally lift and/or move up to 25 pounds. Specific vision abilities required
include close vision, distance vision and the ability to adjust focus.
5.5. Probationary period.
There will be a six-month probationary period, at which time an evaluation of job performance will be
conducted and discussed with the employee. At this time, the employee will either be made a regular
employee, be allowed to continue on probationary period, not to exceed one year total, or be
terminated based on evaluation results.
Article 6. Computer Technician
6.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this position is to provide the Village of Bosque Farms with website and web-server
maintenance, computer hardware and software support, and perform telephone and network
wired/wireless installation and maintenance.
6.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Computer Technician:
Serves as Website Administrator and performs various duties, including programming, web
design, server maintenance and updating the website as required.
Provides computer software applications support to Village employees; responds to, researches
and resolves software inquiries and issues.
Responds to and provides assistance in relation to computer, telephone, wireless/wired network
access, e-mail support and implementation issues.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 307/346
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
Maintains and administers the Administrative and Police Department network and production
servers; ensures effective systems integration.
Conducts equipment installation and wiring, including low-voltage wiring, installation of wireless
bridges, antennas, communication drops and parch panel installation and ergonomic workstation
installation.
Evaluates new software and technical equipment, including live testing and technology research.
Provides training to Village employees in relation to software programs and systems.
Attends technology training seminars as permitted.
Performs other duties as assigned or required.
6.3. Knowledge and skills.
The Computer Technician must have a knowledge of:
Website design and programming techniques and processes.
Network protocols, practices and processes.
Computer hardware and software.
Switching and telephony applications.
Wireless networks.
6.4. Minimum qualifications.
The minimum qualifications for this position are:
High school diploma or equivalent.
Three years of web design/information technology experience; or equivalent combination of
education, training and experience.
6.5. Physical demands.
The physical demands are representative of those that must be met by an employee to
successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be
made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.
The employee is frequently required to walk, sit, talk and hear. The employee is required to use
hands to finger, handle, feel, or operate objects, tools and controls; and reach with hands and
arms. The employee is required to stoop, kneel and crouch.
The employee must occasionally lift and/or move up to 20 pounds. Specific vision abilities required
include close vision, distance vision and the ability to adjust focus.
6.6. Probationary period.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 308/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
D.
There will be a six-month probationary period, at which time an evaluation of job performance will be
conducted and discussed with the employee. At this time, the employee will be either made a regular
employee, be allowed to continue on probationary period, not to exceed one year total, or be
terminated based on evaluation results.
Article 7. Community Center Director
7.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this position is to provide the Village of Bosque Farms with recreational and social
programs directed at the senior citizen and youth populations. This position functions under the
supervision of the Clerk/Administrator.
7.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Community Center Director:
Plans, implements, monitors and evaluates educational, recreational, and social programs for the
senior citizens, as well as other programs of general interest to all Village residents and all other
activities as deemed necessary.
Coordinates the use of the facility, as needed, to support the summer youth program.
Cooperates with public and private agencies in providing programs and services.
Supervises the physical facility, including maintenance, inventory, security, safety and
housekeeping; is responsible for the opening and closing of the center.
Keeps a ledger of activities scheduled in the center and accounting of charges for activities.
Prepares and administers the departmental budget.
Assists in preparation of grant proposals annually.
Submits a monthly report to the Clerk/Administrator on center activities.
Performs other duties as assigned.
7.3. Minimum requirements.
The minimum requirements for the Community Center Director are:
A valid New Mexico driver's license.
Ability to present ideas effectively, orally and in writing.
Experience and/or education in the field of program planning for youth and/or senior citizens.
High school diploma or equivalent.
7.4. Physical demands.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 309/346
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
The physical demands are representative of those that must be met by an employee to
successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be
made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.
The employee is frequently required to walk, sit, talk and hear. The employee is required to use
hands to finger, handle, feel, or operate objects, tools and controls; and reach with hands and
arms. The employee is required to stoop, kneel and crouch.
The employee must occasionally lift and/or move up to 25 pounds. Specific vision abilities required
include close vision, distance vision and the ability to adjust focus.
7.5. Probationary period.
There will be a six-month probationary period, at which time an evaluation of job performance will be
conducted and discussed with the employee. At this time, the employee will be either made a regular
employee, be allowed to continue on probationary period, not to exceed one year total, or be
terminated based on evaluation results.
Article 8. Library Director
8.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this position is to provide the Village of Bosque Farms with professional library
services. The position functions under the supervision of the Clerk/Administrator.
8.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Library Director:
Plans, organizes and implements activities of the library, which include programs and services
recommended through the Village Library Board.
Provides assistance to library patrons and oversees volunteer activities on behalf of the Village.
Directs and supervises the work of library staff and volunteers to assure that regularly scheduled
hours of operation and appropriate recordkeeping and cataloging are maintained.
Serves as a resource to the Bosque Farms Library Board through the development of meeting
agendas, policy and procedure recommendations and identification of budgetary, reading material
and equipment needs.
Advises the Library Board on matters concerning the orderly operation of the library, including
resource development and fund-raising for ongoing and future needs.
Is responsible for seeing that all required reports, grant applications, budget requests and
purchases are completed in a timely manner and submitted, as appropriate, to the Library Board
and/or governing body.
Functions as a community advocate on governing body approved ordinances, policies, and
procedures established for the library.
Performs other duties as assigned.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 310/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
8.3. Minimum requirements.
The minimum requirements for the Library Director are:
High School diploma or GED.
New Mexico Certificate I as required of municipalities of 3,000 to 10,000 population that receive
State Library funds.
Thorough knowledge of library science and practical library techniques.
Ability to classify and catalogue materials.
Ability to establish working relationships with the Village Library Board, the governing body, library
employees, volunteers, and the general public.
Ability to present ideas effectively, orally and in writing.
Practical experience desirable in public, private, or school libraries.
Knowledge of computer word processing and other program applications desirable; knowledge of
Library World circulation system preferred.
Valid state driver's license.
8.4. Physical demands.
The physical demands are representative of those that must be met by an employee to
successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be
made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.
The employee is frequently required to walk, sit, talk and hear. The employee is required to use
hands to finger, handle, feel, or operate objects, tools or controls; and reach with hands and arms.
The employee is require to climb, balance, stoop, kneel and crouch.
The employee must occasionally lift and/or move up to 25 pounds. Specific vision abilities required
include close vision, distance vision, color vision, peripheral vision, depth perception and the
ability to adjust focus.
8.5. Probationary period.
There will be a six-month probationary period, at which time an evaluation of job performance will be
conducted and discussed with the employee. At this time, the employee will either be made a
permanent employee, be allowed to continue on probationary period, not to exceed one year in total,
or be terminated based on evaluation results.
Article 9. Library Aide I
9.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this position is to provide the Village of Bosque Farms with supportive services to the
library. The position functions under the supervision of the Library Director.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 311/346
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
9.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Library Aide I:
Performs basic typing functions as directed by the Library Director.
Performs functions related to filing, shelving of books, records check out and incoming books.
Performs other duties as assigned by the Library Director.
9.3. Minimum requirements.
The minimum requirements for Library Aide I are:
Graduation from high school or equivalent.
Ability to operate a typewriter and computer.
Working knowledge of spelling, grammar and vocabulary.
9.4. Probationary period.
There will be six-month probationary period, at which time an evaluation of job performance will be
conducted and discussed with the employee. At this time, the employee will either be made a
permanent employee, be allowed to continue on probationary period, not to exceed one year in total,
or be terminated based on evaluation results.
9.5. Physical demands.
The physical demands are representative of those that must be met by an employee to
successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be
made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.
The employee is frequently required to walk, sit, talk and hear. The employee is required to use
hands to finger, handle, feel, or operate objects, tools or controls; and reach with hands and arms.
The employee is required to climb, balance, stoop, kneel and crouch.
The employee must occasionally lift and/or move up to 25 pounds. Specific vision abilities required
include close vision, distance vision, color vision, peripheral vision, depth perception and the
ability to adjust focus.
Article 10. Library Aide II
10.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this position is to provide the Village of Bosque Farms with supportive services to the
library. The position functions under the supervision of the Library Director.
10.2. Duties and responsibilities.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 312/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
The Library Aide II:
Assists the Library Director in implementing and maintaining library programs and services.
Performs basic keyboarding functions related to cataloging, correspondence, overdue notices, and
other library needs as directed by the Library Director.
Collects and maintains computerized circulation and inventory records.
Provides general reference assistance to patrons of the library.
May be required to maintain the operation of the library in the absence of the Library Director.
Performs functions related to filing, shelving of books, records check out and incoming books and
other duties as assigned.
Performs other duties as assigned.
10.3. Minimum requirements.
The minimum requirements for Library Aide II are:
Graduation from high school or equivalent.
Two years' experience in library routing and procedure.
Ability to operate a typewriter and computer; ability to type a minimum of 40 words per minute.
Working knowledge of spelling, grammar, and vocabulary.
Ability to establish and maintain working relationships with staff, volunteers and the public.
10.4. Probationary period.
There will be a six-month probationary period, at which time an evaluation of job performance will be
conducted and discussed with the employee. At this time, the employee will either be made a
permanent employee, be allowed to continue on probationary period, not to exceed one year in total,
or be terminated based on evaluation results.
10.5. Physical demands.
The physical demands are representative of those that must be met by an employee to
successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be
made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.
The employee is frequently required to walk, sit, talk and hear. The employee is required to use
hands to finger, handle, feel, or operate objects, tools or controls; and reach with hands and arms.
The employee is required to climb, balance, stoop, kneel and crouch.
The employee must occasionally lift and/or move up to 25 pounds. Specific vision abilities required
include close vision, distance vision, color vision, peripheral vision, depth perception and the
ability to adjust focus.
Article 11. Library Aide II/Program Assistant
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 313/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
11.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this position is to provide the Village of Bosque Farms with supportive services to the
library. The position functions under the supervision of the Library Director.
11.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Library Aide II/Program Assistant:
Plans, organizes and implements activities of the library, which include Story Hour and the
summer reading program.
Performs basic keyboarding functions related to cataloging, correspondence, overdue notices, and
other library needs as directed by the Library Director.
Provides general reference assistance to patrons of the library.
Will be required to maintain the operation of the library in the absence of the Library Director.
Performs functions including filing, shelving of books, checking books in and out.
Performs other duties as assigned.
11.3. Minimum requirements.
The minimum requirements for the Library Aide II/Program Assistant are:
Graduation from high school or equivalent.
Two years' experience in library routine and procedure.
Experience in providing children's services in a professional setting.
Ability to operate a typewriter and computer; ability to type a minimum of 40 words per minute.
Working knowledge of spelling, grammar, and vocabulary.
Ability to establish and maintain a working relationship with staff, volunteers and the public.
11.4. Probationary period.
There will be six-month probationary period, at which time an evaluation of job performance will be
conducted and discussed with the employee. At this time, the employee will either be made a
permanent employee, be allowed to continue on a probationary period, not to exceed one year in total,
or be terminated based on evaluation results.
11.5. Physical demands.
The physical demands are representative of those that must be met by an employee to
successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be
made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 314/346
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
The employee is frequently required to walk, sit, talk and hear. The employee is required to use
hands to handle, feel, or operate objects, tools or controls; and reach with hands and arms. The
employee is required to climb, balance, stoop, kneel and crouch.
The employee must occasionally lift and/or move up to 25 pounds. Specific vision abilities include
close vision, distance vision, color vision, peripheral vision, depth perception and the ability to
adjust focus.
Article 12. Public Works Director
12.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this position is to provide the Village of Bosque Farms with professional services in the
operation of public works, including water, wastewater, parks and recreation, maintenance, streets,
animal and vector control. The position functions under the supervision of the Clerk/Administrator.
12.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Public Works Director:
Directs and administers public works activities, including the water system, the wastewater
treatment system, parks and recreation, maintenance, streets, animal and vector control, to
ensure that these operations are safe, efficient and effective and in conformance with applicable
laws of the federal, state and local governments.
Determines personnel, equipment and facilities required for the efficient administration of public
works activities and makes recommendations to the Mayor and Village Council.
Participates in the selection of all public works employees and directs the training, assignment and
discipline of subordinates.
Meets with citizens and carries out other activities in dealing with the public.
Advises the Mayor and Village Council on the development of problems that may develop that
could affect the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the Village.
Meets with the Village Clerk/Administrator and professional engineering consultants regarding the
scope of work to be performed and contract requirements.
Prepares budget estimates for public works operations for submission to the Village
Clerk/Administrator and the governing body.
Monitors public works expenditures to ensure that expenditures are within budget limits and in
accordance with laws governing expenditure of public funds.
Oversees project management for the construction of public works projects to ensure contractor
compliance with time and budget parameters.
Attends training and professional development workshops at the expense of the Village, as
approved and directed by the governing body.
12.3. Minimum requirements.
The minimum requirements for the Public Works Director are:
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 315/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
A.
B.
Possess a Level III New Mexico State Wastewater Operator Certificate and a Level II New Mexico
State Water Operator Certificate.
Possess (or be willing to acquire) a Public Applicator's License (Category 8) for vector control from
the New Mexico Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Pesticide Management.
Be free of any felony convictions.
Be a United States citizen.
Possess a current New Mexico driver's license.
Possess any combination of education above the high school level, training and/or experience in
the operation and maintenance of municipal water supply and distribution systems and
wastewater plant operations, providing extensive knowledge of the equipment, tools and methods
used in inspecting, cleaning, operating and maintaining the Village's water and sewer systems,
totaling four years or graduation from a four-year college with a degree specializing in civil,
sanitary or mechanical engineering.
Possess extensive knowledge of the duties and responsibilities incumbent upon the municipality in
providing wastewater treatment and water utility to the Village's citizens and in conformance with
the National Safe Drinking Water Act and the National Pollution Discharge Elimination Act.
Possess extensive experience in laboratory procedures.
Possess extensive knowledge, experience and qualifications to direct the municipality's
maintenance, including streets, parks and recreational facilities, and to work with the consulting
engineers in the planning, design and implementation of various projects in the Public Works
Department.
Possess the ability to plan, assign, direct, coordinate and review the work of others; to present
information clearly and concisely, orally and in writing; and to establish effective working
relationships with associates and the public; to establish rules or job/worker safety and to enforce
observance of safety precautions in the workplace; and a general knowledge of the functions of
municipal government and its relation to the federal, state and county governments.
12.4. Physical requirements.
Physical requirements for this position include:
Must be able to pass a physical examination.
Must be able to walk, sit, stand, read, write, operate a motor vehicle, maneuver two-hundred-fiftypound
cylinder tanks, lift a minimum of 50 pounds and a maximum of 94 pounds. Specific vision
abilities required by this job include close vision, distance vision, color vision, peripheral vision,
depth perception, and the ability to adjust focus.
12.5. Probationary period.
There will be a six-month probationary period, at which time an evaluation of job performance will be
conducted and discussed with the employee. At this time, the employee will be made a regular
employee, be allowed to continue on probationary status, not to exceed one year total, or be
terminated based on evaluation results.
Article 13. Field Supervisor
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 316/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
13.1. Purpose.
This is the number two position in the Utility Department in which an employee supervises water and
sewer construction operation and maintenance activities. This position reports to the Utilities Director.
13.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Field Supervisor:
Provides hands-on supervision of various water and sewer construction projects utilizing Village
employees and contract laborers as needed.
Is required to perform the following tasks: installs, services, cleans and repairs water and sewer
lines.
Installs, services, cleans and repairs sewer grinder pumps and yard lines on customers'
properties.
Performs routine and/or emergency operation and maintenance of the Village water supply and
distribution system and the sewer collection and treatment system.
Provides direction and supervision to other Utility Department employees at the direction of or in
the absence of the Utility Director.
Performs related duties as assigned.
May be required to perform stand-by duty.
13.3. Minimum qualifications.
The minimum qualifications for the Field Supervisor are:
Any combination of education above the high school level; training and/or experience in water
supply and distribution system operations totaling two years and in wastewater collection and
treatment system operations totaling two years.
Extensive knowledge of current water and sewer construction practices.
Extensive knowledge of the occupational hazards and safety practices in the water and sewer
construction, operation and maintenance field.
The ability to operate backhoes, trenching machines, skid steer loaders, dump trucks, pumper
trucks, and related construction equipment.
The ability to perform water and/or wastewater operator tasks.
The ability to establish effective working relationships with co-workers, customers, outside
contractors, vendors, line spotters and other associates.
Level II New Mexico Water Operator Certification.
Level I New Mexico Wastewater Operator Certification.
Possession of a valid New Mexico driver's license, Class B.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 317/346
J.
K.
L.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
High school diploma or certificate of successful completion of the General Educational
Development (GED) Test.
Citizenship in the United States or alien work status documents pursuant to the federal
immigration laws is required.
Eighteen years of age, proved by a birth certificate or other acceptable legal documentation as
proof of age.
13.4. Working conditions.
Work is outside and inside and sometimes in inclement weather. Employees are exposed to chemicals,
toxic gases and fumes and to infections and diseases. The employee may be required to lift up to 100
pounds. Irregular working hours are required. The employee may be required to attend special schools
at the direction of the Utilities Director and/or the Mayor and Village Council.
13.5. Probationary period.
There will be a six-month probationary period, at which time an evaluation of job performance will be
conducted and discussed with the employee. At this time, the employee will be either made a regular
employee, be allowed to continue on probationary period, not to exceed one year total, or be
terminated based on evaluation results.
Article 14. Utility Operator
14.1. Purpose.
This is a position in which an employee operates and maintains the water supply and distribution
system and the wastewater collection and treatment system. This position reports to the Utilities
Director.
14.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Utility Operator:
Water system: performs routine and/or emergency maintenance and operation of the Village water
supply and distribution system while performing the following tasks:
Installs, services, cleans and repairs main water lines and water service lines; installs, reads
and replaces meters and prepares meter reading cards; installs and repairs meter boxes;
repairs and replaces fire hydrants; raises water valves and meter boxes.
Assists in operation of treatment facilities, monitors gauges, meters and control panels;
observes variations in operating conditions; checks for water leaks at pump and for heating of
pump and motor bearings; interprets meter and gauge readings and test results to determine
processing requirements.
Operates valves; starts/stops pumps to control and adjust flow and treatment process;
maintains daily-weekly-monthly log of water systems and records all activity; extracts samples
and performs routine laboratory tests.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 318/346
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
Performs routine maintenance functions; maintains all substations, buildings and grounds so
they are safe and clean and keeps record of all visits; makes frequent inspection of all
pressure zones; keeps plumbing and electrical parts in good working order.
Performs related duties as assigned; required to perform stand-by duty.
Wastewater system: performs routine and/or emergency operation of the wastewater plant while
performing the following tasks:
Operates and/or guides, maintains and cleans a variety of equipment, machinery and tools
such as liquid sludge application machines, clarifiers, mechanical bar screens, activated
sludge, lift pumps, chemical feed equipment and wastewater plant vehicles.
Drives, loads and unloads trucks, disposes of screening and grit material in sanitary landfill;
assists in performing wastewater plant repairs, and buildings and grounds upkeep.
Obtains wastewater and sludge samples at various times to perform various tests; records
flows, weather, power and temperature readings and any malfunctions in shift log; installs,
services, cleans and repairs sewer lines.
Performs related duties as assigned; required to perform stand-by duty.
14.3. Minimum qualifications.
The minimum qualifications for the Utility Operator are:
Any combination of education above the high school level; training and/or experience in water
supply and distribution system operations totaling two years and in wastewater collection and
treatment system operations totaling three years.
Level II New Mexico Water Operator Certification.
Level III New Mexico Wastewater Operator Certification.
High school diploma or certificate of successful completion of the General Educational
Development (GED) test.
Eighteen years of age, proved by a birth certificate or other acceptable legal documentation as
proof of age.
Citizenship in the United States or alien work status documents pursuant to the federal
immigration laws as required.
Possession of a valid New Mexico driver's license, Class B.
Basic knowledge of the occupational hazards and safety practices in the water and wastewater
operations, maintenance and construction field.
Must have a basic knowledge of laboratory procedures in wastewater applications.
Good knowledge of the functions and mechanics of pumps, wells, electric motors and related
mechanical equipment; ability to adjust and operate chlorinating equipment.
Ability to perform water and wastewater operator tasks; ability to operate powered and manual
equipment, machinery and tools used in the water and wastewater maintenance operations.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 319/346
L.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Ability to present information clearly and concisely, orally and in writing, to establish effective
working relationships with associates and the public, to understand and follow oral and written
instructions and to observe safety precautions.
14.4. Working conditions.
Work is outside and inside, sometimes in inclement weather. Employees are exposed to chemicals,
toxic gases and fumes, and to infections and diseases. The employee may be required to lift up to 110
pounds. Irregular working hours are required. The employee may be required to attend special schools
at the direction of the Utilities Director and/or the Mayor and Village Council.
14.5. Probationary period.
There will be a six-month probationary period, at which time an evaluation of job performance will be
conducted and discussed with the employee. At this time, the employee will be either made a regular
employee, be allowed to continue on probationary period, not to exceed one year total, or be
terminated based on evaluation results.
Article 15. Water Operator
15.1. Purpose.
This is a position in which an employee operates and maintains the water supply and distribution
system. This position reports to the Utilities Director.
15.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Water Operator performs routine and/or emergency maintenance and operation of the Village
water supply and distribution system, while performing the following tasks:
Installs, services, cleans and repairs main water lines; installs, services, cleans and repairs water
service lines; installs, reads and replaces meters and prepares meter reading cards; installs and
repairs meter boxes; repairs and replaces fire hydrants; raises water valves and meter boxes.
Assists in the operation of treatment facilities, monitors gauges, meters and control panels;
observes variations in operating conditions; checks for water leaks at pump and for heating of
pump and motor bearings; interprets meter and gauge readings and test results to determine
processing requirements.
Operates valves, starts/stops pumps to control and adjust flow and treatment process; maintains
daily-weekly-monthly log of water systems and records all activity; extracts samples and performs
routine laboratory tests.
Performs routine maintenance functions; maintains all substations, buildings and grounds so they
are safe and clean and keeps record of all visits; makes frequent inspection of all pressure zones;
keeps plumbing and electrical parts in good working order.
Performs related duties as assigned; required to perform stand-by duty.
15.3. Minimum qualifications.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 320/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
The minimum qualifications for the Water Operator are:
Any combination of education above the high school level, training and/or experience in water
supply and distribution system operations providing knowledge of the equipment, tools, and
methods used in inspecting, cleaning, operating and maintaining a municipal water supply and
distribution system totaling two years.
Level II New Mexico Water Operator Certification.
High school diploma or certificate of successful completion of the General Educational
Development (GED) test.
Eighteen years of age, proved by a birth certificate or other acceptable legal documentation as
proof of age.
Citizenship in the United States or alien work status documents pursuant to the federal
immigration laws is required.
Possession of a valid New Mexico driver's license, Class B.
Good knowledge of the occupational hazards and safety practices in the water
maintenance/construction field.
Good knowledge of the functions and mechanics of pumps, wells, electric motors and related
mechanical equipment; ability to adjust and operate chlorinating equipment.
Ability to perform Water Utility Operator tasks; to operate powered and manual equipment,
machinery and tools used in water maintenance operations.
Ability to present information clearly and concisely, orally and in writing, to establish effective
working relationships with associates and the public, to understand and follow oral and written
instructions and to observe safety precautions.
15.4. Working conditions.
Work is outside and inside, sometimes in inclement weather. Employees are exposed to chemicals,
toxic gases and fumes, and to infections and diseases. The employee may be required to lift up to 100
pounds; irregular working hours are required. The employee may be required to attend special schools
at the direction of the Director of Utilities and/or the Mayor and Village Council.
15.5. Probationary period.
There will be a six-month probationary period, at which time an evaluation of job performance will be
conducted and discussed with the employee. At this time, the employee will be either made a regular
employee, be allowed to continue on probationary period, not to exceed one year total, or be
terminated based on evaluation results.
Article 16. Wastewater Operator
16.1. Purpose.
This is a position in which an employee operates and maintains the wastewater treatment plant and
collection system. This position reports to the Utilities Director.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 321/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
16.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Wastewater Operator performs routine and/or emergency operation of the wastewater plant while
performing the following tasks:
Operates and/or guides, maintains and cleans a variety of equipment, machinery and tools such
as liquid sludge application machines, clarifiers, mechanical bar screens, activated sludge, lift
pumps, chemical feed equipment and wastewater plant vehicles.
Drives, loads and unloads trucks, disposes of screening and grit material in sanitary landfill;
assists in performing wastewater plant repairs, and buildings and grounds upkeep.
Obtains wastewater and sludge samples at various time to perform various tests; records flows,
weather, power and temperature readings and any malfunctions in shift log; installs, services,
cleans and repairs sewer lines.
Performs related duties as assigned; required to perform stand-by duty.
16.3. Minimum qualifications.
The minimum qualifications for the Wastewater Operator are:
Any combination of education above the high school level, training and/or experience in
wastewater plant operations providing extensive knowledge of the equipment, tools and methods
used in inspecting, cleaning, operating and maintaining of wastewater plants totaling three years.
High school diploma or certificate of successful completion of the General Educational
Development (GED) test.
Eighteen years of age, proved by a birth certificate or other acceptable legal documentation as
proof of age.
Citizenship in the United States or alien work status documents pursuant to the federal
immigration laws is required.
Possession of a valid New Mexico driver's license, Class B, including air brakes.
Level III New Mexico Wastewater Operator Certification.
Basic knowledge of the occupational hazards and safety practices in the wastewater operations
and maintenance field.
Must have a basic knowledge of laboratory procedures in wastewater applications.
Ability to perform wastewater plant operation tasks; to operate powered and manual equipment
and tools used in wastewater operations; to present information clearly and concisely, orally and in
writing; to establish effective working relationships with associates and the public.
16.4. Working conditions.
Work is outside and inside, sometimes in inclement weather. Employees are exposed to chemicals,
toxic gases and fumes, and to infections and diseases. The employee may be required to lift up to 100
pounds. Irregular working hours are required. The employee may be required to attend special schools
at the direction of the Utilities Director and/or the Mayor and Village Council.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 322/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
16.5. Probationary period.
There will be a six-month probationary period, at which time an evaluation of job performance will be
conducted and discussed with the employee. At this time, the employee will be either made a regular
employee, be allowed to continue on probationary period, not to exceed one year total, or be
terminated based on evaluation results.
Article 17. Utility Maintenance Operator
17.1. Purpose.
This is a position in which an employee maintains and repairs water and wastewater equipment. This
position reports to the Utilities Director.
17.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Utility Maintenance Operator performs routine and/or emergency repairs of water and wastewater
equipment, while performing the following tasks:
Performs maintenance and repair of water and wastewater equipment used in the collection,
treatment and disposal of wastewater and the production and distribution of water supplies.
Performs maintenance and repair of related components and equipment.
Repairs and maintains pumps, motors, blowers, chlorine and ultraviolet disinfection systems,
valves, piping and related equipment using standard and specialized tools.
Maintains accurate work order files and logs.
Submits purchase requisitions for parts and supplies.
Assists other operators in the operation and maintenance of water and wastewater systems.
Must be available for responding to emergency situations on a twenty-four-hour basis.
Performs related duties as assigned; required to perform stand-by duty.
17.3. Minimum qualifications.
The minimum qualifications for the Utility Maintenance Operator are:
Any combination of education above the high school level, training and/or experience in current
water/wastewater systems and operating procedures; system processes and equipment; tools and
equipment involved in the servicing, maintenance and repair of the systems; installation,
maintenance and repair of electrical equipment, safety and installation codes; use and care of
electrical equipment as well as power and hand tools.
High school diploma or GED and four years of full-time experience in the operation and
maintenance of water and wastewater systems.
Eighteen years of age, proved by a birth certificate or other acceptable legal documentation as
proof of age.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 323/346
D.
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
Citizenship in the United States or alien work status documents pursuant to the federal
immigration laws is required.
Possession of a valid, unrestricted New Mexico driver's license.
Basic knowledge of the occupational hazards and safety practices in the wastewater operations
and maintenance field.
Ability to operate powered and manual equipment and tools used in wastewater operations; to
present information clearly and concisely, orally and in writing; to establish effective working
relationships with associates and the public.
17.4. Working conditions.
Work is outside and inside, sometimes in inclement weather. Employees are exposed to chemicals,
toxic gases and fumes, and to infections and diseases. The employee may be required to lift up to 100
pounds. Irregular working hours are required.
17.5. Probationary period.
There will be a six-month probationary period, at which time an evaluation of job performance will be
conducted and discussed with the employee. At this time, the employee will be either made a regular
employee, be allowed to continue on probationary period, not to exceed one year total, or be
terminated based on evaluation results.
Article 18. Utility Worker
18.1. Purpose.
This is a position in which an employee operates and maintains the water supply and distribution
system. This position reports to the Public Works Director.
18.2. Duties and responsibilities.
Under close supervision, the Utility Worker receives training while performing the following tasks at the
journeyman level:
Water system: performs routine and/or emergency maintenance and operation of the Village water
supply and distribution system while performing the following tasks:
Assists in all fields related to water production and distribution; installs, services, cleans and
repairs main water lines; installs, services, cleans and repairs water service lines; installs,
reads and replaces meters and prepares meter reading cards; installs and repairs meter
boxes; repairs and replaces fire hydrants; raises water valves and meter boxes.
Operates pumping equipment at the water plant; checks for water leaks at pumps and for
heating of pump and motor bearings; starts, stops or transfers loads among pumps by
switching them on and off and operating various valves.
Performs light maintenance and minor repairs; changes recording charts and takes periodic
readings of pumping rates and reservoir water levels; makes periodic checks on the pumping
equipment at several wells;
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 324/346
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
Maintains all substations, buildings and grounds so they are safe and clean; keeps plumbing
and electrical parts in good working order; works weekends to answer emergency calls when
requested by the Utilities Director; assists in major repair of equipment and performs other
related duties as assigned.
Wastewater system: performs routine and/or emergency operation of the wastewater plant while
performing the following tasks:
Maintains and cleans a variety of equipment, machinery and tools such as liquid sludge
application machines, clarifiers, mechanical bar screens, activated sludge, lift pumps,
chemical feed equipment, and wastewater plant vehicles.
Drives, loads and unloads trucks, disposes of screening and grit material in sanitary landfill.
Assists in performing wastewater plant repairs and buildings and grounds upkeep, as
necessary; installs, services, cleans and repairs sewer lines.
Performs other related duties as assigned.
Required to perform stand-by duty.
18.3. Minimum qualifications.
The minimum qualifications for the Utility Worker are:
Any combination of education above the high school level, training and/or experience in water and
wastewater system maintenance providing some knowledge of the equipment, tools and methods
used in cleaning and maintaining a Village-wide wastewater system and water distribution and
supply system totaling six months.
Possession of a valid New Mexico driver's license, Class B.
High school diploma or certificate of successful completion of the General Educational
Development (GED) test.
Eighteen years of age, proved by a birth certificate or other acceptable legal documentation as
proof of age.
Citizenship in the United States or alien work status documents pursuant to the federal
immigration laws is required.
Some knowledge of the occupational hazards and safety practices in the water and wastewater
maintenance/construction field.
Ability to perform water and wastewater maintenance tasks; to operate powered and manual
equipment and tools used in water and wastewater maintenance; to read, interpret and work from
sketches, diagrams and blueprints; to establish effective working relationships with associates and
the public; to lift and carry heavy burdens, up to 100 pounds.
18.4. Working conditions.
Work is outside, sometimes in inclement weather. Employees are exposed to chemicals, toxic gases
and fumes, and to infections and diseases. Irregular working hours and twenty-four-hour stand-by are
required. The employee may be required to attend schools at the direction of the Utilities Director
and/or the Mayor and Village Council.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 325/346
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
18.5. Probationary period.
There will be a six-month probationary period at which time an evaluation of job performance will be
conducted and discussed with the employee. At this time, the employee will be either made a regular
employee, be allowed to continue on probationary period, not to exceed one year total, or be
terminated based on evaluation results.
Article 19. Utility Worker II
19.1. Purpose.
This is a position in which an employee receives on-the-job training in order to perform tasks at the
journeyman level while assisting in maintaining the water distribution and wastewater treatment and
collection systems. This position reports to the Public Works Director.
19.2. Duties and responsibilities.
Under close supervision, the Utility Worker II receives training while performing the following tasks at
the journeyman level:
Water system: performs routine and/or emergency maintenance and operation of the Village water
supply and distribution system while performing the following tasks:
Assists in all fields related to water production and distribution; installs, services, cleans and
repairs main water lines; installs, services, cleans and repairs water service lines; installs,
reads and replaces meters and prepares meter reading cards; installs and repairs meter
boxes. Repairs and replaces fire hydrants; raises water valves and meter boxes.
Operates pumping equipment at the water plant; checks for water leaks at pumps and for
heating of pump and motor bearings; starts, stops or transfers loads among pumps by
switching them on and off and operating various valves.
Perform light maintenance and minor repairs; changes recording charts and takes periodic
readings of pumping rates and reservoir water levels; makes periodic checks on the pumping
equipment at several wells;
Maintains all substations, buildings and grounds so they are safe and clean; keeps plumbing
and electrical parts in good working order; works weekends to answer emergency calls when
requested by the Utilities Director; assists in major repair of equipment and performs other
related duties as assigned.
Wastewater system: performs routine and/or emergency operation of the wastewater plant while
performing the following tasks:
Maintains and cleans a variety of equipment, machinery and tools such as liquid sludge
application machines, clarifiers, mechanical bar screens, activated sludge, lift pumps,
chemical feed equipment, and wastewater plant vehicles.
Drives, loads and unloads trucks, disposes of screening and grit material in sanitary landfill.
Assists in performing wastewater plant repairs and buildings and grounds upkeep, as
necessary; installs, services, cleans and repairs sewer lines.
Performs other related duties as assigned.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 326/346
(5)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
Required to perform stand-by duty.
19.3. Minimum qualifications.
The minimum qualifications for the Utility Worker II are:
Any combination of education above the high school level, training and/or experience in water and
wastewater system maintenance providing some knowledge of the equipment, tools and methods
used in cleaning and maintaining a Village-wide wastewater system and water distribution and
supply system totaling six months.
Possession of a valid New Mexico driver's license, Class B.
High school diploma or certificate of successful completion of the General Educational
Development (GED) test.
Eighteen years of age, proved by a birth certificate or other acceptable legal documentation as
proof of age.
Citizenship in the United States or alien work status documents pursuant to the federal
immigration laws is required.
Some knowledge of the occupational hazards and safety practices in the water and wastewater
maintenance/construction field.
Ability to perform water and wastewater maintenance tasks; to operate powered and manual
equipment and tools used in water and wastewater maintenance; to read, interpret and work from
sketches, diagrams and blueprints; to establish effective working relationships with associates and
the public; to lift and carry heavy burdens, up to 100 pounds.
19.4. Working conditions.
Work is outside, sometimes in inclement weather. Employees are exposed to chemicals, toxic gases
and fumes, and to infections and diseases. Irregular working hours and twenty-four-hour stand-by are
required. The employee may be required to attend schools at the direction of the Utilities Director
and/or the Mayor and Village Council.
19.5. Probationary period.
There will be a six-month probationary period, at which time an evaluation of job performance will be
conducted and discussed with the employee. At this time, the employee will be either made a regular
employee, be allowed to continue on probationary period, not to exceed one year total, or be
terminated based on evaluation results.
Article 20. Utilities Inspector
20.1. Purpose.
This is a position in which an employee performs inspections of various equipment, facilities and
construction activities relating to water utilities and other public works projects. The Utilities Inspector
reports to the Utilities Director.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 327/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
20.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Utilities Inspector:
Performs project inspections, including, but not limited to, water and/or wastewater construction
projects, sewage grinder pump installations, periodic grinder pump maintenance inspections,
paving projects and fire hydrant maintenance inspections.
Assures that construction is performed in accordance with contract plans and specifications;
maintains daily log of all relevant notes, as-builts, field orders, change orders, discussions with
contractors and/or Village personnel, station numbers, lab results, etc.; takes relevant
photographs, measurements, temperatures and related samples.
Coordinates between contractors, residents, lab personnel, line spotters, engineers and Village
personnel; inspects and tests equipment for proper operation.
Performs other related inspection duties as assigned.
20.3. Minimum qualifications.
The minimum qualifications for the Utilities Inspector are:
Any combination of education above the high school level, training and/or experience in water
utility and paving construction project inspections totaling one year.
High school diploma or certificate of successful completion of the General Educational
Development (GED) test.
Eighteen years of age, proved by a birth certificate or other acceptable legal documentation as
proof of age.
Citizen of the United States or alien work status documents pursuant to the Federal Immigration
laws are required.
Possession of a valid New Mexico driver's license.
20.4. Working conditions.
Work is outside and inside, sometimes in inclement weather. Employees are exposed to chemicals,
toxic gases and fumes and to infections and diseases. Irregular working hours may be required. The
Utilities Inspector may be required to attend special schools at the direction of the Utilities Director
and/or the Mayor and Village Council.
20.5. Physical requirements.
The employee must be able to walk, sit, stand, squat, read, write, operate a motor vehicle and lift a
minimum of 50 pounds and a maximum of 94 pounds. Specific vision abilities required by this job
include close vision, distance vision, color vision, peripheral vision, depth perception and the ability to
adjust focus.
20.6. Probationary period.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 328/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
There will be a six-month probationary period, at which time an evaluation of job performance will be
conducted and discussed with the employee. At this time, the employee will either be made a regular
employee, be allowed to continue on probationary period, not to exceed one year total, or be
terminated based on evaluation results.
Article 21. Maintenance Supervisor
21.1. Purpose.
This is a position in which the employee is responsible for supervising the overall maintenance of
roads, streets, public rights-of-way, buildings, grounds, vehicles, equipment, parks, recreational
facilities and open spaces. This position is also responsible for the supervision of animal control and
vector control duties. This position reports to the Utilities Director.
21.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Maintenance Supervisor:
Performs minor road repairs, installs street signs, maintains traffic signals, streetlights and school
zone lights, operates the bucket truck, dump truck, water truck, motor grader, backhoe and other
industrial equipment.
Cleans and mows public rights-of-way, operates tractors, mowers and trimmers; cuts weeds,
mows grass, installs and maintains sprinkler systems and irrigation equipment, trims trees and
maintains grounds.
Performs building maintenance, including cleaning, painting, moving furniture, minor construction
and carpentry, minor electrical work, plumbing, heating and cooling equipment maintenance.
Performs minor vehicle and equipment maintenance, including checking fluids, changing oil and
filters, replacing batteries and other minor parts; performs preventative maintenance; maintains
adequate parts inventory and accurate vehicle maintenance logs.
Performs vector control duties, including identifying and treating breeding sites, mixing chemicals
and operating mosquito-spraying equipment.
Assists with animal control duties as needed.
Performs other related duties as assigned.
21.3. Minimum requirements.
The minimum requirements for the Maintenance Supervisor are:
Must be able to pass a physical examination.
Valid New Mexico driver's license, Class B.
New Mexico Pesticide Applicator's License.
High school diploma or GED.
Eighteen years of age.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 329/346
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
Extensive knowledge of general maintenance, including grounds keeping, automotive mechanics,
welding, HVAC, carpentry, plumbing and electrical.
Extensive knowledge of the occupational hazards and safety practices in the general maintenance
field.
Ability to establish effective working relationships with co-workers, residents, contractors, vendors
and other associates.
21.4. Working conditions.
Work is outside and inside, sometimes in inclement weather. The employee must be in good physical
condition; may be required to lift up to 100 pounds. Irregular working hours may be required. The
employee responds to after-hours emergencies as needed; may be required to perform standby duty.
The employee may be required to attend schools or special training at the direction of the Utilities
Director and/or the Mayor and Village Council.
21.5. Physical requirements.
The employee must be able to walk, sit, stand, squat, read, write, operate a motor vehicle, lift a
minimum of 50 pounds and a maximum of 94 pounds. Specific vision abilities required by this job
include close vision, distance vision, color vision, peripheral vision, depth perception and the ability to
adjust focus.
21.6. Probationary period.
There will be a six-month probationary period, at which time an evaluation of job performance will be
conducted and discussed with the employee. At this time, the employee will either be made a regular
employee, be allowed to continue on probationary period, not to exceed one year total, or be
terminated based on evaluation results.
Article 22. Maintenance Worker I
22.1. Purpose.
This is a position in which an employee receives on-the-job training in order to perform the tasks at the
journeyman level while assisting in maintaining roads, streets, public rights-of way and open spaces.
This position reports to the Maintenance Supervisor.
22.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Maintenance Worker I:
Assists in minor road repairs, installs street signs, cleans public rights-of-way, cuts weeds, mows
grass, trims trees and assists with grounds keeping.
Assists with general building maintenance, including cleaning, sweeping, mopping and otherwise
maintaining furniture, floors and bathroom fixtures.
Assists with vehicle and equipment maintenance, including washing and vacuuming vehicles,
transporting vehicles and parts running.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 330/346
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
Performs other related duties as assigned.
22.3. Minimum requirements.
The minimum requirements for the Maintenance Worker I are:
Must be able to pass a physical examination.
Valid New Mexico driver's license.
High school diploma or GED.
Eighteen years of age.
22.4. Working conditions.
Work is outside and inside, sometimes in inclement weather. The employee must be in good physical
condition; may be required to lift up to 94 pounds. Irregular working hours may be required.
22.5. Physical requirements.
The employee must be able to walk, sit, stand, squat, read, write, operate a motor vehicle, lift a
minimum of 50 pounds and a maximum of 94 pounds. Specific vision abilities required by this job
include close vision, distance vision, color vision, peripheral vision, depth perception and the ability to
adjust focus.
22.6. Probationary period.
There will be a six-month probationary period, at which time an evaluation of job performance will be
conducted and discussed with the employee. At this time, the employee will either be made a regular
employee, be allowed to continue on probationary period, not to exceed one year total, or be
terminated based on evaluation results.
Article 23. Maintenance Worker II
23.1. Purpose.
This is a position is which an employee performs routine maintenance of roads, streets, public rightsof-
way, buildings and grounds, vehicles and equipment, parks, recreational facilities and open spaces.
This position also assists with animal control and vector control duties. This position reports to the
Maintenance Supervisor.
23.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Maintenance Worker II:
Performs minor road repairs, installs street signs, operates the dump truck and water truck; cleans
and mows public rights-of-way, operates tractors, mowers and trimmers; cuts weeds, mows grass,
trims trees and maintains grounds.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 331/346
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Performs building maintenance, including cleaning, painting, moving furniture and assisting with
plumbing, heating and cooling equipment maintenance.
Performs minor vehicle and equipment maintenance, including checking fluids, changing oil and
filters, replacing batteries and other minor parts.
Assists with animal control duties as needed.
Assists with vector control duties as needed.
Performs other related duties as assigned.
23.3. Minimum requirements.
The minimum requirements for the Maintenance Worker II are:
Must be able to pass a physical examination.
Valid New Mexico driver's license.
High school diploma or GED.
Eighteen years of age.
Basic knowledge of building and grounds maintenance.
23.4. Working conditions.
Work is outside and inside, sometimes in inclement weather. The employee must be in good physical
condition; may be required to lift up to 94 pounds. Irregular working hours may be required.
23.5. Physical requirements.
The employee must be able to walk, sit, stand, squat, read, write, operate a motor vehicle and lift a
minimum of 50 pounds and a maximum of 94 pounds. Specific vision abilities required by this job
include close vision, distance vision, color vision, peripheral vision, depth perception and the ability to
adjust focus.
23.6. Probationary period.
There will be a six-month probationary period, at which time an evaluation of job performance will be
conducted and discussed with the employee. At this time, the employee will either be made a regular
employee, be allowed to continue on probationary period, not to exceed one year total, or be
terminated based on evaluation results.
Article 24. Animal Control Officer/Maintenance
24.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this position is to provide the Village of Bosque Farms with services to enforce the
Animal Control Ordinances of the Village. This position functions under the supervision of the
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 332/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
Maintenance Supervisor.
24.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Animal Control Officer:
Investigates complaints on animal-related calls from residents and contacts appropriate parties to
resolve complaints.
Performs inspections of the Village for possible animal control violations, investigates findings and
issues appropriate warnings and citations to owners.
Captures and impounds stray and uncontrolled animals through the use of nets, ropes or sedation
devices, as necessary; disposes of dead carcasses within the roadway/right-of-way.
Secures animals in cages or other enclosures and transports them to county animal control
facilities, as appropriate.
Maintains accurate and complete recordkeeping on complaints, findings investigated, animal
impoundment and disposition of fines or action needed.
Attends municipal court as needed to represent the Village in citations issued for violations of the
animal control ordinance.
May intervene in animal abuse or neglect cases as reported and requested by the Village Clerk.
Performs other duties as assigned relating to maintenance of roadways, signs, building
maintenance, etc. when not occupied with animal control tasks.
24.3. Minimum requirements.
The minimum requirements for the Animal Control Officer are:
Valid State of New Mexico driver's license and good driving record.
Ability to communicate effectively.
Physical ability to apprehend animals.
24.4. Probationary period.
There will be a six-month probationary period, at which time an evaluation of job performance will be
conducted and discussed with the employee. At this time, the employee will either be made a
permanent employee, be allowed to continue on probationary period, not to exceed seven months in
total, or be terminated based on evaluation results.
24.5. Physical demands.
Primary work site is outdoors with temperature factors, extreme cold, heat, wet and humid.
The employee must be able to walk, stand, sit, bend, twist, rotate; must be able to reach, work
with arms extended, carry 20 pounds to 50 pounds, push/pull 15 pounds, lift 20 pounds from floor
to waist, lift 15 pounds overhead and five pounds horizontally.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 333/346
C.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
Legs: lift/push-pull up to 125 pounds; hands: grasp, manipulate, eye/hand coordination, bilateral
coordination. The employee must be able to talk, write, see and hear; must be in good physical
condition due to the fact that he/she may be required to pursue animals on foot. Cannot have
allergies to animals.
Article 25. Police Chief
25.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this position is to provide the Village of Bosque Farms with law enforcement services
for the protection of people and property. The position functions under the supervision of the
Clerk/Administrator.
25.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Police Chief:
Directs and coordinates activities of the Police Department in accordance with the authority
delegated by the governing body.
Promulgates rules and regulations for the Department as defined in Village codes and state law.
Coordinates and administers daily police activities of subordinates and provides direction to
subordinates in carrying out any of the following activities:
The execution, serving, and return for all writs and processes directed by the Court;
The suppression of all riots, disturbances and breaches of peace, including the apprehension
of disorderly persons;
The pursuit and arrest of persons fleeing from justice; and
The apprehension of any person in the act of violating the laws of the state or ordinances of
the Village and the execution of appropriate measures to bring those apprehended before
competent authorities to assure justice.
Provides direction and supervision to subordinates in areas such as scheduling, personnel,
training and general procedural matters.
Responsible for seeing that all required reports, budget requests, and grant applications are
completed and submitted in a timely manner.
Functions as the Village's representative in the enforcement, processing, interpretation and
administration of Village codes pertaining to law enforcement.
Serves as liaison to the Municipal Judge and the Court.
Performs other duties as assigned.
25.3. Minimum requirements.
The Police Chief:
Must have extensive knowledge of police procedures and law enforcement laws.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 334/346
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
Must have supervisory or management experience in working with police officers.
Must possess New Mexico Law Enforcement Academy Mid-Management Certification.
Must communicate effectively, both orally and in writing.
Must have a proven record of sound judgment, discretion, moral character, and honesty.
Must have the ability to qualify with a Department-issued firearm.
25.4. Physical requirements.
The Police Chief must be able to respond actively to any situation in which the public or he/she
may be in danger. The Police Chief must be able to walk, climb, crawl, stand, sit, crouch, lay,
kneel, bend, twist/rotate, carry, reach, work with arms extended, arms bent, push/pull up to 50
pounds, lift. The position requires hand movement of gross dexterity, grasp, speed, bilateral
coordination, and eye/hand coordination.
The Police Chief may be required to work in extreme cold, extreme hot and extreme wet and
humid temperatures.
25.5. Annual leave.
Annual leave may be granted after six months in this position.
Article 26. Police Captain
26.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this position is to perform a variety of complex administrative, supervisory and
professional work in assisting the supervisor in planning, coordinating, directing and overseeing the
activities of the police unit. Duties include assisting in the supervision in the duties of the Public
Relations/Community Relations, Internal Affairs, Personnel, Legal Process, Court Liaison, Patrol and
Criminal Investigations duties of the Police Department. In the absence of the Police Chief, the Police
Captain assumes full command of the division. This position serves under the supervision of the Police
Chief.
26.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Police Captain:
Assists and exercises direct and indirect supervision and administrative authority over Police
Sergeants, Police Corporals and Police Officers.
May assist in reviewing and planning, coordinating, supervising, and evaluating Police Department
personnel; assists in the development of policies and procedures, plans and implements law
enforcement programs for the Village in order to better carry out the policies and goals of the
Department.
Is responsible for reviewing the performance and conduct of subordinates and the performance
and effectiveness of the Department; has considerable latitude for independent action in
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 335/346
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
accordance with Police Department policies and procedures; formulates programs or policies to
alleviate deficiencies.
Coordinates the information gathered and work accomplished by various officers; assigns officers
to special investigations as the needs arise for their specific skills; assures that personnel are
assigned to shifts or working units, which provides optimum effectiveness.
Evaluates evidence, witnesses and suspects in criminal cases to correlate all aspects and to
assess for trends, similarities or for associations with other cases.
Schedules training to ensure that subordinates are receiving mandatory and other training.
May participate in Internal Affairs investigations and other disciplinary actions to maintain
departmental discipline and oversee the conduct and general behavior of assigned personnel.
Prepares and submits periodic reports to the Police Chief regarding the Department's activities
and prepares a variety of other reports as appropriate; may be assigned to meet with elected
officials, community and business representatives and the general public.
Ensures that laws and ordinances are enforced and that the public peace and safety are
maintained; analyzes and recommends improvements to equipment and facilities as needed.
Will be required to respond to major incidents to handle the release of information as it becomes
necessary in the public's best interest.
Will complete any other duties as required by the Chief.
26.3. Work schedule.
Work schedule is 40 hours to 43 hours per week and is primarily swing shift or graveyard shift.
26.4. Supervisory responsibilities.
The Police Captain supervises Police Sergeants, Police Corporals and Police Officers. In the absence
of the Police Chief, the Police Captain exercises total supervision over the Operations Division.
26.5. Minimum requirements.
The minimum requirements for the Police Captain are:
High school graduation or GED.
Five years' experience in police work, two years of which must have been in a supervisory or
administrative position. Related work experience or college education may be substituted for up to
two years of the required police work.
Graduation from the New Mexico Law Enforcement Academy.
Ability to read, write, and comprehend complex reports, correspondence, manuals, rules and
regulations; ability to communicate in a one-on-one situation and establish and maintain effective
working relationships with subordinates, peers, supervisors, elected officials and the general
public.
Ability to exercise sound judgment in evaluating situations and making decisions.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 336/346
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
Thorough knowledge of modern law enforcement principles, procedures, techniques and
equipment; considerable knowledge of applicable laws, ordinances and Department rules and
regulations.
Ability to manage and supervise subordinate personnel.
Ability to meet and maintain the Department's physical standards.
26.6. Physical requirements.
Work also involves patrolling the area for the purpose of preventing and discovering crimes. Most
of the time, this position does not require heavy physical activity. However, the Police Captain
needs to be able to respond actively to any situation in which the public or he/she may be in
danger. The Police Captain is required to pass a physical agility test which requires maneuvering
through an obstacle course involving walking on a balance beam, climbing a wall, crawling
through windows, dragging a one-hundred-sixty-pound dummy, and jogging a course within
approximately three minutes.
The Police Captain must be able to walk, climb, crawl, stand, sit, crouch, lay, kneel, bend,
twist/rotate, carry, reach, work with arms extended, arms bent, push/pull up to 50 pounds, lift. The
position requires hand movement of gross dexterity, grasp, speed, bilateral coordination, and
eye/hand coordination. Specific vision abilities required by this job include close vision, distance
vision, color vision, peripheral vision, depth perception, and the ability to adjust focus.
The Police Captain may be required to work in extreme cold, extreme hot and extreme wet and
humid temperatures.
26.7. Terms of employment.
The job description does not constitute an employment agreement between the employer and the
employee and is subject to change by the employer as the needs of the employer and the
requirements of the job change.
There will be a twelve-month probationary period. At this time, an evaluation of job performance
will be conducted and discussed with the employee. Following the evaluation, the employee will
either be made a regular employee, be allowed to continue on probationary period (not to exceed
13 months), or be terminated based on evaluation results as appropriate.
Article 27. Police Lieutenant
27.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this position is to perform a variety of routine and complex public safety work in the
administration of the Police Department. This position is responsible for the supervision of the Patrol
Division, investigations, traffic regulations, and related enforcement activities. This position serves
under the supervision of the Police Captain. It directly supports the Chief of Police in the management
of the Police Department.
27.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Police Lieutenant:
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 337/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Exercises general supervision over all subordinate officers.
Is responsible for background investigations, testing and field training of officers; may make dayto-
day police assignments and reviews police-related reports prepared by subordinates;
participates in the hiring process.
Is responsible for grant writing; reviews, evaluates and develops programs, policies and
procedures for various departmental operations.
Shall conduct Internal Affairs investigations and initiates and recommends disciplinary actions to
maintain departmental discipline; and oversees the conduct and general behavior of assigned
personnel.
Makes recommendations of retention or dismissal of probationary employees.
Monitors and observes patrol or investigative activities to ensure that conduct and performance
conforms to standard operating procedures (SOP).
Prepares and submits periodic reports to the Police Chief regarding the Department's activities
and prepares a variety of other reports as appropriate; may be assigned to meet with elected
officials, community and business representatives and the general public.
Ensures that laws and ordinances are enforced and that the public peace and safety are
maintained; analyzes and recommends improvements to equipment and facilities as needed.
Will be required to respond to major incidents to handle the release of information as it becomes
necessary in the public's best interest.
Will complete any other duties as required by the Captain or Chief.
Performs all duties identified above in the best interest of the Village.
27.3. Work schedule.
The work schedule is 40 hours per week.
27.4. Minimum requirements.
The minimum requirements for the Police Lieutenant are:
High school graduation or GED.
Two years of college or vocational school degree in political science; law enforcement; criminal
justice or two years of related field experience.
Graduation from the New Mexico Law Enforcement Academy.
Ability to read, write, and comprehend complex reports, correspondence, manuals, rules and
regulations; ability to communicate in a one-on-one situation and establish and maintain effective
working relationships with subordinates, peers, supervisors, elected officials and the general
public.
Ability to exercise sound judgment in evaluating situations and making decisions.
Thorough knowledge of modern law enforcement principles, procedures, techniques and
equipment; considerable knowledge of applicable laws, ordinances and Department rules and
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 338/346
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
regulations.
Ability to manage and supervise subordinate personnel.
Ability to meet and maintain the Department's physical standards.
27.5. Physical requirements.
Work also involves patrolling the area for the purpose of preventing and discovering crimes. Most
of the time, this position does not require heavy physical activity. However, the Police Lieutenant
needs to be able to respond actively to any situation in which the public or he/she may be in
danger. The Police Lieutenant is required to pass a physical agility test similar to the New Mexico
Law Enforcement Academy test.
The Police Lieutenant must be able to walk, climb, crawl, stand, sit, crouch, lay, kneel, bend,
twist/rotate, carry, reach, work with arms extended, arms bent, push/pull up to 50 pounds, lift. The
position requires hand movement of gross dexterity, grasp, speed, bilateral coordination, and
eye/hand coordination. Specific vision abilities required by this job include close vision, distance
vision, color vision, peripheral vision, depth perception, and the ability to adjust focus.
The Police Lieutenant may be required to work in extreme cold, extreme hot and extreme wet and
humid temperatures.
27.6. Terms of employment.
The job description does not constitute an employment agreement between the employer and the
employee and is subject to change by the employer as the needs of the employer and the
requirements of the job change.
There will be a twelve-month probationary period. At this time, an evaluation of job performance
will be conducted and discussed with the employee. Following the evaluation, the employee will
either be made a regular employee, be allowed to continue on probationary period (not to exceed
13 months) or be terminated based on evaluation results as appropriate.
Article 28. Field Investigator
28.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this position is to provide the Village of Bosque Farms with investigative service in the
area of law enforcement for the protection of people and property. This position reports to the Chief of
Police through the chain of command.
28.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Field Investigator:
Patrols the Village in uniform to enforce laws, investigate crimes and arrest violators. Patrol shall
be the primary duty, but time allowed for investigations shall be at the discretion of the investigator.
Drives a vehicle through the Village, observing traffic violations and issuing traffic citations.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 339/346
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
R.
A.
B.
A.
B.
Assumes control at traffic accidents to maintain traffic flow, assist accident victims, and investigate
the cause of accidents.
Investigates illegal or suspicious activities of persons, quells disturbances, and arrests law
violators.
Locates and takes persons into custody on arrest warrants.
Transports prisoners as necessary.
Familiarizes himself/herself with the patrol area and with persons living in the area.
Notes suspicious persons and establishments and reports to supervisory officer.
Warns or arrests persons violating animal ordinances.
Writes and files daily activity reports with superior officer.
May notify the Public Works Department of problems with water, sewer or roads.
Carries out felony investigations when they are assigned to him.
Reviews and maintains case files of assigned felony cases until they are resolved.
Investigates known or suspected felonious criminals or facts of particular cases to detect planned
criminal activity or clues.
Frequents known haunts of felonious criminals and becomes familiar with criminals to determine
criminals' habits, associates, characteristics, aliases, and other information.
Prepares assigned felony cases for court or grand jury according to formalized procedures.
Testifies before court and grand jury as required.
Performs other duties as assigned by the Chief.
28.3. Physical requirements.
The Field Investigator must be able to respond actively to any situation in which the public and/or
he/she may be in danger. The employee must be able to walk, climb, crawl, stand, sit, crouch, lay,
kneel, bend, twist/rotate, carry, reach, work with arms extended, arms bent, push/pull up to 50
pounds, lift. The position requires hand movement of gross dexterity, grasp, speed, bilateral
coordination, and eye/hand coordination.
This position may be required to work in extreme cold, extreme heat, and extreme wet and humid
conditions.
28.4. Minimum requirements.
The minimum requirements for the Field Investigator are:
Must have a current New Mexico Law Enforcement Academy certificate and at least two years of
experience. Knowledge of criminal procedures is a must.
Must communicate effectively, both orally and in writing.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 340/346
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
Must have a proven record of sound judgment, honesty and discretion.
28.5. Probationary period.
There will be a twelve-month probationary period for new hires or a six-month probationary period for
currently employed officers transferring to this position. At the end of the probationary period, an
evaluation of job performance will be conducted and discussed with the employee. Following the
evaluation, the employee will either be made a regular employee, be allowed to continue on
probationary period (not to exceed six additional months), or be terminated or transferred to a patrol
officer's status, based on evaluation results, as appropriate.
Article 29. Police Detective
29.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this position is to provide the Village of Bosque Farms with professional investigative
services in the area of law enforcement for the protection of people and property. The position
functions under the direction and supervision of the Police Chief.
29.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Police Detective:
Carries out investigations to prevent crime or solve criminal cases.
Examines, preserves and safeguards evidence obtained through investigations performed.
Researches known or suspected criminals and facts of criminal cases to detect planned activities
or clues.
Conducts interviews with witnesses, victims and others, as necessary to determine the facts in
criminal cases, or to establish habits and other personal information on suspects and known
criminals.
Provides for maintenance of communication between other law enforcement and judicial agencies
as necessary, to collect and disseminate information as it pertains to criminal investigations.
Arrests or assists in the arrest of criminals or suspects of crimes committed.
Under the direction of Police Chief, prepares testimony and/or appropriate documentation for the
courts and the grand jury.
Interacts with Village officers and the Police Chief in the investigation of cases.
Assists the Department in assuming patrol duties when required.
Promulgates rules and regulations of the Department as defined in Village codes, state and
federal laws.
Performs other duties as assigned.
29.3. Work schedule.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 341/346
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
Although assigned to work primarily the day shift, 40 hours to 43 hours per week, the position requires
varied work hours to accommodate ongoing investigations.
29.4. Physical requirements.
The Police Detective must be able to respond actively to any situation in which the public or
he/she may be in danger. The employee must be able to walk, climb, crawl, stand, sit, crouch, lay,
kneel, bend, twist/rotate, carry, reach, work with arms extended, arms bent, push/pull up to 50
pounds, lift. The position requires hand movement of gross dexterity, grasp, speed, bilateral
coordination, and eye/hand coordination.
The officer may be required to work in extreme cold, extreme hot and extreme wet and humid
temperatures.
29.5. Minimum requirements.
The minimum requirements for the Police Detective are:
Must have a current New Mexico Law Enforcement Certificate and five years of police experience;
some experience in detective work preferred.
Must communicate effectively, both orally and in writing.
Must have a proven record of sound judgment, honesty and discretion.
Ability to qualify with a Department-issued firearm.
29.6. Probationary period.
There will be a twelve-month probationary period for new hires or a six-month probationary period for
currently employed officers transferring to the position. At this time, an evaluation of job performance
will be conducted and discussed with the employee. Following the evaluation, the employee will either
be made a permanent employee, be allowed to continue on probationary period (not to exceed 18
months total for a new hire or 12 months for a transferring employee), or be terminated or transferred
to police patrolman status, based on evaluation results, as appropriate.
Article 30. Police Officer
30.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this position is to provide the Village of Bosque Farms with personal and property
protection. This position functions under the supervision of the Chief of Police.
30.2. Duties and responsibilities.
A police officer:
Executes and returns all writs and processes as directed by the Municipal Judge.
Serves criminal writs and processes in any part of the county wherein the municipality is situated.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 342/346
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
Within the municipality:
Suppresses all riots, disturbances, and breaches of the peace.
Apprehends all disorderly persons.
Pursues and arrests any persons fleeing from justice.
Apprehends any person in the act of violating the laws of the state or the ordinances of the
municipality and brings him before a competent authority for examination and trial.
Performs other duties as assigned.
30.3. Work schedule.
Normal work schedule is 40 hours to 43 hours, with rotating shifts. The employee must be willing to be
called for additional duty if necessary. Night duty or alternate night/day duty may be required.
30.4. Additional requirements.
The employee must pass a pre-employment physical agility test, psychological test, and physical.
The employee must demonstrate an attitude, personality, and character compatible with good
police work, good judgment, discretion, manners, honesty, and an ability to keep information
confidential. The employee must maintain a high level of moral conduct. Police officer work under
the supervision of the Police Chief.
Police officers are also required to adhere to rules and regulations identified in the Bosque Farms
Police Department Rules and Regulations Manual.
30.5. Minimum qualifications.
The minimum qualifications for police officers are:
High school diploma or GED.
Certified with New Mexico Law Enforcement Academy or able to obtain certification, with twoweek
course preferred.
Valid New Mexico driver's license.
Continued maintenance of firearms qualifications standards.
Ability to communicate effectively, both orally and in writing.
30.6. Physical requirements.
The majority of the police work involves patrolling an assigned area for the purpose of preventing
and discovering crimes. Most of the time, this position does not require heavy physical activity.
However, the police officer needs to be able to respond actively to any situation in which the public
or he/she may be in danger. The police officer is required to pass a physical agility test, which
requires maneuvering through an obstacle course involving walking on a balance beam, climbing
a wall, crawling through windows, dragging a one-hundred-sixty-pound dummy, and jogging a
course within approximately three minutes.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 343/346
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
The officer must be able to walk, climb, crawl, stand, sit, crouch, lay, kneel, bend, twist/rotate,
carry, reach, work with arms extended, arms bent, push/pull up to 50 pounds, lift. The position
requires hand movement of gross dexterity, grasp, speed, bilateral coordination, and eye/hand
coordination.
The officer may be required to work in extreme cold, extreme hot and extreme wet and humid
temperatures.
30.7. Probationary period.
There will be a twelve-month probationary period for new hires. At this time, an evaluation of job
performance will be conducted and discussed with the employee. Following the evaluation, the
employee will either be made a regular employee, be allowed to continue on probationary period (not
to exceed 13 months) or be terminated based on evaluation results, as appropriate.
Article 31. Police/Court Clerk
31.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this position is to provide the Village of Bosque Farms with clerical, dispatch and
supportive services to the Village Police and the Municipal Court. The position functions under the
supervision of the Chief of Police for the police work and the Municipal Judge for the judicial work.
31.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Police/Court Clerk:
Under general direction, performs typing, word processing, recording and filing of police and court
correspondence, reports, forms and other related projects as determined by the Chief.
Provides information to the public on police and court matters, as appropriate.
Receives complaints from the public concerning crimes and emergencies; broadcasts orders as
necessary to appropriate patrol units; records calls, broadcasts any complaints received, in
accordance with established police procedures.
Must attend all Municipal Court hearings and may perform any combination of the following
clerical duties for the Municipal Court relating to: the preparation of court dockets and case
folders; contacting witnesses, attorneys and litigants to secure or provide information necessary
for the court; and the recording of case dispositions and court orders.
Makes arrangements for, and oversees the collection of fees and court fines, and notifies various
agencies of Municipal Court sentencing to be fulfilled.
Provides fiscal functions necessary to deposit and account for court receipts collected, and the
disposition of checks for payment of court-related costs.
Prepares and submits required reports as needed.
Performs other duties as assigned.
31.3. Minimum requirements.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 344/346
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
A.
The minimum requirements for the Police/Court Clerk are:
Knowledge of ability to interpret New Mexico Uniform Traffic Codes, Village ordinances and other
appropriate regulations pertaining to law enforcement and court-related matters.
Ability to type accurately 60 words per minute and perform light bookkeeping functions.
Must obtain New Mexico Law Enforcement Academy Certification for radio transmission as
specified by the New Mexico Law Enforcement Academy.
Ability to communicate effectively, both orally and in writing.
Ability to establish working relationships with the governing body, Village staff and the general
public.
Knowledge of computer word processing and other program applications desirable.
Previous experience in similar duties preferred.
31.4. Probationary period.
There will be a six-month probationary period, at which time an evaluation of job performance will be
conducted and discussed with the employee. At this time, the employee will either be made a
permanent employee, be allowed to continue on probationary period, not to exceed one year total, or
be terminated based on evaluation results.
31.5. Physical demands.
The physical demands are representative of those that must be met by an employee to
successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be
made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.
The employee is frequently required to walk, sit, talk and hear. The employee is required to use
hands to finger, handle, feel, or operate objects, tools or controls; and reach with hands and arms.
The employee is required to stoop, kneel and crouch.
The employee must occasionally lift and/or move up to 25 pounds. Specific vision ability
requirements include close vision, distance vision and the ability to adjust focus.
Article 32. DWI Clerk
32.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this position is to provide the Village of Bosque Farms with clerical and supportive
services to the Municipal Court. The position functions under the supervision of the Municipal Judge.
32.2. Duties and responsibilities.
The DWI Clerk:
Under general direction, is responsible for the filing and tracking of all DWI cases for the Municipal
Court and all weekly, bi-weekly, monthly, and annual reports requested.
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 345/346
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
A.
B.
C.
Under general direction, performs typing, word processing, recording and filing of court cases,
correspondence, reports, forms, and other related projects as determined by the Municipal Judge.
Provides information to the public on court and DWI matters as appropriate with the approval of
the Municipal Judge.
Attends all Municipal Court hearings and performs any combination of the following duties for the
Municipal Court: preparation of court dockets and case folders; contacting witnesses, attorneys,
and litigants to secure or provide information necessary for the court; and the recording of case
disposition and court orders.
Will assist in the arrangement for collection of fees, court fines and other related cases, and
notifies various agencies of Municipal Court sentencing to be fulfilled.
Will provide assistance in fiscal functions necessary to deposit and account for court receipts
collected and the disposition of checks for payment of court-related costs.
Will assist in the preparation of reports as needed.
Will perform other duties as assigned by the Municipal Judge.
Will be cross-trained to assist the Police Clerk and the Senior Court Clerk as needed, with the
approval of the Municipal Judge.
Will attend all training and updated training for the Municipal Court Judicial Information Systems
Council's tracking of convictions of violations of municipal ordinances prohibiting driving while
under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs and prohibiting domestic violence.
32.3. Minimum requirements.
The minimum requirements for the DWI Clerk are:
Ability to interpret New Mexico Uniform Traffic Codes, Village ordinances and other appropriate
regulations pertaining to court-related matters. Court Clerk experience is a plus.
Ability to type accurately 40 plus words per minute and perform light bookkeeping functions.
Ability to communicate effectively, both orally and in writing. Bilingual ability is a plus.
DISPOSITION LIST
Section DL. Disposition List
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the Village of Bosque Farms adopted since the
publication of the Code, indicating its inclusion in the Code or the reason for its exclusion. [Enabling
legislation which is not general and permanent in nature is considered to be non-Code material
(NCM).] The last legislation reviewed for the original publication of the Code was an ordinance adopted
October 15, 2015.
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
3-17-2016 Animal Control Amendment § 8
7/14/2020 Village of Bosque Farms, NM Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BO3202?guid=BO3202&children=true 346/346
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
5-19-2016 Adoption of Code § 1-1
5-19-2016 Penalty Assessments Amendment § 12-2
6-16-2016 Uniform Traffic Code Superseded 10-19-2017
7-1-2016 Sewer Service Amendment § 9-3
8-18-2016 Zoning Amendment § 10-1
9-15-2016 Water Amendment § 9-2
10-20-2016 Zoning Amendment § 10-1
4-20-2017 Water Amendment § 9-2
4-20-2017 Sewer Service Amendment § 9-3
10-19-2017 Uniform Traffic Code § 12-1
10-19-2017 Penalty Assessments Amendment § 12-2
12-21-2017 Personnel Policy Manual Amendment § A1
12-21-2017 Loan Agreement NCM
4-19-2018 Personnel Policy Manual Amendment § A1
5-17-2018 Water Amendment § 9-2
6-21-2018 Sewer Service Amendment § 9-3
7-1-2018 Water Amendment; Sewer Service
Amendment
§ 9-2; § 9-3