7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 1/318
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Deming, as supplemented, contains ordinances and resolutions up to and including ordinance 1268, passed
December 11, 2017, and resolution 17-10, passed February 13, 2017. Ordinances and resolutions of the City adopted after said ordinance
and resolution supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ORDINANCE NO. 1054
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING
THE CITY OF DEMING, NEW MEXICO MUNICIPAL CODE (2001)
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF DEMING, NEW MEXICO that the Municipal Code be amended as follows:
Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the City of Deming Municipal Code (2001), containing the compilation of all
ordinances of a general nature together with the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the City Council of the City of
Deming, shall be accepted in all local, state, tribal and federal courts without question as the official code and law of the City of Deming as
enacted by the City Council.
Section 2: There is hereby adopted as a method of perpetual codification the loose-leaf type of binding whereby each newly adopted
ordinance of a general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions of the Municipal Code (2001) is identified by
the proper catchline and is inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which shall be maintained in the office of
the City Clerk, certified as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly open.
Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in the City of Deming Municipal Code (2001) shall be considered as a continuation of
said ordinance provisions and the fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the City Council shall not serve to cause
any interruption in the continuous effectiveness of ordinances included in said Municipal Code (2001). All ordinances of a special nature,
including but not limited to tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating ordinances, annexation ordinances and zoning
change ordinances shall continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by provision of the Municipal Code (2001).
Such ordinances are not intended to be included in the Municipal Code (2001).
Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm or corporation to change, alter or amend by additions or deletions, any part or
portion of the Municipal Code (2001), or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the Municipal Code (2001) in
any manner which will cause the law of the City of Deming to be misrepresented thereby.
Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
Section 6: This ordinance and the Municipal Code (2001) herewith adopted shall be recorded and shall be in full force and effect from and
after its passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
PASSED, ADOPTED AND APPROVED this 10th day of December, 2001.
Attest:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 2/318
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this city code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official city code of Deming.
This city code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the DEMING CITY CODE and is hereby published by authority of the city council
and shall be supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section 1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to
the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title
heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this city code by title
in any legal documents. (2001 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in administrative
tribunals of this state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2001 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the city code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and
this shall constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of
this city code. All such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers, and the said ordinance
material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this city code. Each such replacement page shall be properly
identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the city code. (2001 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this city code in such a
manner that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official
instructions when so authorized by the city council. The city clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the official
copies maintained in the office of the city clerk. Any person having custody of a copy of the city code shall make every effort to maintain
said code current as to the most recent ordinances passed. Such person shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages
when such are delivered or made available to such person through the office of the city clerk. Said code books, while in actual possession
of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the office of the city clerk when
directed so to do by order of the city council. (2001 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this city code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this city
code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and
excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to
boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract
ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing,
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 3/318
naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the city; and all special ordinances. (2001 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this city code or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as the city code may
contain provisions for such matters, in which case, this city code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect
to such provisions only. (2001 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
A. Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly
repealed or not, as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment
so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so
committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding,
so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such provision may
be, by consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
B. Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the
ordinance making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
C. Currently Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of
any general ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to
be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any
right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this city code. (2001 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this city code, or any part hereof or any portion adopted by
reference or any codes or portions of codes adopted herein is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court
of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this code, or any part hereof
or any portion adopted by reference or any codes or portions of codes adopted herein. The city council hereby declares that it would have
passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (2001
Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
A. Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or
persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used. When
any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this code by words importing the singular number only, or a particular gender, several
matters, parties or persons and the opposite gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of
construction shall not be applied to any section of this code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where
the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
B. The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section"
and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not
meant to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2001 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context
makes such meaning repugnant thereto:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 4/318
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either expressly or by implication.
CITY: The city of Deming, county of Luna, state of New Mexico.
CODE: The city code of the city of Deming.
COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the city council of the city of Deming.
COUNTY: The county of Luna, state of New Mexico.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the
words "of the city of Deming".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
FIDELITY BOND: A bond written by an insurance company to protect an employer from any dishonest acts of employees.
FISCAL YEAR1: The fiscal year of the city shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30.
GENDER: A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall extend and be applied to the other gender and to persons.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR2: Any offense for which the authorized penalty upon conviction is imprisonment in excess of six (6) months but less than
one year.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health
and welfare of inhabitants of the city, or any activity which by its perpetuation can reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the
property of a person or persons within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether
alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words
"of the city of Deming".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or
of a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as
well as a natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written
instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated,
discharged or diminished and every right or interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to
the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property.
STATE: The state of New Mexico.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
SURETY BOND: A bond usually written by an insurance or bonding company to guarantee that someone, an individual or a corporation or
similar entity, will perform some act or duty as agreed. A construction contract is an example of a situation where a surety bond could apply.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.
WHOLESALER OR WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods,
merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any
person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case such person
is unable to write, by such person's proper mark. (2001 Code; amd. Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 5/318
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be
deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent
of the provisions of any section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the
catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (2001 Code)
Footnote 1: NMSA § 6-10-1.
Footnote 2: NMSA § 31-1-2.
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: PENALTY1:
Unless a lesser maximum penalty or a specific penalty is established by ordinance for a particular offense, the maximum penalty for
violation of this code or any city ordinance shall be as follows:
A. Violations Generally: Except for those violations of this code or city ordinances described in subsections B and C of this section, a fine of
not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or both;
B. Driving While Under The Influence Of Liquor Or Drugs: For violations of this code or an ordinance prohibiting driving a motor vehicle
while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs, a fine of not more than nine hundred ninety nine dollars ($999.00) or
imprisonment for not more than one hundred seventy nine (179) days, or both; and
C. Industrial User Wastewater Pretreatment: For violations of an industrial user wastewater pretreatment ordinance, or this code, as
required by the United States environmental protection agency, a fine of not more than nine hundred ninety nine dollars ($999.00) a day
for each violation. (Ord. 976, 6-8-1998)
1-4-2: MANDATORY FEES COLLECTED UPON CONVICTION:
A. Mandatory Fees Imposed: In addition to any fine or imprisonment described in section 1-4-1 of this chapter, there is imposed upon any
person convicted of violating any provision of this code or a city ordinance the penalty for which carries a potential jail term or any
ordinance or code provision relating to the operation of a motor vehicle the following mandatory fees. (Ord. 976, 6-8-1998)
1. A municipal judge shall collect the following costs:
a. Corrections Fee: A corrections fee of twenty dollars ($20.00);
b. Judicial Education Fee: A judicial education fee of three dollars ($3.00);
c. Court Automation Fee: A court automation fee of six dollars ($6.00). (Ord. 1191, 7-27-2009)
2. The fees are to be collected upon conviction from persons convicted of violating any ordinance relating to the operation of a motor
vehicle or any ordinance that may be enforced by the imposition of a term of imprisonment. (Ord. 1076, 7-14-2003)
B. Definition Of Convicted: As used in this chapter, "convicted" means the defendant has been found guilty of a criminal charge by the
municipal judge, either after trial, a plea of guilty or a plea of nolo contendere, or has elected to pay a penalty assessment in lieu of trial.
(Ord. 976, 6-8-1998)
1-4-3: DISPOSITION AND USE OF FEES COLLECTED:
A. Corrections Fees: All money collected pursuant to subsection 1-4-2A1a of this chapter shall be deposited in a special fund in the
municipal treasury and shall be used for:
1. Municipal jailer or juvenile detention officer training;
2. The construction planning, construction, operation and maintenance of a municipal jail or juvenile detention facility;
3. Paying the cost of housing municipal prisoners in a county jail or detention facility or housing juveniles in a detention facility;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 6/318
4. Complying with match or contribution requirements for the receipt of federal funds relating to jails or juvenile detention facilities;
5. Providing inpatient treatment or other substance abuse programs in conjunction with or as an alternative to jail sentencing;
6. Defraying the cost of transporting prisoners to jails or juveniles to juvenile detention facilities; or
7. Providing electronic monitoring system.
B. Judicial Education Fees: All money collected pursuant to subsection 1-4-2A1b of this chapter shall be remitted monthly to the state
treasurer for credit to the judicial education fund and shall be used for the education and training, including production of bench books
and other written materials, of municipal judges and other municipal court employees.
C. Court Automation Fees: All money collected pursuant to subsection 1-4-2A1c of this chapter shall be remitted monthly to the state
treasurer for credit to the municipal court automation fund and shall be used for the purchase and maintenance of court automation
systems in the municipal courts. The court automation systems shall have the capability of providing, on a timely basis, electronic
records in a format specified by the judicial information systems council.
D. Special Fund Interest: The city of Deming may credit the interest collected from fees deposited in the special fund pursuant to subsection
A of this section to the municipality's general fund. (Ord. 1076, 7-14-2003)
1-4-4: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a
part of each and every separate section.
B. Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or
sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so
as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
C. Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of
this code and there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2001
Code)
1-4-5: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable
for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the city council to impose such fine or penalty on
such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (2001 Code)
Chapter 5
OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
1-5-1: OFFICIAL SEAL:
A. Seal Adopted: A seal, the impression of which shall be as follows: in the center the word "Seal". Around the outer edge the words "City of
Deming, Luna County, New Mexico", and between said outer edge and the said word "Seal", the words "Incorporated 1902", shall be
and hereby is declared to be the seal of the city.
B. Use Of Seal: The seal of the city shall be affixed to all transcripts, orders, certificates, and other documents which may be necessary and
proper to authenticate under the provisions of this code. (Ord. 1, 3-3-1902)
Chapter 6
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
1-6-1: ELECTION; TERMS OF OFFICE:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 7/318
The mayor and city council members shall be elected and serve four (4) year terms, with said terms to be staggered so that the terms of
office for one-half (1/2) of the members will expire every two (2) years1. (2001 Code)
1-6-2: CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS:
A. Time And Place Of Meetings: All regular meetings shall be held at the city hall at six o'clock (6:00) P.M., or as indicated on the meeting
notice. (Ord. 1137, 4-10-2006)
B. Regular Meetings: Regular meetings shall be held each month on the second Monday. A proposed agenda will be available the Friday
before the meeting from the municipal offices. Notice of any other regular meetings will be given ten (10) days in advance of the meeting
date. Notice requirements are met if notice of the date, time, place and general subject matter to be discussed is placed in newspapers
of general circulation in the state.
C. Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the chair or a majority of the members of the city council upon three (3) days'
notice. Notice requirements shall be met by posting notices in the municipal building.
D. Emergency Meetings: Emergency meetings will be called only under circumstances which demand immediate action to protect the
health, safety and property of citizens. The city will avoid emergency meetings whenever possible. Emergency meetings may be called
by the chair or a majority of the members of the city council upon twenty four (24) hours' notice, unless threat of personal injury or
property damage requires less notice. Notice requirements shall be met by posting notices in the municipal building.
E. Open Meetings; Exceptions: Meetings of the city council shall be open to the public pursuant to New Mexico Statutes Annotated section
10-15-1. The city council may close a meeting to the public only if the subject matter of such discussion or action is exempted from the
open meeting requirement under New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 10-15-1(E).
1. If any meeting is closed during an open meeting, such closures shall be approved by a majority vote of a quorum of the city council
taken during the open meeting. The authority for the closure and the subjects to be discussed shall be stated in the motion for closure
and the vote on closure of each individual member shall be recorded in the minutes. Only those subjects specified in the motion may
be discussed in a closed meeting; and
2. If the decision to hold a closed meeting is made when the city council is not in an open meeting, the closed meeting shall not be held
until public notice, appropriate under the circumstances and stating the specific provision of law authorizing the closed meeting and
the subjects to be discussed, is given to the members and to the general public; and
3. Except as provided in New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 10-15-1(E), any action taken as a result of discussions in a closed
meeting shall be made by vote of the city council in an open meeting. (Res., 4-13-1998; amd. 2001 Code)
1-6-3: PRESIDING OFFICER:
The mayor shall preside at all city council meetings and shall vote only when there is a tie vote. The duties of the presiding officer shall be
as set out in section 1.3 of resolution 05-72 which is titled "Pertaining To Rules Of Procedure And Ordinances", as amended from time to
time. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-6-4: GENERAL RULES:
A. General Rules Of Procedure: In addition to the general rules set out in this section and any other rules of procedure set out in this
chapter, the rules of procedure and ordinances adopted by resolution 05-72, as amended from time to time, shall apply.
B. Order Of Business: The order of business of city council shall be in accordance with section 2.3 of resolution 05-72, "Pertaining To Rules
Of Procedure And Ordinances", as amended from time to time.
C. Questions: All questions relating to order and priority of business and references to committees shall be decided by the mayor, without
debate, but subject in all cases to an appeal from such decision, which appeal shall be decided by a majority vote of city council.
Appeals shall be governed by section 2.11 of resolution 05-72, "Pertaining To Rules Of Procedure And Ordinances", as amended from
time to time.
D. Rules Of Voting: Voting shall be in accordance with section 3-17-4A, New Mexico Statutes Annotated, 1978, with respect to ordinances
and resolutions and section 3.1.1 of resolution 05-72, "Pertaining To Rules Of Procedure And Ordinances", as amended from time to
time.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 8/318
E. Quorum: At all meetings of the city council, a majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Should
there be no quorum present, only a motion to summon members, compel attendance or adjourn can be entertained.
F. Suspension Of Rules: Except for charter, statutory or ordinance provisions and the provisions of subsection 1-6-5A of this chapter, the
rules set out in this chapter may be temporarily suspended by a majority vote of the city councilors present. When the suspension of a
rule is requested, and no objection is offered, the mayor shall announce the rule suspended, and city council may proceed accordingly.
G. Amendment Of Rules: The rules set out in this chapter or any part thereof may be amended, repealed, altered or rescinded by a vote of
the majority of the city council, after notice of the intended proposal. Such notice shall be presented by resolution at a regular meeting of
city council. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-6-5: ORDINANCES:
A. Introduction And Passage: No ordinance, resolution or act carrying an appropriation, levying a tax or assessment, or entering into a
contract shall be passed except by a vote by roll call, and it shall require a majority vote of all the members of the city council for the
passage of such ordinance, resolution or act. (Ord. 2, 4-6-1908; amd. Ord. 1116, 8-8-2005)
B. Style: The style of all ordinances shall be "Be it ordained by the city council of the city of Deming, New Mexico". (Ord. 2, 4-6-1908; amd.
2001 Code)
C. Publication: All ordinances shall be published in some newspaper of general circulation in the city and proof of such publication, by
affidavit of the printer or publisher of such paper, shall be provided and filed with the clerk and by the said clerk placed on record in the
ordinance book. (Ord. 2, 4-6-1908; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
D. Effective Date: All ordinances so published shall take effect and be in force at the expiration of five (5) days after the first publication
thereof, and the said ordinance book compiled and published by authority of the city council shall be taken in all courts as prima facie
evidence that such ordinances have been published as provided herein.
E. Repeal, Modify Ordinances: Whenever an ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance,
the ordinance or part thereof thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication and going into effect of the ordinance
repealing and modifying the same, unless therein otherwise expressly provided, and no suit, proceeding, right, fine or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal, shall in anywise be affected, released or discharged by
such repeal or modification, but may be prosecuted, enjoined and recovered as fully as if such ordinance had continued in force.
F. Repeal Of Repealing Ordinances: Whenever any ordinance repealing or modifying a former ordinance shall be itself repealed, such
repeal shall not be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision unless it shall be therein so expressly provided. (Ord.
2, 4-6-1908)
G. Resolution 05-72: In addition to the provisions of this section, the provisions of section 2.4 of resolution 05-72, "Pertaining To Rules Of
Procedure And Ordinances", as amended from time to time shall apply to ordinances and resolutions. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-6-6: JOURNAL OF PROCEEDINGS:
The city council shall keep a journal of its proceedings which shall at all times be open for inspection. (Ord. 2, 4-6-1908)
1-6-7: COMMITTEES:
A. Appointment: All committees shall be appointed by the mayor, or in his absence by the temporary chair.
B. Reporting To Council: All matters referred to committees shall be reported upon at the next regular meeting unless otherwise ordered.
(Ord. 2, 4-6-1908)
1-6-8: CLAIMS:
All claims against the city and all reports shall be addressed to the "city council of the city of Deming". (Ord. 2, 4-6-1908)
1-6-9: CITY CLERK TO ATTEND MEETINGS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 9/318
The city clerk shall attend all meetings of the city council unless excused by the mayor. In the absence of the city clerk, the deputy city clerk
shall attend the city council meeting to keep a record of the proceedings. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
ARTICLE A. CITY COUNCIL ELECTIONS
1-6A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish single member districts for election of council members. (Ord. 844, 12-9-1991)
1-6A-2: CREATION OF DISTRICTS:
A. City councilors shall reside in and be elected from municipal election districts. (Ord. 1050, 11-14-2001)
B. As a general provision, every ten (10) years, following the United States census, the city council shall adopt an official municipal election
district map upon which will be shown the boundaries of each municipal election district. In addition, whenever territory is annexed to the
city, city council shall determine into which municipal election district or districts the annexed territory will be placed. The municipal
election district map shall be amended accordingly. The map shall be kept in the custody of the city clerk. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
C. Each municipal election district shall be a single member district. (Ord. 1050, 11-14-2001)
1-6A-3: CANDIDATES:
A. Only persons residing in a particular municipal election district and who otherwise meet all applicable requirements imposed by law or
ordinance shall be allowed to be candidates for the position of council member for that municipal election district.
B. In determining whether the residence of a person is in a particular district, the rules set forth in New Mexico Statutes Annotated section
3-8-3 (being laws 1985, chapter 208, section 11) and New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 1-1-7 shall apply.
C. In addition to the requirements for a declaration of candidacy set forth in New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 3-8-27A (being laws
1985, chapter 208, section 35), the city clerk shall not accept a declaration of candidacy for the position of council member, unless the
declaration of candidacy states which district the candidate resides in and is seeking election from. The city clerk shall determine if the
candidate's residence is in that district from which he seeks election. If the candidate does not reside within the district, the city clerk
shall determine that the declaration of candidacy is invalid.
D. A write in candidate shall not be elected to fill the position of council member unless the write in candidate resides in the district from
which the write in candidate is elected. (Ord. 844, 12-9-1991)
1-6A-4: ELECTION RESOLUTION:
In addition to the requirements of New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 3-8-26 (being laws 1985, chapter 208, section 34), the election
resolution calling for the regular city election shall set forth which districts of the city will be electing council members. (Ord. 844, 12-9-1991)
1-6A-5: POLLING PLACES:
In addition to the requirements of New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 3-8-11 (being laws 1985, chapter 208, section 19), the governing
body shall assure that each election district has not less than one polling place. (Ord. 844, 12-9-1991)
1-6A-6: BALLOTS:
In addition to the requirements of New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 3-8-29 (being laws 1985, chapter 208, section 37), the city clerk
shall cause all ballots to separate candidates for the position of council member by district. The order of the candidates running for office
within each district shall be determined by a drawing by lot. There shall be a position for a voter to insert a write-in candidate below the
names of the candidates running for legislative office from each district. (Ord. 844, 12-9-1991)
1-6A-7: PRECINCT BOARDS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 10/318
In addition to the requirements of New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 3-8-26A (being laws 1985, chapter 208, section 28), the precinct
board shall assure that each person votes only for a candidate for the position of council member from the district within which that person
resides. (Ord. 844, 12-9-1991)
1-6A-8: PUBLICATION OF NAMES OF CANDIDATES:
In addition to the requirements of New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 3-8-30 (being laws 1985, chapter 208, section 38), the city clerk
shall assure that the publication of the names of candidates for the office of council member shall designate from which election district
each such candidate is seeking election. (Ord. 844, 12-9-1991)
1-6A-9: ELECTION OF OTHER MUNICIPAL OFFICERS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect the manner in which other city officers are elected. (Ord. 844, 12-9-1991)
1-6A-10: PLURALITY OF VOTES CAST REQUIRED FOR ELECTION:
In addition to the requirements of New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 3-8-32 (being laws 1985, chapter 208, section 40), each
candidate for the position of council member shall only receive votes cast for such candidate by the resident qualified electors for the
election district from which the candidate is running. The candidate who receives a plurality of votes cast in that district shall be elected to
the office for the term designated. (Ord. 844, 12-9-1991)
1-6A-11: CANVASS OF RETURNS, ELECTION CERTIFICATE:
Regarding canvass of returns and issuance of an election certificate, appropriate election officials shall assure that returns are canvassed
and election certificates are issued on a district-by-district basis for the position of council member. (Ord. 844, 12-9-1991)
Chapter 7
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-7-1: OATH AND BOND:
A. Oath: Every officer of the city, whether elected or appointed, shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe an
oath that he will well and truly perform the duties of his office to the best of his skill and ability and that he will support the constitution of
the United States and the laws of the state; and such oath shall be in the form prescribed by law.
B. Bond: Elected or appointed officials of the city shall furnish a corporate surety bond, as may be required by the city council; and the city
shall pay for such surety bond. (Ord. 6, 4-6-1908; amd. 2001 Code)
1-7-2: PERFORMANCE OF DUTIES:
Officers appointed by the city council shall perform such duties as said council may by ordinance or resolution require. (Ord. 6, 4-6-1908)
1-7-3: SALARIES:
A. Mayor: Effective for mayoral elections and appointments to fill a vacancy after December 28, 2011, the mayor shall receive the sum of
nine hundred sixty two dollars fifty cents ($962.50) per month as compensation.
B. City Council And Mayor Pro Tem: Any city council member elected or appointed to fill a vacancy after December 28, 2011, shall receive
as compensation the sum of five hundred seventy seven dollars fifty cents ($577.50) per month. Any council member designated by
council as mayor pro tem after December 28, 2011, shall receive compensation of six hundred sixty dollars ($660.00). (Ord. 1218, 12-
28-2011)
C. Health Insurance: The mayor and mayor pro tem of the city council and the members of the city council shall be provided the option to
participate in any health insurance plan the city offers to municipal employees, under the same terms and conditions as municipal
employees. For any city council member elected or reelected after March 7, 2008, the percentage of health insurance cost paid by
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 11/318
individual elected officials shall conform to the employee schedule of percentage paid in the city of Deming "Personnel Policies And
Procedures Manual". (Ord. 1164, 10-8-2007)
1-7-4: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
All officers appointed by the city council may be removed from office at any time in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 6, 4-6-1908)
1-7-5: GROUP INSURANCE:
A. Insurance Provided: Pursuant to the provisions of New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 10-7-4.2, the city shall cooperate in providing
group and other insurance for the benefit of eligible employees of the city.
B. Authorization: The city council shall be authorized to purchase an appropriate form of group or other forms of insurance for the benefit of
eligible employees of the city, from any appropriate insurance company authorized and qualified to do business in the state, and shall be
authorized to contribute to payment of cost of such insurance; provided, that the contributions of the city shall not exceed seventy five
percent (75%) of the cost of such insurance.
C. Deduction From Salaries: Pursuant to the provisions of New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 10-7-5, the city shall be authorized to
deduct from the salaries of the employees who may elect to be covered by any such group and other insurance for the payment of
premiums on such policies of insurance. (Ord. 409, 9-12-1966; amd. 2001 Code)
ARTICLE A. CITY CLERK
1-7A-1: APPOINTMENT:
The city council shall appoint some qualified person to be the clerk of the city, who shall hold office at the pleasure of city council and shall
continue in office until his successor shall be appointed and qualified. At the sole discretion of the city council, the positions of city clerk and
city treasurer may be held by the same person. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-7A-2: BOND:
Before assuming or performing any of the duties provided for in section 1-7A-3 of this article, the clerk shall secure a corporate surety bond
in a bonding company acceptable to the city council, in such amount as the city council shall consider adequate, conditioned for the faithful
performance of his duties. The city shall pay for the surety bond. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-7A-3: DUTIES:
The city clerk shall have and shall perform the following duties1:
A. Attend all meetings of the city council.
B. Record all proceedings, ordinances and resolutions of the city council.
C. Have the custody and safekeeping of all records and documents of the city, including, but not limited to, minutes, ordinances and
resolutions of the city council, except as otherwise provided by law.
D. Upon request, during city business hours, furnish copies of municipal records. The clerk may charge a reasonable fee for the cost of
furnishing copies of municipal records.
E. Report to the city council all matters affecting the interest of the city which shall have come to his attention since the preceding meeting.
F. Issue all licenses authorized by the provisions of this code or approved by the city council and keep a complete record of same and the
purpose for which given.
G. Be the keeper of the city seal and shall affix it to all instruments required to be so attested.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 12/318
H. Shall administer the municipal election, including, but not limited to: securing the necessary polling places; ensuring necessary
equipment and supplies are at each polling place; certifying voting machines; keeping the office of the municipal clerk open on election
day for the purpose of receiving ballot boxes, election returns and materials until all election returns and materials are received;
conducting an election school for precinct board members as required in section 3-8-21 New Mexico Statutes Annotated, 1978; and,
within fifteen (15) days of the holding of any municipal election, forwarding to the county clerk a listing of all individuals voting in the
municipal election. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-7A-4: SALARY:
The city clerk shall receive as salary such compensation as may be fixed by the city council from time to time during his term of office and
shall be in an amount consistent with his duties and responsibilities. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
Footnote 1: NMSA § 3-13-1A (1978).
ARTICLE B. CITY ATTORNEY
1-7B-1: APPOINTMENT:
The attorney for the city shall be appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of the city council. The attorney may be appointed on a
contract basis or as a city employee. The attorney shall hold the office at the pleasure of the mayor with the concurrence of city council.
(Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-7B-2: DUTIES:
A. Suits And Actions: The city attorney shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at law or equity to which the city may be a
party, or in which it may be interested, or which may be brought against, or by, any officer of the city on behalf of the city, or in the
capacity of such person as an officer of the city. (1961 Code § 1-10-2)
B. Judgments: It shall be the duty of the city attorney to see to the full enforcement of all judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor
of the city and of all similar interlocutory orders. (1961 Code § 1-10-3)
C. Advice: The city attorney shall be the legal advisor of the city, and shall render advice on all legal questions affecting the city, whenever
requested to do so by any city official. Upon request by the mayor or by the city council, he shall reduce any such opinion to writing.
(1961 Code § 1-10-4)
D. Special Assessments: It shall be the duty of the city attorney to see to the completion of all special assessment proceedings and
condemnation proceedings. (1961 Code § 1-10-5)
E. Ordinances And Documents: It shall be the duty of the city attorney to draft or supervise the phraseology of any contract, lease or other
documents or instruments, to which the city may be a party; and upon request of the city council to draft ordinances covering any
subjects within the power of the city. (1961 Code § 1-10-6)
1-7B-3: CITY REPRESENTATIVE; CRIMINAL COMPLAINTS:
The city attorney shall be the sole representative of the city in municipal court. All criminal complaints commenced in municipal court shall
be approved thereon by the city attorney unless that approval has been duly delegated as provided herein. The city attorney in his sole
discretion may designate members of the police department to approve criminal complaints for municipal traffic violations and may
designate code enforcement officers to approve criminal complaints for city code violations. (Ord. 1110, 6-13-2005)
ARTICLE C. TREASURER
1-7C-1: APPOINTMENT:
The treasurer for the city shall be appointed by the city council. He shall hold office at the pleasure of city council. At the sole discretion of
the city council, the positions of city clerk and city treasurer may be held by the same person. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 13/318
1-7C-2: BOND:
Before assuming or performing any of the duties provided for in section 1-7C-3 of this article, the treasurer shall secure a corporate surety
bond in a bonding company acceptable to the city council, in such amount as the city council shall consider adequate, conditioned for the
faithful performance of his duties. The city shall pay for the surety bond. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-7C-3: DUTIES:
The city treasurer shall have and shall perform the following duties:
A. Supervise the depositing and safekeeping of all monies belonging to the municipality1.
B. With the advice and consent of the municipal board of finance (city council), designate banks qualified to receive on deposit money
entrusted to his care2. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-7C-4: SALARY:
The city treasurer shall receive as salary such compensation as may be fixed by the city council from time to time during the term of
appointment and shall be in an amount consistent with his duties and responsibilities. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
Footnote 1: NMSA § 3-37-1C(1) (1978).
Footnote 2: NMSA § 3-37-1C(2) (1978).
ARTICLE D. FINANCE OFFICER
1-7D-1: APPOINTMENT:
The city treasurer shall be the finance officer for the city unless another person is directed by ordinance to be the finance officer. The
finance officer shall hold office at the pleasure of the city council. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-7D-2: BOND:
Before assuming or performing any of the duties provided for in section 1-7D-3 of this article, the finance officer shall secure a corporate
surety bond in a bonding company acceptable to the city council, in such amount as the city council shall consider adequate, conditioned
for the faithful performance of his duties. The city shall pay for the surety bond. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-7D-3: DUTIES:
The finance officer shall have and shall perform the following duties1:
A. Collect and receive all monies belonging to the city, whether for taxes, licenses or other indebtedness and issue a proper receipt therefor.
B. Keep the monies of the city separate from his own monies or any other monies in his possession and in a safe depository.
C. Keep his accounts and records in a manner prescribed by the city council.
D. On the first day of each month, or as soon thereafter as can be completed, prepare a full and complete statement showing the present
financial condition of the city and the monies collected and disbursed during the preceding month.
E. Expend monies only as directed by the city council.
F. Prepare annually, or at the close of the fiscal year, a financial report showing the receipts, expenditures and balances for each fund. A
copy of the financial statement shall be filed in the office of the city clerk as a public document. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 14/318
1-7D-4: SALARY:
The finance officer shall receive as salary such compensation as may be fixed by the city council from time to time during the term of
appointment and shall be in an amount consistent with his duties and responsibilities. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
Footnote 1: NMSA § 3-37-3A (1978).
ARTICLE E. POLICE CHIEF
1-7E-1: APPOINTMENT:
The police chief for the city shall be appointed by the city council. He shall hold office at the pleasure of city council. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-7E-2: BOND:
Before assuming or performing any of the duties provided for in section 1-7E-3 of this article, the police chief shall secure a corporate surety
bond in a bonding company acceptable to the city council, in such amount as the city council shall consider adequate, conditioned for the
faithful performance of his duties. The city shall pay for the surety bond. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-7E-3: DUTIES:
The police chief shall have and shall perform the following duties1:
A. Execute and return all writs and process as directed by the municipal judge of the city.
B. Execute and return all criminal process as directed by the municipal judge of any incorporated municipality of the state if the criminal
process arises out of a charge of violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
drugs.
C. Serve criminal writs and process specified in subsections A and B of this section in any part of Luna County.
D. Within the city the police chief shall:
1. Suppress all riots, disturbances and breaches of the peace.
2. Apprehend all disorderly persons.
3. Pursue and arrest any person fleeing from justice.
4. Apprehend any person in the act of violating the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city and bring him before competent
authority for examination and trial.
E. In the discharge of his proper duties, the police chief shall have the same powers and be subject to the same responsibilities as sheriffs
in similar cases. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-7E-4: SALARY:
The police chief shall receive as salary such compensation as may be fixed by the city council from time to time during the term of
appointment and shall be in an amount consistent with his duties and responsibilities. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
Footnote 1: NMSA § 3-13-2 (1978).
ARTICLE F. APPOINTED OFFICIALS
1-7F-1: APPOINTMENT:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 15/318
The city council may provide for the appointment of various appointed officials such as the chief administrative officer, directors, deputies
and assistants. The positions set out in subsections 1-8-6C1 through C14 inclusive of this title are examples of positions that may be
appointed by city council. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
Chapter 8
PERSONNEL SYSTEM
1-8-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the CITY OF DEMING PERSONNEL ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-8-2: GENERAL POLICY:
It is hereby declared the personnel policy of the city that:
A. The "City Of Deming Personnel Policies And Procedures Manual" adopted by city council, as amended from time to time, and the
"Administrative Regulations" promulgated by the city administrator, as amended from time to time, are hereby incorporated by reference
as part of this chapter. The "City Of Deming Personnel Policies And Procedures Manual" and the "Administrative Regulations" are held
to be supportive and supplemental to the policies and provisions of this chapter.
B. Employment in the city government shall be based on merit and fitness, free of personal and partisan political considerations.
C. Incentives and conditions of employment shall be established and maintained to promote efficiency and economy in the operation of the
city government.
D. Positions having similar duties and responsibilities, as determined by the city administrator, shall be classified and compensated on a
uniform basis.
E. Actions requiring the application of merit principles shall be based on tests and/or evaluations.
F. Consideration shall be given to the rights and interests of employees consistent with the best interests of the public and the city.
G. Continued employment of employees covered by this chapter shall be subject to good behavior, the satisfactory performance of work,
necessity for the performance of work and the availability of funds.
H. High morale shall be promoted by the fair administration of this chapter.
I. Every employee is expected to comply with the spirit and intent of the city's personnel system. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-8-3: CONFORMITY:
The city personnel system, as established by ordinance and rules and regulations, and as administered in accordance therewith, shall
conform to the foregoing policy. (Ord. 1046, 8-13-2001)
1-8-4: STATEMENT OF EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY POLICY:
A. Policy Statement: It is the city of Deming policy to hire, promote, train, and compensate employees without regard to age, race, religion,
color, national origin, ancestry, sex, physical or mental handicap, serious medical condition, spousal affiliation, sexual orientation, or
gender identity except in the case of a bona fide statutory exception.
B. Guidelines:
1. The city will affirmatively act to promote equal employment opportunity.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 16/318
2. The city is committed to training and educational programs as may be necessary, consistent with the needs of the city to encourage
protected classes including minority groups and female personnel, to prepare themselves for employment and advancement
opportunities.
3. The city will accommodate religious observances and practices of employees except where such accommodation would constitute a
hardship in the delivery of services to the public. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-8-5: ADMINISTRATION OF THE PERSONNEL SYSTEM:
A. City Administrator, General: The city administrator is responsible for the actual operation of the city's business, carrying out the wishes of
city council and supervising city employees directly or through the management and supervisory staff.
B. Powers And Duties: The city administrator or his designee shall perform the duties and have the powers concerning personnel matters
as follows:
1. Be responsible for administering the personnel system as promulgated in this chapter, the "City Of Deming Personnel Policies And
Procedures Manual" adopted by city council from time to time, and the "Administrative Regulations", promulgated by the said city
administrator from time to time.
2. Be responsible for the development, implementation and administration of the personnel policies and procedures subject to the
approval of city council.
3. Be responsible for the development, implementation and administration of the "Administrative Regulations".
4. Administer and maintain the personnel system and other rules and regulations established by this chapter and under its authority.
5. As necessary, develop, maintain and apply procedures for the recruitment, compensation, promotion, training, disciplinary and other
related aspects of personnel management for all personnel in the city departments, subject to the provisions of city ordinance, city
council policies and to personnel rules and regulations stated therein, or adopted pursuant to this chapter.
6. Develop, maintain and apply other supplemental rules and administrative regulations as are necessary for the effective
implementation of this chapter, city council policies and rules and regulations stated herein, or adopted pursuant to this chapter.
7. Recommend and administer contractual arrangements with any qualified person or agency for the performance of such technical
services as may be desired in the establishment and operation of the personnel system.
8. Delegate responsibility, in writing, to a personnel officer to administer all or parts of the personnel system. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
C. Exceptions To The Municipal Personnel System:
1. The municipal judge is responsible for establishing and carrying out policies and adopting rules and regulations for the recruitment,
hiring, selection, retention, promotion, demotion, layoff, discipline and separation and/or discharge of all municipal court employees
and for complying with all state and federal laws governing employment.
2. The municipal judge may choose to have court employees covered by the same personnel policies, ordinances, rules and regulations
covering other full time hourly paid municipal personnel as written in the "City Of Deming Personnel Policy And Procedures Manual",
but is not required to do so, since the court is a separate branch of municipal government. (Ord. 1230, 11-13-2012)
1-8-6: COMPETITIVE AND NONCOMPETITIVE SERVICE:
A. All city positions shall be classified as either competitive or noncompetitive. Elected officials and members of boards, commissions and
authorities who are not employees of the city shall not be included in either category. Employees who are in competitive positions are
covered under the fair labor standards act and are eligible for overtime pay, unless exempt for all hours worked in excess of forty (40)
hours per week in the case of regular employees, forty two (42) hours for police officers, or two hundred twelve (212) hours within a
twenty eight (28) day period in the case of firefighters.
B. The competitive service classification shall comprise all employees except those who are specifically placed in the noncompetitive
category by this chapter.
C. Employees in noncompetitive positions are not covered by the fair labor standards act and do not qualify for overtime. Employees in
these noncompetitive positions may include:
1. The city administrator.
2. The assistant city administrator.
3. Treasurer.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 17/318
4. Assistant treasurer.
5. Police chief.
6. Assistant police chief.
7. Fire chief.
8. Assistant fire chief.
9. Public works director.
10. Assistant public works director.
11. Community services director.
12. Assistant community services director.
13. City attorney.
14. Assistant city attorney.
15. Temporary, seasonal or emergency employees as defined in the "City Of Deming Personnel Policies And Procedures Manual".
D. Those persons specified in subsection C of this section, shall be entitled to all rights and privileges to which other employees are entitled
except appeal of disciplinary action or dismissal through the procedure provided herein. Those persons specified in subsections C1
through C14, inclusive, of this section shall be at will employees subject to the terms of any employment agreement. Temporary,
seasonal or emergency employees as defined in the "City Of Deming Personnel Policies And Procedures Manual" shall be at will
employees.
E. All persons holding positions in the city service on the effective date hereof which are classified as competitive positions, shall retain their
positions until discharged, demoted, promoted or transferred in accordance with the procedure established under this chapter. All
appointments to competitive positions on or after the effective date hereof shall be made in accordance with the rules and regulations
promulgated under this chapter. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-8-7: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. The "City Of Deming Personnel Policies And Procedures Manual" adopted by city council, as amended from time to time, is hereby
incorporated by reference as part of this chapter. The "City Of Deming Personnel Policies And Procedures Manual" is held to be
supportive and supplemental to the policies and provisions of this chapter.
B. The city administrator shall recommend such new or revised personnel rules and regulations as deemed desirable; and any other person
or organization proposing such rules or revisions shall first submit them to the city administrator for review and comment. The city
administrator shall submit to the city council the rules and regulations or revisions developed on his initiative; and in the case of those
submitted by others, shall submit them to the city council with his comments and recommendations.
C. The rules and regulations shall include: the classification of all city positions, based on the duties, authority and responsibility of each
position, with adequate provisions for reclassification of any position whenever warranted by changed circumstances as determined by
the city administrator; a pay plan for all city positions; methods for determining the merit and fitness of candidates for appointment or
promotion; policies and procedures regulating reduction in force and removal of employees; the hours of work, attendance regulations
and provisions for sick and vacation leave; policies and procedures governing persons holding provisional appointments; the policies
and procedures governing relationships with employee organizations; policies regarding in service training programs; and other
practices and procedures necessary to the administration of the city personnel system.
D. "Administrative Regulations", as promulgated by the city administrator, as amended from time to time, is hereby incorporated by
reference as part of this chapter. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-8-8: CLASSIFICATION AND PAY:
A. All positions subject to this chapter shall be classified according to their duties and responsibilities. A class of positions shall include
those positions sufficiently alike that they may generally bear the same descriptive title, be described by the same definition of duties
and responsibilities, be filled by persons of the same kind of qualification, and be compensated by the same salary scale.
B. The manner of establishing and maintaining the classification plan, of allocating individual positions to classes, and otherwise
administering the plan, and the effect of any allocation, reallocation, classification or reclassification of the status of an incumbent
employee shall be as provided in the personnel rules and regulations.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 18/318
C. There shall be a compensation plan consisting of a basic salary schedule approved by the city council, and the assignment of each class
to its appropriate scale in such schedule.
D. The salary plan shall be maintained and administered, and periodic salary adjustments based on quality and/or length of service shall be
made as provided in the personnel rules and regulations. (Ord. 1046, 8-13-2001)
1-8-9: EMPLOYMENT:
A. Employment and promotions in the competitive service shall be based on merit as determined by tests and/or measures of fitness as
provided by the "City Of Deming Personnel Policies And Procedures Manual".
B. On initial employment, the employee shall be deemed a probationary employee for a period of six (6) months or longer, if extended from
the date of hire. Firefighters and certified police officers shall serve a one year probationary period. Noncertified police officers shall
serve an eighteen (18) month probationary period.
C. The probationary period on an initial hire is employment in an at will status. The probationary period is an integral part of the evaluation
and selection process, during which time the employee will be closely observed to determine the fitness of the employee to continue in
the city service. This time may also be used to terminate any new probationary at will employee for cause or for no cause. Upon
satisfactory documentation and completion of the probationary period, the employee shall be considered a regular nonprobationary
employee in the employee category for which he was hired. Employee categories are set out in the "City Of Deming Personnel Policies
And Procedures Manual".
D. When an employee is promoted or transferred, the employee shall serve a trial period of six (6) months. If during the six (6) month trial
period it is determined the employee is suitable, he shall become a regular employee. If during the six (6) month trial period it is
determined the employee's performance or conduct is unsatisfactory in the new position, he may be removed from that position and
returned to his former or similar position, if such position is available. If no such position is available, the employee will be laid off in
accordance with the policy set out in the "City Of Deming Personnel Policies And Procedures Manual". If, however, at the end of the trial
period it is apparent that the promoted or transferred employee could qualify with more training time, the trial period may be extended by
the city administrator.
E. Whenever a vacancy exists for which there is not an appropriate list of eligible candidates available, a provisional/probationary
appointment may be made by the city administrator pending the examination or other test of fitness required by the "City Of Deming
Personnel Policies And Procedures Manual". A provisional appointment may not be continued more than thirty (30) days beyond the
availability of a list of qualified eligible candidates and in any event may not be continued for more than six (6) months; nor may any
person serve under one or more provisional appointments for more than six (6) months in any consecutive twelve (12) months. Provided
that the provisions of this section may be waived by the city council in the event that it is determined that a qualified person is not
available to fill such vacancy.
F. The service of a person serving under a provisional appointment may be terminated at any time without recourse to the procedures
applying to dismissal or to reduction of force.
G. A "temporary or seasonal employee" is defined as an employee hired or assigned to a position for a period of time not to exceed six (6)
months for employees working less than forty (40) hours per week or nine (9) months for employees working forty (40) hours per week.
Temporary or seasonal positions shall be filled from a list of qualified eligible candidates or by a provisional appointment if necessary.
H. In lieu of any other form or manner of employment, a vacancy may be filled by the reinstatement of any former probationary or regular
nonprobationary employee who resigned in good standing as determined by the hiring management staff; provided the city administrator
certifies that such former employee is qualified to fill the position.
I. In lieu of any other form or manner of employment, a vacancy may be filled by the transfer of an employee, either voluntarily or by
reassignment by management, with the approval of the city administrator, from another position of the same or closely related class.
J. The "City Of Deming Personnel Policies And Procedures Manual" and the "Administrative Regulations", both as amended from time to
time, shall prescribe the standards and procedures to govern all categories of employment, reinstatements and transfers authorized by
this section. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-8-10: TERMINATIONS AND REDUCTIONS:
A. The city does not guarantee continued permanent employment and any employee may be terminated for cause without regard to age,
race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, physical or mental handicap, serious medical condition, spousal affiliation, sexual
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 19/318
orientation, or gender identity, except in the case of a bona fide statutory exception.
B. An employee may initiate a voluntary termination from city employer by resignation or retirement. When an employee initiates a
termination he is expected to submit written notice to his department head or supervisor at least two (2) weeks prior to the termination
date. Failure to do so may affect the employee's eligibility for rehire.
C. The city may initiate an involuntary termination of an employee from city employment for several reasons, including, but not limited to:
1. Termination of a probationary or provisional employee or an employee on temporary assignment for cause or without cause, during
the at will probationary period.
2. Violation of employee responsibilities.
3. Employee misconduct.
4. Insubordination.
5. Failure to perform duties satisfactorily.
6. Failure to qualify for the position held.
7. Layoff due to lack of work, economic shortfall or reorganization.
8. Failure to report to work.
D. In the event of a termination during the probationary period, the terminated employee may be restored to the eligible list for consideration
for employment with another department if the city administrator finds that the circumstances so warrant.
E. Dismissals, suspensions, demotions or reductions in pay of regular nonprobationary employees for cause shall be subject to appeal and
review according to the procedures prescribed in section 1-8-11 of this chapter and in the "City Of Deming Personnel Policies And
Procedures Manual".
F. An employee may be demoted to an unfilled position, where such position exists, in a lower class for which he is qualified, with the
concurrence of the city administrator:
1. When the employee would otherwise be laid off because the employee's position is being abolished, the position is reclassified to a
lower class, there is a lack of work, a lack of funding exists, or, as a result of the return to work from an authorized leave of another
employee to such position in accordance with the rules on leave.
2. When the employee does not possess the necessary qualifications, and/or does not render satisfactory service or conduct in the
position.
3. When the employee voluntarily requests such demotion.
4. As part of a disciplinary action.
G. If it is necessary to reduce the workforce on account of a lack of work, lack of funds, reorganization, the elimination of function or position
or in the interests of economy and efficiency, employees shall be laid off after consideration of relative qualifications and seniority under
procedures prescribed in the "City Of Deming Personnel Policies And Procedures Manual".
H. The voluntary resignation of an employee may be accepted without prejudice, or may be accepted with prejudice if the employee has
given insufficient notice or resigns to avoid dismissal or other disciplinary action. If a resignation is accepted with prejudice, the
employee shall not be eligible for reinstatement and will be so notified.
I. An employee absent without authorized leave under conditions as set out in the "City Of Deming Personnel Policies And Procedures
Manual" will be regarded as having provided just cause for termination. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-8-11: DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURE:
A. General Policy Statement: Individuals accepting employment with the city must also accept certain responsibilities for common sense
behavior that provides the basis for employees to work together safely, effectively and harmoniously. Common sense behavior includes,
but is not limited to: being concerned with personal safety as well as the safety and well being of others; serving the general public
effectively and courteously; willingness to comply with instructions that do not create a health or safety violation; being mentally alert and
ready to work as assigned; and, acting in the city's best interests at all times.
The city and its citizens expect reasonable conduct and work habits from every city employee. Where it is appropriate, as determined by
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 20/318
the city, the city will use progressive discipline. Disciplinary action will be based on the severity and/or the frequency of reoccurrence of
the infraction. For some offenses, dismissal, demotion, or any other action may result from a single instance and may not be preceded
by lesser forms of discipline for the same or other offenses. The city reserves the right to determine in its sole discretion the appropriate
disciplinary measures to be imposed in any given case.
B. Eligible Employees: Probationary employees and temporary or casual or intern appointed employees are at will employees and do not
have appeal and/or grievance rights. All other employees have appeal and/or grievance rights.
C. Department Standard Operating Procedures: Any personnel may be subject to any departmental standard operating procedures for
actions involving discipline including, but not limited to, written reprimands, suspensions, demotions, or, dismissals. Said standard
operating procedures are subject to the recommendation of the department head and the approval of the city administrator.
D. Causes For Discipline: Causes for discipline are set out in the "City Of Deming Personnel Policies And Procedures Manual".
E. Predetermination Conference: The initiating department head or supervisor and human resources will meet with the employee and
discuss any proposed disciplinary action. The purpose of the meeting is not to provide an evidentiary hearing, but to provide an
opportunity for the employee to present his side of the issue. After the meeting, the department head or supervisor will notify the
employee of his decision and, if disciplinary action is to be imposed, what the discipline is to be. Prior to initiating any disciplinary action,
the initiating supervisor must obtain the concurrence of his department head. Approval of the city administrator must be obtained in all
cases of suspension, demotion or dismissal.
If the department head's or supervisor's decision is to discipline the employee, that decision is effective immediately, unless otherwise
stated.
F. Dismissal For Cause: A regular nonprobationary employee may be dismissed, demoted with a reduction in pay or suspended for a stated
cause relating to his work performance or personal conduct, or other cause, which cause shall be stated in writing in the notice of such
action.
G. Action Subject To Appeal: Upon service of such notice of action to be taken, the action indicated shall be taken, subject to the appeal
procedure provided in this section.
H. Grievance Filing: Upon receipt of the notice of dismissal, demotion or suspension, a regular nonprobationary employee may, within ten
(10) days of such action, file a written grievance with the city administrator. Failure to file a timely grievance shall render the grievance
null and void and shall not be heard. In the event the last day for filing a grievance falls on Saturday, Sunday or on a legal holiday, the
appeal may be filed on the next working day. Such appeal shall be instituted by the filing by such employee of a notice with the city
administrator, which notice shall state the grounds for such appeal. Upon receipt of a timely grievance, the city administrator will appoint
a hearing officer to hear the appeal. No less than five (5) days nor more than thirty (30) calendar days from the filing of such notice, the
hearing officer shall conduct an open and public hearing thereon and thereafter shall file an advisory decision within five (5) calendar
days with the city administrator proposing that he affirm, reverse or modify the action or decision of the city administrator and stating the
reasons therefor. A copy of such advisory decision, and the reasons therefor, will be furnished to the grievant. The city administrator or
his designee shall, within ten (10) calendar days after the filing of an advisory decision by the hearing officer, make his final decision in
the matter; a copy of which shall, forthwith, be furnished to the employee.
I. Costs: The regular nonprobationary employee shall pay a filing fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) and the fee must be paid at the time
of filing the grievance for the grievance to be considered timely and properly filed. The nonprobationary employee shall pay any and all
costs he may incur during the processing of any grievance. The city shall pay its own costs and the cost of the hearing officer.
J. Appeal To City Council: A further appeal may be taken from the decision of the city administrator to the city council. Such written appeal
to the city council shall be taken within thirty (30) calendar days of the final action of the city administrator and shall be governed by the
same rules and procedures as appeals to the hearing officer. The decision of the city council thereon shall be final.
K. Reversal Of Decision: Where, through the appeal procedure provided in this section, the decision complained of is reversed or modified,
the order of such reversal or modification may include a provision for the restoration of all or part of the pay and/or personnel benefits
lost because of the decision appealed from. The provision for restoration of all or part of the pay and/or personnel benefits shall become
effective upon approval by the city council. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-8-12: GRIEVANCE/COMPLAINT PROCEDURE:
A. Economic Versus Noneconomic Issues: The grievance/complaint procedure described in this section shall include grievances/complaints
involving both economic and noneconomic issues. For purposes of this section, a "noneconomic" issue is one arising out of an alleged
misapplication or misinterpretation by the city of this chapter or the rules and regulations set out in the "City Of Deming Personnel
Policies And Procedures Manual", which issue has no negative monetary impact on the employee. An "economic" issue is one arising
out of an alleged misapplication or misinterpretation by the city of this chapter or the rules and regulations set out in the "City Of Deming
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 21/318
Personnel Policies And Procedures Manual", which issue has an actual, negative monetary impact on the employee, as opposed to an
anticipated negative impact.
B. Understanding The Review Process: Nothing contained in this section, or the "City Of Deming Personnel Policies And Procedures
Manual" or any "Administrative Regulations" promulgated by the city administrator from time to time, that relate to the
grievance/complaint procedure shall in any way interfere with the city's right to manage and administer all city affairs.
C. Means Of Resolution: The procedures set out in this section or related procedures set out in the "City Of Deming Personnel Policies And
Procedures Manual" or any "Administrative Regulations" promulgated by the city administrator from time to time, shall be the sole and
exclusive means of resolving all grievances and complaints, except for the process set out in section 1-8-11 of this chapter.
D. Definitions: For the purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply:
COMPLAINTS: Differences of opinion, disagreements or disputes arising out of the interpretation or application of the city's personnel
policies as set out in this chapter or the "City Of Deming Personnel Policies And Procedures Manual" or any "Administrative
Regulations" promulgated by the city administrator from time to time. Complaints shall first be discussed informally between the
complainant and his immediate supervisor.
GRIEVANCES: "Complaints", as defined in this section, which are not resolved between the grievant and his immediate supervisor and
which are entered into the formal review process.
TIME LIMITS: Hours used as a time limit include the whole twenty four (24) hour calendar day. When the deadline falls on a holiday,
Saturday or Sunday, the deadline shall extend to the next day that city hall is open for business.
E. First Step: When an employee has a complaint as defined in subsection D of this section, he shall discuss the complaint with his
immediate supervisor on an informal basis and attempt to resolve it.
1. The employee shall initiate the discussion with his immediate supervisor within seventy two (72) hours following the date of the
incident giving rise to the complaint or from the date the employee knew or should have known of the issue that generated the
complaint.
2. Complaints affecting more than one department, suspension without pay, dismissal, demotion, sexual harassment or discrimination
charges, must be filed, in writing, directly to the city administrator within seventy two (72) hours of the occurrence of the incident or
from the date the employee knew or should have known of the incident.
F. Second Step: If a complaint is not resolved at the first step stage as set out in subsection E of this section, and the complainant so
desires, he may file a formal written grievance with the city administrator within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the incident that
generated the initial complaint/grievance. The written grievance shall include the identification of the language in question, a brief and
concise statement of the grievance, the date of the incident that generated the grievance, the name of the employee's department head,
the relief requested (a general statement such as "make the employee whole" is not acceptable), and the grievance must be dated. The
following procedure shall apply:
1. Second step grievances shall be considered for resolution by an official designated by the city administrator.
2. The grievant shall submit the grievance to the office of the city administrator for review by a city representative appointed by the city
administrator.
3. The grievant shall set a meeting with the city's representative in an attempt to resolve the grievance.
4. If the grievance is not resolved at this level and the grievant desires to pursue the grievance, the grievant shall, within fifteen (15) days
following the date of filing at the second step, file a written request for hearing of the final resolution before a hearing officer appointed
by the city administrator. The cost of the hearing officer shall be paid by the city. The grievant shall pay a filing fee of two hundred
dollars ($200.00) and such fee must be paid at the time of filing for the grievance to be considered timely and properly filed.
5. The hearing officer shall set a hearing date that is mutually acceptable to the parties.
6. The decision of the hearing officer shall be rendered within thirty (30) calendar days of the hearing date and the decision of the
hearing officer is advisory. The city council reserves its authority as elected officials to make the final decision and either accept,
reject, or modify the decision of the hearing officer. The decision of the council is final and binding on management and the employee.
7. If any time limit identified in this grievance process is not met, the grievance shall be considered untimely and no further action shall
be taken with respect to the grievance.
G. General Information:
1. The grievant shall pay any expenses he incurs during the processing of grievances.
2. The city's representative shall be responsible for making necessary arrangements for all hearings.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 22/318
3. Grievants shall be permitted to call a reasonable number of witnesses during grievance meetings provided they are able to give
testimony pertinent to the case under review.
4. Complete records shall be kept of grievances, including the manner in which they are resolved.
5. The city shall advise the grievant of the time, date, and place of hearings. If the grievant fails to attend any grievance hearing, the
grievance will be resolved on the basis of the facts known to the city.
6. The formal rules of evidence and civil procedure applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply to this grievance process. (Ord.
1182, 12-8-2008)
1-8-13: PROHIBITIONS:
A. Financial Interest: Any city employee who has a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any corporation, firm or person contracting
business with the city in the sale of land, material, supplies or services to the city shall make known that interest in writing to the city
council and shall refrain from voting or otherwise participating in the making of such a contract or sale. Any city employee who wilfully
conceals such financial interest or wilfully violates the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance of office or position and
shall have provided cause for termination of employment with the City. Violation of this section with the knowledge express or implied of
the person or corporation contracting with or making sale to the City shall render the contract voidable by the City Council.
B. Accepting Free Services, Gifts: No City employee shall accept any free or preferred services, rewards, gifts or favors from any
corporation, firm or person contracting business or proposing to contract business with the City.
C. Activities Restricted: Each officer and employee shall, during his hours of active duty, devote his whole time, attention and efforts to his
office or employment, and he may not perform any service except for the benefit of the City. No officer or employee of the City may
engage in any employment, activity or enterprise which has been determined to be inconsistent, incompatible or in conflict with his
duties or with the duties, functions and responsibilities of the department or other agency in which he is employed. Each department
head, with the approval of the City Administrator, shall determine the activities which will be considered inconsistent, incompatible or in
conflict. In making determination, consideration shall be given, among other things, to employment, activity or enterprise which: 1)
involves the use for private gain or advantage of City time, or the badge, uniform, prestige or influence of one's City office or
employment; or 2) involves receipt by the officer or employee of any money or other consideration for the performance of any act
required by him as a City officer or employee; or 3) involves the performance of an act in other than his capacity as City officer or
employee which act may later be subject, directly or indirectly, to control, inspection, review, audit or enforcement by him or by the
agency in which he is employed. Regular full time City employees shall submit a written request annually and receive approval from the
department head and the City Administrator prior to participating in other employment in addition to City employment. (Ord. 1046, 8-13-
2001)
D. Elected Office: The City Council finds that certain political activities are inconsistent with merit principles and are not in the best interests
of the City or its employees. Therefore, the following political activities are prohibited or restricted:
1. No City employee shall engage in any partisan political activity during his hours of work for the City.
2. No City person shall solicit, orally or by letter, or be in any manner concerned in soliciting any assessment, subscription or contribution
for any political party or for any partisan political purpose whatever from any City employee during such City employee's hours of work
for the City.
3. No City employee shall, during his hours of work for the City, solicit or receive any contribution to the campaign funds of any partisan
political organization or any partisan candidate for public County, State or Federal office or take any policy making or fundraising part
in the management or partisan political campaign of any partisan political organization or any partisan candidate for public County,
State or Federal office.
4. No City employee shall use his/her position or employment to influence support from other City employees for or against any
candidate or issue in any election, provided, however, that nothing in this section shall deny the right of an employee to express
his/her views on any issue or candidate whatsoever during nonworking hours.
5. No City employee shall engage in political activity while on the job.
6. There shall be no use of City bulletin board or other City property for political purposes.
7. No regular full-time City employee shall hold an elective office of the State of New Mexico or any of its political subdivisions without
formal written approval granted by a majority vote of the City Council, in consideration and determination that a conflict of interest
does not exist; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent any City employee from seeking
election to an elective position. If it is determined that a conflict of interest exists, the same rule as if elected to a Municipal office will
apply. Such employee may request a leave of absence without pay from his position beginning nine (9) calendar days prior to and
including the day of any primary, Municipal, County or general election in which such employee shall be a candidate. A leave of
absence may be granted by the City Administrator if the vacancy does not negatively affect the daily operations of the City. Paid time
off may be substituted with approval from the City Administrator. If not elected, upon completion of his leave of absence, the employee
shall be reinstated to his former position. If elected to a Municipal office, employee must submit a letter of resignation from current
employment with the City of Deming within three (3) calendar days. (Ord. 1267, 12-11-2017)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 23/318
E. Off Hour Political Activities: Nothing in this section or chapter shall be construed to restrict other proper off hours political activities, to
prohibit any employee from making voluntary contributions for political purposes, to restrict the right of employees to vote as they may
choose, or to restrict the right of employees to express their opinions on political subjects and candidates or to attend general political
meetings.
F. Suspension Or Dismissal For Violation: Any employee who by himself or with others wilfully violates any provision of this section is
subject to suspension or dismissal from the City service. (Ord. 1046, 8-13-2001)
1-8-14: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
A. Discrimination: No person in the service of the City or person seeking admission to the service of the City shall be appointed, promoted,
demoted/removed or in any way favored or discriminated against because of his race, national origin, political or religious opinions or
affiliations, age, disability or sex.
B. False Statements: No person shall wilfully make any false statement, certificate, mark, rating or report in regard to any test, certification
or appointment held or made under this chapter or in any manner commit any fraud preventing or for the purpose of preventing the
proper or impartial execution of this chapter.
C. Payment For Appointment Or Promotion: No person seeking appointment or promotion in the service of the City shall either directly or
indirectly give, render or pay any money, service or other valuable thing to any person for or on account of or in connection with his test,
appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotion; provided, however, that the provisions hereof shall not apply to
payments made to duly licensed employment agencies.
D. Disability: Employees who have suffered an on the job disability or who cannot perform their duties, as determined by the City
Administrator, shall be placed in light duty positions that they are qualified and able to perform within the City service whenever
practicable and when such work is available. (Ord. 1046, 8-13-2001)
1-8-15: PENAL PROVISIONS:
Any person violating subsection 1-8-13D2 of this chapter, unless otherwise disciplined under this chapter for such violation, may be
punished as provided by the general penalty in section 1-4-1 of this title, upon conviction thereof and in the discretion of the City. (Ord.
1046, 8-13-2001; amd. 2001 Code)
Chapter 8A
LABOR-MANAGEMENT RELATIONS
1-8A-1: APPLICABILITY:
A. In the event of conflict with other city of Deming ordinances or code provisions, the provisions of the city labor-management relations
ordinance shall govern.
B. The city of Deming rules and regulations, administrative directives, departmental rules and regulations, and workplace practices shall
govern employee relations unless there is a specific conflict with a collective bargaining agreement. Where a specific conflict exists the
collective bargaining agreement shall govern. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-8A-2: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter may be cited as the CITY OF DEMING LABOR-MANAGEMENT RELATIONS ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-8A-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
APPROPRIATE BARGAINING UNIT: A citywide group of employees designated by the board, in accordance with the parameters set forth
in this chapter, for the purpose of collective bargaining.
BOARD: The city labor-management relations board comprised of members chosen pursuant to the provisions of section 1-8A-14 of this
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 24/318
chapter.
CITY EMPLOYEE: Any classified regular full time nonprobationary employee of the city of Deming except officials elected by popular vote
or appointed to fill vacancies in elective offices; members of boards, commissions and heads of agencies appointed by the city council;
heads of agencies appointed by boards and commissions; management employees; supervisors; temporary or seasonal employees;
employees paid wholly and directly from funds of the United States government; and individuals privy to confidential matters of city
government as further defined in subsection 1-8A-5B of this chapter.
CITY GOVERNMENT: The government of the city of Deming acting through and for its agencies, departments, divisions, branches and
bureaus.
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: A procedure whereby representatives of the city government, generally not elected officials, and an exclusive
representative meet, confer, consult and negotiate with one another in a good faith effort to reach agreement or otherwise resolve
differences relating or with another in a good faith effort to reach agreement or otherwise resolve differences relating or with respect to
wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment.
EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION: Any organization or labor union whose primary purpose is to represent city employees in collective
bargaining on matters pertaining to wages, working conditions and terms and conditions of employment, but it does not include any
organization:
A. Which advocates the overthrow of the constitutional form of government in the United States by other than lawful means;
B. Which discriminates with regard to the terms or conditions of membership because of age, race, religion, color, national origin,
ancestry, sex, physical or mental handicap, serious medical condition, spousal affiliation, sexual orientation, or gender identity except
in the case of a bona fide statutory exception; or
C. Which has a primary purpose other than representing employees in collective bargaining with their employer or other than as an
association or organization formed for the advancement of, or in behalf of, a specific profession or vocation.
EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE: A labor organization that, as a result of certification by the city administrator, represents all employees in
an appropriate bargaining unit for the purposes of collective bargaining.
IMPASSE: The failure of the parties to agree with respect to any issue or issues which are subject to collective bargaining over which the
parties have negotiated in good faith, with respect to which neither party is willing to make further concessions.
MANAGEMENT EMPLOYEE: An employee who is engaged primarily in executive and management functions and is charged with the
responsibility of developing, administering or effectuating management policies.
PROFESSIONAL EMPLOYEE: Any city employee engaged in work:
A. Which is predominately intellectual and varied in character as opposed to routine mental, manual, mechanical or physical work;
B. Which involves the consistent exercise of discretion and judgment in its performance;
C. Which is of such a character that the output produced or the result accomplished cannot be standardized in relation to a given time
period; and
D. Which requires knowledge of an advanced type in a field of science or learning customarily acquired by a prolonged course of a
specialized intellectual instruction and study in an institution of higher learning or hospital, as distinguished from an apprenticeship or
from training in the performance of routine mental, manual, mechanical or physical processes.
STRIKE: The wilful failure or refusal by employees to report for duty; wilful absence from an employee's assigned position; the complete or
partial cessation of work by an employee; a concerted work to rule action, or the abnormal abstinence in whole or in part from the full,
faithful and proper performance of the duties of employment by city employees where a purpose of such action is to induce, influence or
coerce a change in, or the enforcement of, any claimed representation right or any term or condition of employment or compensation or any
right, privilege or obligation of employment or any term or provision of a collective bargaining agreement or proposal advanced in the course
of collective bargaining. The definition of strike includes, but is not limited to, such action as, the blue flu, sick outs, slowdowns, traffic ticket
writing campaigns, mass resignations, sympathy strikes, or wilful interference with the operation to the employer. For the purposes of this
chapter the threat of any such activity by the union, its officers or representatives. Individual members of the union making threats may be
disciplined individually without affecting the standing of the union.
SUPERVISOR: Any individual having authority in the interest of the city employer to hire, transfer, suspend, lay off, recall, promote,
discharge, assign, reward or discipline other employees, or to adjust their grievances, or effectively to recommend any of the actions listed
above. In the police department lieutenants, captains and higher ranks shall be classified as supervisors and in the fire department captains
and higher ranks shall be classified as supervisors. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-8A-4: RIGHT TO ORGANIZE AND BARGAIN COLLECTIVELY:
City employees have the right to form, join and otherwise participate in the lawful activities of an employee organization of their own
choosing for the purpose of bargaining collectively with city government and for other lawful reasons. City employees also have the right to
refuse to join and participate in the activities of employee organizations. An employee organization which has been certified by the city
administrator as the exclusive bargaining representative for an appropriate bargaining unit of city employees may bargain collectively with
city government concerning wages, working conditions and other terms and conditions of employment.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 25/318
A. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to limit, impair or affect the rights of an individual city employee who does not have
an exclusive representative to the expression or communication of a view, grievance, complaint or opinion on any matter related to the
conditions or compensation of city employment or their betterment aside from the method described herein, so long as the same is not
designed to and does not interfere with the full, faithful and proper performance of the duties of that employee's employment.
B. No organization, its representative or other individual shall be allowed to solicit membership from an employee organization or labor
union during employees' duty hours.
C. Every employee organization representing city employees pursuant to this chapter shall submit at least annually to the city administrator
a detailed financial report detailing financial receipt and expenditures, including payments to officers, agents and representatives. (Ord.
1182, 12-8-2008)
1-8A-5: DETERMINATION OF BARGAINING UNITS:
Upon authentication by the city administrator of a valid petition and supporting employee signatures, the appropriateness of the bargaining
unit will be investigated and determined by the board. Such determination must conform to the parameters set forth in this chapter.
A. Bargaining units will consist of the following four (4) citywide units: 1) labor, trades and crafts (unskilled, semiskilled and skilled
employees); 2) clerical-technical-professional (clerical, paraprofessional and professional employees); 3) police; and 4) fire. Individual
crafts will not be designated as bargaining units.
B. A bargaining unit shall not include supervisors or security personnel charged with protecting the employer's property other than
commissioned police officers and jailers. Nor shall it include those privy to confidential information, including, but not limited to,
employees of the personnel department, risk management department, data processing department, city administrator's office, the city
attorney's office, secretaries to department heads, employees involved in payroll work and any person privy to confidential information
concerning employee relations. No labor organization shall be allowed to represent police officers if it represents other city employees.
(Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-8A-6: DETERMINATION OF REPRESENTATION:
A. Any employee organization may file a written request with the city administrator asserting that a majority of the members of a bargaining
unit as defined in section 1-8A-5 of this chapter desires to be represented by it for the purpose of collective bargaining and asking to be
recognized as the exclusive bargaining representative. The request shall include a demonstration of support of at least thirty percent
(30%) of the employees in the bargaining unit by means of an individually dated membership list or signed and individually dated
membership cards of those employees desiring representation. No signature that is dated more than nine (9) months before the filing of
the petition shall be counted toward the showing of interest. Notice of the request shall be posted by the city personnel department in a
place conspicuous to city employees in the bargaining unit on the next working day following the filing of the request. The posting of this
notice shall not be construed as an authentication of the signatures.
B. Other employee organizations may file, within ten (10) days after the posting of the notice of the request as specified in subsection A of
this section, a written claim with the city administrator showing a demonstration of support of at least ten percent (10%) of the
employees in the bargaining unit by means of a dated membership list or signed and dated membership cards of those employees
desiring representation.
Notice of this claim shall also be posted by the city personnel department in a place conspicuous to city employees in the bargaining unit
on the five (5) calendar days following filing of the claim.
C. Upon the authentication of the list or cards and the determination of an adequate showing of interest, the city administrator shall so
advise the board. If there is no dispute over the composition of the bargaining unit, the board shall call and hold a representation
election within forty five (45) days from the posting of the notice that a petition has been filed. If there is a dispute over the composition
of the bargaining unit the board shall conduct a hearing to determine the outcome of such dispute. The board shall then call and hold an
election within forty five (45) days of the determination by the board of the composition of the bargaining unit. Such election shall not be
held if:
1. There is currently in effect a lawful written agreement between the city and an exclusive bargaining representative for the bargaining
unit involved; and
2. Within the preceded twelve (12) months there has been held a representation election or a decertification election for the bargaining
unit; or
3. In the opinion of the board after holding such hearing as may be appropriate, the bargaining unit described in the request for
representation is not an appropriate unit in accordance with this chapter or such appropriateness has not yet been determined by the
board. If the board subsequently determines that the requested bargaining unit is appropriate, the board shall then call and hold a
representation election.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 26/318
D. The board shall call and hold all elections within the time limits established by this chapter and according to the following:
1. Included on the ballot in a representation election shall be any employee organization which has submitted evidence of support of at
least thirty percent (30%) of the city employees in the bargaining unit in accordance with subsection A of this section, any employee
organization which has submitted evidence of support of at least ten percent (10%) of the city employees in the bargaining unit in
accordance with subsection B of this section, and a choice for no representation. The choices on a ballot in a decertification election
shall be the incumbent exclusive bargaining representative and no representation;
2. Voting shall be by secret ballot;
3. All city employees in the bargaining unit involved shall have the right to vote;
4. If the majority of the city employees in the bargaining unit vote in favor of representation by an employee organization for the purpose
of collective bargaining as provided by this chapter, the city administrator shall certify that employee organization as the exclusive
bargaining representative for the bargaining unit. If a majority of the employees in the unit do not vote for representation by an
employee organization, the unit shall not be represented.
E. Election disputes shall be resolved by the board. In the event of an election involving more than one employee organization in which no
choice on the ballot receives the vote of a majority of the city employees in the bargaining unit, then and in such event a runoff election
shall be held within thirty (30) days with a choice consisting of the employee organization receiving the greatest number of votes in the
original election and the choice of no representation. A runoff election may occur only if the combined votes for the two (2) or more
employees' representatives comprise a majority of the bargaining unit. The determination of representative status in such runoff election
shall be governed by the provisions set forth in subsection D of this section.
F. The exclusive representative shall represent the interests of all employees in the appropriate bargaining unit without discrimination or
regard to membership in a labor organization.
G. The decertification of any employee organization which has been recognized as the exclusive bargaining representative of employees in
an appropriate bargaining unit may be effected by the filing of a written request for decertification supported by either a showing that
thirty percent (30%) of the employees in the bargaining unit seek to have a decertification election or a statement by city government
that it harbors a good faith doubt that the exclusive bargaining representative has the support of the majority of the employees in the
bargaining unit. If, in the opinion of the board, the showing of interest in support of such a petition is sufficient or, in the case of a petition
filed by city government, there is objective evidence to support a good faith doubt as to the majority status of the exclusive bargaining
agent, the board shall call and hold a decertification election within forty five (45) days from the date of the receipt of the request. The
ballot for decertification will include the choice of the exclusive representative and no representative. If the majority of the employees in
the bargaining unit do not vote in favor of the exclusive representative, the city administrator shall decertify the exclusive representative.
H. No decertification election shall be held if within the preceding twelve (12) months the board has held a representation election or a
decertification election for the bargaining unit.
I. No petition for representation or decertification shall be entertained by the board unless such petition and the requisite showing of support
therefor shall have been filed with the board during the thirty (30) day period between the one hundred twentieth day and the thirtieth
day immediately preceding the expiration date of the contract. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-8A-7: DUTY TO BARGAIN:
A. City government and any employee organization recognized as the exclusive representative for a unit, through their designated agents,
shall bargain concerning all wages, working conditions and other terms and conditions of employment not in violation of law or local
ordinance. The methods and procedures of initial employment, establishing classified and unclassified employees, performance
evaluation, promotional procedures, the right to discipline and discharge employees are nonnegotiable issues. The duty to bargain
includes an obligation to confer in good faith with respect to wages, working conditions and terms and conditions of employment, to
execute a written contract incorporating any agreement reached, but does not require either party to agree to a specific proposal or
make a concession.
B. The duty to bargain on economic issues is limited to the funding appropriated by the city council. Multiyear agreements are subject to the
city council appropriating sufficient funds to fund the collective bargaining agreement for subsequent years. Should this not occur, either
party may reopen negotiations on the sections of the agreement affected. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-8A-8: MANAGEMENT RIGHTS:
Subject to existing law management rights include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. To hire, promote, reclassify, transfer, assign, lay off and recall employees;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 27/318
B. To reprimand, suspend, demote, discharge or otherwise discipline employees;
C. To evaluate and judge the employee's skill, ability, efficiency and general performance;
D. To revise, eliminate, combine or establish new jobs and job classifications;
E. To establish job qualifications for new and existing employees;
F. To establish, organize, reorganize, close down, expand or otherwise change the operation of any city facility, division or department and
reduce, increase, alter, combine, transfer or cease any department's operation, equipment or service;
G. To establish working hours, size and composition of work forces, shifts or units, and otherwise determine staffing requirements;
H. To subcontract, contract for goods and services, and otherwise determine the methods or means by which operations and services are to
be delivered, made or purchased;
I. To maintain the efficiency of city government and to take actions as may be necessary to carry out the mission of the city government in
emergencies;
J. To manage and to exercise judgment on all matters not specifically prohibited by this chapter or by a collective bargaining agreement in
effect between the city employer and an employee organization; and
K. The rights of management shall not be diminished or subjugated in any way by any expressed or implied duty or obligation to bargain.
(Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-8A-9: PROHIBITED PRACTICES:
A. City government and its agents or employees are prohibited from:
1. Interfering with the formation or administration of any employee organization;
2. Interfering with the selection of an agent or representative for bargaining or adjustment of grievances;
3. Discrimination in regard to hiring or conditions of employment for the purpose of encouraging or discouraging membership in any
employee organization;
4. Refusing to negotiate in good faith with a certified exclusive bargaining representative of an employee organization;
5. Discharging or discriminating against a city employee because that employee has filed charges or given testimony under the
provisions of this chapter. This provision may not be used as immunity from discipline;
6. Violating a written agreement in force which was negotiated under the provisions of this chapter. However, the parties may agree to a
grievance procedure in a collective bargaining agreement for the purpose of adjudicating disputes over the meaning of the collective
bargaining agreement. In that event the provisions of this subsection shall not apply.
B. An employee organization, its agent or representative, a group of city employees, or a city employee individually is prohibited from:
1. Interfering with, restraining or coercing employees in the exercise of their designated duties or their rights under this chapter;
2. Restraining, coercing or interfering with the public employer in the selection of its agent for bargaining or for adjustment of grievances;
3. Causing or attempting to cause a city supervisor to discriminate against a city employee because of membership in an employee
organization;
4. Refusing to negotiate and/or conduct business in good faith with the designated representative of city government;
5. Violating the provisions of any written agreement or this chapter in force, or attempting to cause a change or causing a change to an
existing written agreement or this chapter other than through the negotiating process identified in this chapter;
6. Interfering with, restraining or coercing any official, administrative officer or representative of city government in the conduct of their
city duties, private business or personal affairs;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 28/318
7. Engaging in, inducing, threatening, or encouraging any city employee or group of employees to engage in a strike, a work stoppage
or work slowdown;
8. Picketing and/or boycotting the residences and/or business of city employees and elected officials;
9. Using city property, time or money for union business;
10. During the negotiating process, including the impasse procedure, employees are prohibited from attempting to negotiate with or
disclosing to city elected officials and management employees any information, bargaining strategy, term(s) or issue(s) which are the
subject of negotiations between the city and the exclusive representative. It is the intent of this provision that all negotiations and
concessions occur only between the members of the respective negotiating teams.
C. An employee organization that represents city employees may not assist or endorse a candidate in a city election.
D. It shall be a prohibited practice for any elected official of city government to attempt to negotiate or to negotiate directly with any
employee organization or a group of city employees or individual city employees who are members of a bargaining unit. All negotiations
shall be conducted between the negotiating teams as identified, in writing, by the parties.
E. Any controversy concerning prohibited practices will be submitted to the board within thirty (30) days of the occurrence of the alleged
prohibited practice. Proceedings against the party alleged to have committed a prohibited practice shall be commenced by service upon
it and the board of a written notice together with a copy of the charges and the relief requested. The accused party shall have fourteen
(14) calendar days within which to serve a written answer to such charges. If the board finds that reasonable cause exists to believe that
a prohibited practice has occurred, it will, within five (5) working days, schedule a hearing to be held in a reasonable time thereafter. The
parties shall be permitted to be represented by counsel and/or a personal representative and to summon witnesses and submit
evidence, although formal rules of evidence shall not be strictly applied. The board may promulgate reasonable rules or regulations
concerning these proceedings or the conduct of other proceedings before it pursuant to this chapter.
F. The board shall determine if a prohibited practice has been committed according to this chapter, shall state its findings of fact and shall
report its findings to the city administrator. In case of an alleged "strike" as defined in this chapter, the board shall meet in emergency
session with all parties concerned and shall report its findings to the city administrator in a joint session within twenty four (24) hours of
such alleged prohibited practice. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-8A-10: PENALTIES AND SANCTIONS:
A. The board shall enter an order in each case. At the request of the board, the governing body may petition the appropriate district court to
enforce the board's order in accordance with this chapter and shall file in the court the record of the proceedings.
1. In case of a "strike" as defined by this chapter, or the threat of such action, after determination by the board that a strike or threat of a
strike has occurred, shall direct that the collective bargaining agreement ceases to exist, shall order an automatic decertification of the
union, and shall inform the employee organization that it no longer represents employees in the bargaining unit involved. The city
administrator shall also notify the employees in subject bargaining unit of such action and advise that they will not be privileged to
bargain with the city government through a collective bargaining agent for at least twenty four (24) months. In such case, the
employee organization that represented the employees who went on strike shall be prohibited from participating in a representation
election for city employees for a minimum of twenty four (24) months.
B. In the case of a violation of section 1-8A-9 of this chapter, the city may petition the appropriate district court to:
1. Issue an order restraining and enjoining such violation.
2. In the case of a strike, impose on the employee organization a fine which will be set in accordance with the damages, loss of revenue
and/or services involved.
C. The inclusion of penalties and sanctions in this section shall in no way prohibit or preclude the discipline, up to and including discharge,
of those who instigated, threatened, induced, encouraged or participated in a strike. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-8A-11: COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS:
A. All agreements reached between the city and an exclusive bargaining representative as a result of a collective bargaining will be reduced
to writing in the form of a contract between the parties.
B. A hand executed copy of the agreement will be provided to each party and each will bear the cost of reproducing copies as needed. The
city is responsible for providing copies and orientation to supervisors and managers. The exclusive representative is responsible for
providing copies and orientation to the members of the bargaining unit. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 29/318
1-8A-12: NEGOTIATION PROCEDURES:
A. Negotiating Teams: Negotiating teams will consist of a maximum of five (5) persons designated by the employee organization and a
maximum of five (5) persons designated by the city administrator.
B. Contract Openings:
1. Upon written request by the employee organization to the city administrator or his designee, or the city administrator or his designee
to the employee organization, negotiating sessions will be scheduled to discuss items mutually agreed upon. Such request for
negotiating sessions shall be in writing and shall include all of the full text written proposals of the party requesting negotiations. The
request shall be answered within ten (10) working days.
2. Not less than sixty (60) days prior to the contract ending date, either side may request the opening of negotiations as indicated above.
3. Prior to the start of negotiations, the city administrator and the employee organizations will designate their chairperson and
spokesperson from among the designated members of their negotiating team.
C. Procedure For Negotiations:
1. Negotiations will be conducted as provided below and will take place at the facilities and at a time mutually agreed to by the
negotiating teams.
2. All negotiations will be held in closed sessions. Because negotiations are held in closed sessions the parties shall not issue public
announcements concerning negotiations during the negotiations and impasse process without the mutual agreement of the city and
the exclusive representative.
3. Negotiations will start with the negotiating team of the party requesting negotiations delivering its proposed changes, in writing, to the
other party. Each section will be read with the changes and the reasons therefor explained in some detail. This procedure will continue
to be followed until the entire proposal has been presented.
4. Upon complete presentation of the proposal, the other negotiating team will present its issues and its counterproposal in the same
manner.
5. Thereafter, each side will take turns presenting counterproposals with supporting data until agreement is reached.
6. Negotiating sessions will proceed with deliberate speed, but recesses and study sessions may be called for by either side. Prior to
recess, the reconvening time will be agreed upon.
7. Members of the employee organization negotiating team will be released from their normal duties without pay to participate in
negotiations.
D. Tentative Agreement:
1. Tentative agreements reached during negotiations will be reduced to writing and initialed by each team spokesperson.
2. Such tentative agreement is conditional and may be withdrawn should later discussions change either team's understanding of the
section as it related to another part of the agreement.
E. Ratification: Complete agreement on any matter in negotiations will be reached when the employee organization membership and the
city administrator have ratified the agreement except that, in the event of any multiyear agreement which includes economic increases in
subsequent years, such economic increases shall be considered ratified if and when the governing body appropriates sufficient funds for
the subsequent year or years of the agreement. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-8A-13: IMPASSE PROCEDURES:
A. Mediation:
1. If the parties have not reached agreement and an impasse exists, either party or the board may call for mediation. Upon the
declaration of impasse, the parties involved shall mutually agree upon a mediator or request the federal mediation and conciliation
service to appoint an impartial and disinterested person to act as mediator. If the services of the federal mediation and conciliation
service are not available, the parties shall request the board to appoint a neutral and disinterested person to act as a mediator. Only
mandatory subjects negotiated but not agreed upon shall be submitted to mediation. The mediator shall not have the power of
compulsion and shall meet with the parties to aid in resolving their differences and effectuate a settlement of the impasse.
2. The parties shall not issue public announcements concerning negotiations during pendency of these closed impasse procedures.
B. Voluntary Final Offer Advisory Arbitration:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 30/318
1. If an impasse persists after the mediator has concluded or has been released by either party, the city and the employee organization
shall have the power to agree voluntarily to advisory arbitration as a method of resolving the impasse. The agreement for advisory
arbitration shall be in writing and a copy shall be served upon the board. The board shall arrange for such advisory arbitration
consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
2. Each party shall submit to the board, within fourteen (14) calendar days of the agreement to enter arbitration, its last best total
package offer on all of the issues in dispute, with proof of service of a copy upon the other party. Each party shall also submit a copy
of a draft of the proposed collective bargaining agreement to the extent to which agreement has been reached. The parties may
continue to negotiate during the arbitration proceedings until an agreement is reached or a decision is rendered by the arbitrator.
3. The last best total package offer on all of the issues at impasse will be submitted to the arbitrator. These issues shall be limited to
those that had been considered by the mediator and upon which the parties have not reached agreement.
4. The arbitrator shall be selected in the following manner: The negotiating teams shall jointly request a list of five (5) names from the
federal mediation and conciliation service from which the arbitrator shall be selected. The negotiating team that loses the flip of the
coin shall strike the first name from the list submitted by the federal mediation and conciliation service. The negotiating teams shall
continue to alternate striking names until one name remains. The remaining person shall be the arbitrator.
5. The arbitrator shall at no time engage in an effort to mediate or otherwise settle the dispute in any manner other than that prescribed
in this section unless agreed to by both parties.
6. From the time of selection until such time as the arbitrator makes his or her advisory determination, there shall be no dispute by the
arbitrator with parties other than those who are direct parties to the dispute. The arbitrator may conduct closed formal or informal
hearings to discuss the content of the final total package offer submitted by each party.
7. Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the presentation of the parties and the submission of briefs, the arbitrator shall select the
total package offer submitted by one of the parties and shall issue an advisory decision incorporating that final offer without
modification. The arbitrator shall give written explanation for the selection of the final offer and shall inform the city council of the
advisory decision.
C. Costs: All costs for mediation and arbitration shall be borne equally by the city and the employee organization, except that the cost of any
representatives of each party shall be borne by that party.
D. City Council Decision: The city council will consider the arbitrator's advisory decision; however, the city council reserves its authority as
elected officials to make the final decision on which package to implement. The decision of the city council is final and binding on
management and the employee representative and shall be combined with the issues previously agreed upon by the parties.
E. Resort To Procedure Not A Condition Precedent To Suit: The impasse procedures set forth herein are voluntary and shall not constitute a
condition precedent to the bringing of any action for the relief in an appropriate tribunal. Nor shall the failure or refusal of city government
or any employee organization to participate in said voluntary impasse procedures constitute a defense in any such action or
proceedings. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-8A-14: CITY LABOR-MANAGEMENT RELATIONS BOARD:
There shall be formed to assist in the implementation and administration of this chapter a city of Deming labor-management relations board
of three (3) members. In view of the legal work involved in the interpretation of this chapter, board members shall normally be members of
the legal profession or individuals who possess expertise in the field of employee relations or both. Board members shall serve for a period
of one year commencing January 1, and shall be selected as follows:
A. Each city employee organization whose principal interest is to represent city employees in bargaining collectively with city government
concerning wages and conditions of employment, shall appoint one person to a committee that will be charged with selecting one
person to the board. This committee will meet annually and select the employee's member of the board for the following year by
December 1.
B. The city administrator of the city of Deming shall appoint the second member of the board by December 1.
C. The third member and chairman of the board shall be appointed mutually by the members appointed by the city administrator and the
employee organizations. In the event the parties are unable to agree, the mayor shall appoint the third member.
D. In case the board must meet in accordance with this chapter during the temporary or permanent absence of a member of the board, the
city administrator shall appoint an interim board member from the public at large with due regard to the representative character of the
board.
E. The members of the board shall be compensated at the rate of two hundred dollars ($200.00) each per hearing, plus travel and per diem,
the cost to be shared equally by the parties involved. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 31/318
1-8A-15: PREEMPTION:
This chapter shall preempt all contrary local ordinances or executive orders except those provisions of the personnel rules and regulations
establishing:
A. Classified and unclassified service;
B. Performance evaluations;
C. Methods of initial employment and promotion procedures; and
D. The right to discipline and discharge employees.
All provisions of the personnel rules and regulations shall continue in effect for all employees not represented by a bargaining agent. (Ord.
1182, 12-8-2008)
Chapter 9
RESERVED
(Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
Chapter 10
RESERVED
(Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
Chapter 11
MUNICIPAL COURT
1-11-1: MUNICIPAL JUDGE; TERM:
The municipal judge shall be elected for a term of four (4) years. (Ord. 645, 12-10-1979, eff. 3-17-1980)
1-11-2: QUALIFICATIONS; COURT SESSIONS:
A. Qualifications: The municipal judge shall be a citizen of the United States, a resident of the city of Deming and have such other
qualifications as may be determined and required from time to time by the city council. (Ord. 1221, 5-14-2012)
B. Bond: (Rep. by Ord. 1221, 5-14-2012)
C. Compensation Of Elected Judge And Temporary Judge:
1. Salary: For the municipal judges elected or appointed to fill a vacancy after December 28, 2011, the judge shall receive as salary the
sum of sixteen thousand five hundred dollars ($16,500.00) annually for up to a minimum of fifteen (15) hours worked per week and
twenty one dollars fifteen cents ($21.15) for all hours over fifteen (15) hours per week with a limit of forty (40) hours per week. Should
any temporary municipal judge be appointed, as hereinafter provided, then such temporary judge shall receive as compensation
during the time the municipal judge is absent from his duties for a period of less than five (5) days, the sum of one hundred seventy
five dollars ($175.00) per day for a total of two (2) days per week, and during the time the municipal judge is absent from his duties for
a period of more than five (5) days, the temporary judge shall receive the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day. (Ord. 1218,
12-28-2011)
2. Benefits: The municipal judge of the city of Deming shall be provided the option to participate in any health insurance plan the city
offers to municipal employees, under the same terms and conditions as municipal employees. For any municipal judge elected or
reelected after March 7, 2008, the percentage of health insurance cost paid by individual elected officials shall conform to the
employee schedule of percentage paid in the city of Deming "Personnel Policies And Procedures Manual". (Ord. 1165, 10-8-2007)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 32/318
D. Reports To City Council: The judge shall make any and all reports not otherwise herein required upon such matters, affairs, business and
accounts of said court to the city council at any and at all times as the said city council may direct. (Ord. 1161, 8-13-2007)
1-11-3: TEMPORARY ABSENCE:
A. Appointment Of Temporary Judge: In the event of the temporary incapacity or absence of any municipal judge, any person residing in the
city may be appointed to the office of municipal judge and during such temporary incapacity or absence shall hear and determine cases
within the jurisdiction of the municipal court. Such temporary municipal judge shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the
city council. (Ord. 512, 5-6-1974)
1-11-4: JUDGE TO DECIDE OFFENSES:
As provided by law, the municipal judge residing within the corporate limits is authorized, empowered and required to inquire into, hear and
determine all offenses committed within the limits of the city, against any of the provisions of this code, and to punish the offender as
prescribed by such code. (Ord. 732, 1-9-1984, eff. 3-19-1984)
1-11-5: DOCKET:
The municipal judge shall keep a docket in which he shall enter a true record of all actions brought before him. All cases tried before the
municipal judge shall be docketed in the name of the city against the defendant, and shall provide detail (judgment and sentence) of each
case, and itemized statement of all costs and fines imposed and collected by him. (Ord. 1221, 5-14-2012)
1-11-6: JUDGMENTS:
A. Discretionary Action: Judgment of guilty or not guilty of the offense charged shall be entered in such case, and by said judgment
defendant shall be discharged, fined or imprisoned as the case may be; and when defendant is found guilty, the costs of such case shall
be assessed against him, and all judgments imposing a fine or penalty shall be, in default of the payment thereof, imprisonment for a
specified number of days or until such fine and costs are paid.
B. Guilty Judgment: Whenever judgment of guilty is entered in any case, the judge shall issue a commitment against the person of the
defendant, commanding the police or other officer, acting in default of the immediate payment of such fine and costs as may have been
assessed, or where the judgment shall be imprisonment, to commit the defendant to the city or county jail. (Ord. 1221, 5-14-2012)
1-11-7: APPEAL:
A defendant in any case shall be entitled to file an appeal in accordance with the laws of the state of New Mexico and the rules of the New
Mexico supreme court. (Ord. 1221, 5-14-2012)
1-11-8: FEES:
A. Additional Fees Assessed: In each case tried before the municipal judge, said judge may tax as costs the fees allowed to any attorney
who prosecutes any violation of a city ordinance to conviction, and may tax as costs the services of an interpreter not to exceed ten
dollars ($10.00), and may tax the docket fees paid for the filing of said cause, and said judge shall file his report of such fines, docket
fees, judgments and costs under the provisions of this code with the city administrator at the first regular meeting of the city council in
each month. (Ord. 478, 8-7-1972)
B. Filing Fee:
1. No criminal complaint signed by a private person alleging a violation of any city ordinance shall be docketed in the municipal court
unless the person signing the complaint shall pay a nonrefundable filing fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) to the clerk of the municipal
court.
2. Nothing herein contained shall apply to any complaint filed by a police officer of the city. (Ord. 823, 10-8-1990)
C. Penalty Assessment Misdemeanor:
1. Penalty Amounts Assessed: As used in this subsection C, the words "penalty assessment misdemeanor" shall include the following
violations of the uniform traffic code1 and the penalty to be assessed shall be the prescribed dollar figure for each:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 33/318
Common Name Of Offense Assessment
Permitting unlicensed minor to drive $171.00
Failure to obey signal 46.00
Speeding:
Up to 5 miles an hour over the speed limit 31.00
From 6 to 8 miles an hour over the speed limit 36.00
From 9 to 11 miles an hour over the speed limit 41.00
From 12 to 15 miles an hour over the speed limit 46.00
From 16 to 20 miles an hour over the speed limit 51.00
From 21 to 25 miles an hour over the speed limit 56.00
From 26 to 30 miles an hour over the speed limit 61.00
From 31 miles an hour and higher over the speed limit 86.00
Unfastened safety belt 51.00
Child not in restraint device or seat belt 141.00
Minimum speed 36.00
Improper starting 41.00
Improper backing 41.00
Improper lane 41.00
Improper passing 46.00
Controlled access violation 41.00
Improper turning 41.00
Following too closely 41.00
Failure to yield 41.00
Pedestrian violation 31.00
Failure to stop 41.00
Passing school bus 171.00
Failure to signal 41.00
Failure to secure load 121.00
Operation without oversize-overweight permit 71.00
Improper equipment 36.00
Improper emergency signal 36.00
Operation interference 36.00
Litterbugging 171.00
Improper parking 41.00
Failure to dim lights 41.00
Riding in or towing occupied trailer 46.00
Improper opening of doors 46.00
No slow moving vehicle emblem or flashing amber light 41.00
Open container - first offense 141.00
The term "penalty assessment misdemeanor" does not include any violation which has caused or contributed to the cause of an accident
resulting in injury or death to any person. (Ord. 1215, 6-13-2011)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 34/318
2. Warning Notice: Unless a warning notice is given at the time of making an arrest for any penalty assessment misdemeanor and if the
alleged violator is a resident of Luna County, the arresting officer shall offer the alleged violator the option of accepting a penalty
assessment. The violator's signature on the penalty assessment shall constitute acknowledgment of guilt of the offense stated in the
notice.
3. Payment Of Penalty: Payment of any penalty assessment must be made by mail to the municipal court for the city, within twenty (20)
days from the date of arrest. Payments of penalty assessments are timely filed if postmarked within twenty (20) days from the date of
arrest.
4. Court Evidence: No record of penalty assessment payment is admissible as evidence in any court in any civil action.
5. Failure To Pay: It shall be a misdemeanor for any violator who has accepted a penalty assessment to fail or refuse to pay the
assessment within the times set forth above and, upon conviction thereof, the violator shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1
of this title. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude the city from prosecuting the violator for the traffic offense for which he has been
arrested. (Ord. 1171, 11-13-2007)
1-11-9: ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS:
A. Citation Issuance; Form: In all cases involving violations of any city ordinance, not amounting to the breach of peace, the municipal court
of the city may cause to be issued a citation or summons requiring any party charged with the violation of any ordinance to appear at the
time fixed by such citation or summons. The form of such citation or ordinance shall be approved by the city attorney.
B. Failure To Appear; Warrant For Arrest: Any person charged and named as a defendant in such citation or ordinance who fails to appear
shall be subject to arrest and the municipal judge shall issue a warrant for the arrest of such person and in such event, proceedings shall
thereafter be had as in cases when arrest is made upon a warrant issued upon affidavit.
C. Affidavit; Complaint: In any action for the violation of any ordinance in which an arrest has not been made, a warrant for the arrest of any
defendant may issue in the first instance upon the affidavit of any person making a complaint that he has reason to believe that the party
charged therefor is guilty. Such affidavit shall be in the form approved by the city attorney. (Ord. 507, 11-12-1973)
1-11-10: VIOLATIONS; SUSPENSION, PROBATION, COMMUNITY SERVICE:
A. Suspension; Probation: Upon a plea of guilty or a judgment of conviction for violation of a city ordinance, the municipal court may
suspend in whole or in part the execution of sentence or place the defendant on probation for a period not exceeding one year on terms
and conditions the court deems best, or both.
B. Discretionary Action Of Judge: Suspension of execution of the sentence or probation, or both, shall be granted only when the municipal
judge is satisfied it will serve the ends of justice and of the public.
C. Discharge Of Liability: The defendant's liability for any fine or other punishment imposed shall be fully discharged upon successful
completion of the terms of probation.
D. Community Service: The municipal court may, as a condition of probation, require the defendant to serve a period of time in volunteer
labor to be known as community service. The type of labor and period of service shall be at the sole discretion of the court; provided,
that any person receiving community service shall be immune from the community service, and any person who performs community
service pursuant to court order or any criminal diversion program shall not be entitled to any wages, shall not be considered an
employee for any purpose and shall not be entitled to workers' compensation, unemployment benefits or any other benefits otherwise
provided by law. As used in this section, "community service" means any labor that benefits the public at large or any public, charitable
or educational entity or institution. (Ord. 779, 9-11-1987)
1-11-11: CITATION FOR NONTRAFFIC VIOLATION:
A. Citation Or Jail: Any police officer of the city who arrests a person without a warrant for the violation of any nontraffic ordinance of the city
may offer the person arrested the option of accepting a citation to appear in lieu of taking him to jail.
B. Contents Of Citation: The citation issued pursuant to this section shall contain the name and address of the cited person, the offense
charged, and the time and place to appear. Unless the person requests an earlier date, the time specified in the citation shall be at least
three (3) days after issuance of the citation. The police officer shall explain the person's right not to sign a citation, the effect of not
signing the citation, the effect of signing the citation and the effect of failing to appear at the time and place stated in the citation.
C. Signature, Promise To Appear: The person's signature on the citation constitutes a promise to appear at the time and place stated in the
citation. One copy of the citation to appear shall be delivered to the person cited and the police officer shall keep a duplicate copy which
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 35/318
he shall file with the court as soon as practicable.
D. Appearance In Court: A citation issued pursuant to this section is a valid complaint if the person receiving it appears in the municipal
court.
E. Failure To Appear: It shall be unlawful for a person signing a citation not to appear at any time and place stated in the citation, regardless
of the disposition of the offense for which the citation was issued, except by appearance of counsel on behalf of such person. Any
person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this title. (Ord. 653, 6-9-1980)
Chapter 12
CASH OR BAIL BONDS
1-12-1: ACCEPTANCE OF CASH OR BAIL BONDS:
The duly elected and acting sheriff of Luna County, any full time, salaried deputy sheriff of said county, or any full time salaried police officer
of the city, is hereafter authorized to accept, in lieu of arrest and confinement, cash or bail bonds or recognizances from any person
hereafter charged with the violation of any ordinances of the city, or from their attorneys, agents or representatives, in accordance with the
schedule of such cash or bail bonds set forth in this chapter; provided, that nothing herein contained shall be construed as requiring the
acceptance of any cash or bail bond from any person in lieu of arrest and confinement when, in the opinion of the sheriff or his deputies, or
police officer the release of such person by giving bond would constitute a possible danger to the public health, safety or welfare of the
citizens of the city, or to the person requesting such cash or bail bond. The cash or bail bonds or recognizances, as provided herein, may
either be accepted at the Luna County correctional facility, or at the police department at the municipal building of the city. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-
2008)
1-12-2: RECEIPTS PROVIDED:
All cash or bail bonds or recognizances accepted in lieu of arrest or confinement, as provided herein, shall be evidenced by receipts in the
form approved by the city and shall be signed by the officer accepting same. The original of such receipt shall be given to the person
depositing such bond, or his agent or attorney, one copy shall be retained by the officer accepting same, and one copy shall be delivered to
the municipal judge of the city. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-12-3: MONIES DELIVERED TO MUNICIPAL JUDGE:
All monies for cash or bail bonds or recognizances received by any officer shall, within three (3) days thereafter, be delivered to the
municipal judge. The judge shall execute and deliver to such officer, a receipt for such monies, and upon delivery of such receipt, the officer
shall be released from all further liability in connection therewith. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-12-4: WHEN BOND NOT ACCEPTED:
No cash or bail bond or recognizance shall be accepted in lieu of arrest, arraignment or confinement during any time or times when the
municipal judge is available to arraign any person charged with the violation of any city ordinance. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-12-5: BOND ENTERED ON RECORDS:
Upon receipt of any cash or bail bond or recognizance, the municipal judge shall enter the same on the records of the docket of the case as
any other bond accepted by the municipal judge in any other criminal proceeding before him, and such bond shall be subject to forfeiture in
event of the failure of any defendant to appear for any trial or hearing as provided by law. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
1-12-6: ENFORCEMENT OF CRIMINAL PENALTIES:
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to relieve any person giving any cash or bail bond or recognizance from the enforcement or
imposition of any criminal penalties for the violation of the city ordinance under which such person is charged, upon conviction of such
person by the municipal court. (Ord. 1182, 12-8-2008)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 36/318
Chapter 13
ENTERPRISE ZONES
1-13-1: AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE; CONDITIONS:
Pursuant to New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 5-9-4, the city is authorized to designate an area as an enterprise zone under the New
Mexico enterprise zone act1 if the proposed zone meets the following requirements as to size and population characteristics:
A. A population not exceeding twenty five percent (25%) of the population of the city and a land area not exceeding twenty five percent
(25%) of the land area of the city.
B. When combined with the population and land area of any existing enterprise zones within the city, a combined population less than
twenty five percent (25%) of the population of the city and a combined land area less than twenty five percent (25%) of the land area of
the city.
C. Widespread poverty, unemployment and general distress in the area, as evidenced by substantial deterioration, abandonment or
demolition of commercial or residential structures and as evidenced by one or more of the following criteria:
1. An average rate of unemployment for the most recent eighteen (18) month period for which data is available exceeding the average
rate of unemployment for the state for that period by at least one percentage point; or
2. At least sixty percent (60%) of the households living in the area under consideration having income below eighty percent (80%) of the
median income of households of the city as determined pursuant to section 119 of the federal housing and community development
act of 1974, as that section may be amended or renumbered. (Ord. 978, 8-10-1998)
1-13-2: ENTERPRISE ZONE PLAN:
A. Approval: An enterprise zone plan shall be developed and approved by resolution of the city council after public hearing prior to an area
being designated an enterprise zone.
B. Contents Of Plan: The contents of an enterprise zone plan shall include:
1. The purpose of creating an enterprise zone.
2. A description of the characteristics which make the proposed zone eligible as an enterprise zone under the New Mexico enterprise
zone act, including information regarding:
a. Population according to the most recent census.
b. Poverty rate.
c. Unemployment rate.
d. Evidence of substantial deterioration, abandonment or demolition of commercial or residential structures.
3. The incentives to be offered to accomplish the purpose of the enterprise zone plan. (Ord. 978, 8-10-1998)
Chapter 14
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
1-14-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter may be cited as the AFFORDABLE HOUSING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1173, 12-10-2007)
1-14-2: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted to implement Deming's affordable housing program. In accordance with New Mexico constitution article IX section
14, the affordable housing act, New Mexico Statutes Annotated, 1978, section 6-27-1 et seq. (the "act"), rules, the purpose of this chapter is
to:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 37/318
A. Establish procedures to ensure that both state and local housing assistance grantees are qualifying grantees who meet the requirements
of the act and the rules promulgated pursuant to the act, both at the time of the award and throughout the term of any grant or loan
under the program;
B. Establish an application and award timetable for state housing assistance grants or loans to permit the selection of the qualifying
grantee(s) by the city;
C. Create an evaluation process to determine:
1. The financial and management stability of the applicant;
2. The demonstrated commitment of the applicant to the community;
3. A cost-benefit analysis of the project proposed by the applicant;
4. The benefits to the community of a proposed project;
5. The type or amount of assistance to be provided;
6. The scope of the affordable housing project;
7. Any substantive or matching contribution by the applicant to the proposed project;
8. A performance schedule for the qualifying grantee with performance criteria; and
9. Any other rules or procedures the city believes are necessary for a full review and evaluation of the applicant and the application or
which the MFA believes is necessary for a full review of the city's evaluation of the applicant;
D. Require long term affordability of the city's affordable housing program so that a project cannot be sold shortly after completion and taken
out of the affordable housing market to ensure a quick profit for the qualifying grantee;
E. Require that the city enter into a contract with the qualifying grantee consistent with the act, which contract shall include remedies and
default provisions in the event of the unsatisfactory performance by the qualifying grantee and which contract shall be subject to the
review of the MFA in its discretion;
F. Require that a grant or loan for a project must impose contractual obligation on the qualifying grantee that the affordable housing units in
any project be occupied by persons of low or moderate income;
G. Provide for adequate security against loss of public funds or property in the event that the qualifying grantee abandons or otherwise fails
to complete the project;
H. Require review and approval of a housing grant project budget by the city and/or the MFA before any expenditure of grant finds or
transfer of granted property;
I. Require that a condition of grant or loan approval be proof of compliance with all applicable state and local laws, rules and ordinances;
J. Provide definitions for "low income" and "moderate income" and setting out requirements for verification of income levels; and
K. Provide the city with a valid affordable housing program. (Ord. 1173, 12-10-2007)
1-14-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms shall have the following meanings:
ACT: The affordable housing act, New Mexico Statutes Annotated, 1978, section 6-27-1 et seq.
AFFORDABILITY PERIOD: A. If the fair market value of any housing assistance grant or the total amount of affordable housing funds that
have been awarded, loaned, donated, or otherwise conveyed to the qualifying grantee is from one dollar ($1.00) to fourteen thousand nine
hundred ninety nine dollars ninety nine cents ($14,999.99), then the affordability period shall be not less than five (5) years.
B. If the fair market value of any housing assistance grant or the total amount of affordable housing funds is from fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00) up to and including forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00), then the affordability period shall be not less than ten (10) years.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 38/318
C. If the fair market value of any housing assistance grant or the total amount of affordable housing funds is from forty thousand dollars
($40,000.00) up to and including one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), then the affordability period shall be not less than
fifteen (15) years.
D. If the fair market value of any housing assistance grant or the total amount of affordable housing funds is greater than one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00), then the affordability period shall be not less than twenty (20) years.
AFFORDABLE: Consistent with minimum rent and/or income limitations set forth in the MFA act, and in guidelines established by MFA.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING: Residential housing primarily for persons or households of low or moderate income.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING FUND: Any and all funds awarded or to be awarded, loaned or otherwise distributed under the act for payment of
the costs of infrastructure for affordable housing under an affordable housing plan.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PLAN OR PLAN: A plan pursuant to an affordable housing program that contemplates one or more affordable
housing projects, which may be developed in one or more phases.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM OR PROGRAM: Any programs the city and/or the MFA establish pursuant to the act.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROJECT OR PROJECT: Any work or undertaking, whether new construction, acquisition of existing residential
housing, remodeling, improvement, rehabilitation or conversion, which may be undertaken in one or more phases, as part of an affordable
housing plan, as approved by the city and/or the MFA for the primary purposes as allowed by the act.
APPLICANT: Subject to further qualifications in subsection 1-14-4B of this chapter, an individual, a governmental housing agency, regional
housing authority, a for profit organization, including a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, or
association or a nonprofit organization meeting the appropriate criteria of the city and/or the MFA.
APPLICATION: An application to participate in one or more affordable housing programs or affordable housing plans under the act
submitted by an applicant to the city and/or the MFA.
BUILDER: An individual or entity licensed as a general contractor to construct residential housing in the state that satisfies the requirements
of a qualifying grantee and has been approved by the city and/or the MFA to participate in an affordable housing program. The term
"builder" shall also include an individual or entity that satisfies the requirements of a qualifying grantee and has been approved by the city
and/or the MFA to participate in an affordable housing program, who is not licensed as a general contractor by the state, provided such
individual or entity contracts with a general contractor licensed with the state to construct residential housing.
BUILDING: A structure capable of being renovated or converted into affordable housing or a structure that is to be demolished and is
located on land donated for use in connection with an affordable housing project.
CITY: The city of Deming, New Mexico, a New Mexico municipal corporation.
CONGREGATE HOUSING FACILITY: Residential housing designed for occupancy by more than four (4) persons of low or moderate
income living independently of each other. The facility may contain group dining, recreational, healthcare or other communal living facilities
and each unit in a congregate housing facility shall contain at least its own living, sleeping, and bathing facilities.
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT: The United States of America and any agency or instrumentality, corporate or otherwise, of the United States of
America.
HUD: The United States department of housing and urban development.
HOUSEHOLD: One or more persons occupying a housing unit.
HOUSING ASSISTANCE GRANT: The donation by the city of:
A. Land for construction of a project;
B. An existing building for conversion or renovation as affordable housing; or
C. The costs of infrastructure necessary to support affordable housing.
INFRASTRUCTURE: Infrastructure improvements and infrastructure purposes.
INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT: Includes, but is not limited to:
A. Sanitary sewage system, including collection, transport, storage, treatment, dispersal, effluent use and discharge;
B. Drainage and flood control systems, including collection, transport, diversion, storage, detention, retention, dispersal, use and
discharge;
C. Water systems for domestic purposes, including production, collection, storage, treatment, transport, delivery, connection and
dispersal;
D. Areas for motor vehicle use for roads access, ingress, egress and parking;
E. Trails and areas for pedestrian, equestrian, bicycle or other nonmotor vehicle use for access, ingress, egress and parking;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 39/318
F. Parks, recreational facilities and open space areas for the use of residents for entertainment, assembly and recreation;
G. Landscaping, including earthworks, structures, plants, trees and related water delivery systems;
H. Electrical transmission and distribution facilities;
I. Natural gas distribution facilities;
J. Lighting systems;
K. Cable or other telecommunications lines and related equipment;
L. Traffic control systems and devices, including signals, controls, markings and signs;
M. Inspection, construction management and related costs in connection with the furnishing of the items listed in this definition; and
N. Heating, air conditioning and weatherization facilities, systems or services, and energy efficiency improvements, that are affixed to
real property.
INFRASTRUCTURE PURPOSE: A. Planning, design, engineering, construction, acquisition or installation of infrastructure, including the
costs of applications, impact fees and other fees, permits and approvals related to the construction, acquisition or installation of the
infrastructure, provided the city may determine it appropriate to reduce or waive building permit fees, sewer and water hookup fees and
other fees with respect to an affordable housing project for which affordable housing funds and/or housing assistance grants are awarded,
loaned, donated or otherwise distributed under the act;
B. Acquiring, converting, renovating or improving existing facilities for infrastructure, including facilities owned, leased or installed by the
owner;
C. Acquiring interests in real property or water rights for infrastructure, including interests of the owner; and
D. Incurring expenses incident to and reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes specified in this definition.
MFA: The New Mexico mortgage finance authority.
MFA ACT: The New Mexico mortgage finance authority act, enacted as chapter 303 of the laws of 1975 of the state of New Mexico, as
amended (being sections 58-18-1 through 58-18-27, inclusive, New Mexico Statutes Annotated (1978), as amended).
MORTGAGE: A mortgage deed, deed of trust or other instrument creating a lien, subject only to title exceptions as may be acceptable to
the city and/or the MFA, on a fee interest in real property located within the state or on a leasehold interest that has a remaining term at the
time of computation that exceeds or is renewable at the option of the lessee until after the maturity day of the mortgage loan.
MORTGAGE LENDER: Any trust company, mortgage company, mortgage banker, national banking association, savings bank, savings and
loan association, credit union, building and loan association and any other lending institution; provided that the mortgage lender maintains
an office in the state, is authorized to make mortgage loans in the state and is approved by the city and/or MFA and either the federal
housing authority, veterans' affairs, Federal National Mortgage Association (now known as Fannie Mae), or Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Corporation.
MORTGAGE LOAN: A financial obligation secured by a mortgage, including a mortgage loan for a project.
MULTI-FAMILY HOUSING PROGRAM: A program, involving a congregate housing facility, a multiple-family housing project or a transitional
housing facility.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY HOUSING PROJECT: Residential housing that is designed for occupancy by more than four (4) persons or family living
independently of each other or living in a congregate housing facility, at least sixty percent (60%) of whom are persons of low or moderate
income, including, without limitation, persons of low or moderate income who are elderly and handicapped as determined by the city and/or
MFA, provided that the percentage of low income persons and families shall be at least the minimum, if any, required by federal tax law.
PERSONS OF LOW OR MODERATE INCOME: Persons and families within the state who are determined by the MFA to lack sufficient
income to pay enough to cause private enterprise to build an adequate supply of decent, safe and sanitary residential housing in their
locality or in an area reasonably accessible to their locality and whose income levels established by the MFA to be in need of the assistance
made available by the act, taking into consideration, without limitation, such factors as defined under the act. For purposes of this definition,
the word "families" shall mean a group of persons consisting of, but not limited to, the head of the household; his or her spouse, if any; and
children, if any, who are allowable as personal exemptions for federal income tax purposes.
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES: Policies and procedures of the MFA, including, but not limited to, mortgage loan purchasing, selling,
servicing and reservation procedures, which the MFA may update and revise from time to time as the MFA deems appropriate.
PUBLIC SERVICE AGENCIES: Shall include, but are not limited to, any entities that support affordable housing and which believe that the
program or project proposed by the applicant is worthy and advisable, either directly or indirectly, in the affordable housing program or
project for which the applicant is applying.
QUALIFYING GRANTEE: A. An individual who is qualified to receive assistance pursuant to the act and is approved by the city; and
B. A governmental housing agency, regional housing authority, corporation, a limited liability company, partnership, joint venture,
syndicate, association or a nonprofit organization that:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 40/318
1. Is organized under state or local laws and can provide proof of such organization;
2. If a nonprofit organization, has no part of its net earnings inuring to the benefit of any member, founder, contributor, or individual;
and
3. Is approved by the city.
RFP: Any request for proposal made by the city.
RECERTIFICATION: The recertification of applicants and/or qualifying grantees participating in any affordable housing programs or in any
programs under the act as determined necessary from time to time by the city and/or the MFA.
REHABILITATION: The substantial renovation or reconstruction of an existing single-family residence or a multi-family housing project,
which complies with requirements established by the MFA. Rehabilitation shall not include routine or ordinary repairs, improvements or
maintenance, such as interior decorating, remodeling or exterior painting, except in conjunction with other substantial renovation or
reconstruction.
RESIDENTIAL HOUSING: Any building, structure or portion thereof that is primarily occupied, or designed or intended primarily for
occupancy, as a residence by one or more households and any real property that is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location
thereon of such a building, structure or portion thereof. "Residential housing" includes congregate housing, manufactured homes and
housing intended to provide or providing transitional or temporary housing for homeless persons.
RESIDENTIAL USE: The structure or the portion of the structure to benefit from the affordable housing funds or housing assistance grant is
designed primarily for use as the principal residence of the occupant or occupants and shall exclude vacation or recreational homes.
RULES: The New Mexico finance authority affordable housing rules adopted pursuant to section 6-27-8(B), New Mexico Statutes
Annotated, 1978.
STATE: The state of New Mexico.
TRANSITIONAL HOUSING FACILITY: Residential housing that is designed for temporary or transitional occupancy by persons of low or
moderate income or special needs. (Ord. 1173, 12-10-2007)
1-14-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
With the exception of housing assistance grants involving funding from the state which shall be governed by subsection L of this section,
the following requirements shall apply to all housing assistance grants and/or affordable housing funds awarded, loaned or otherwise
distributed by the city under the act to a qualifying grantee.
A. Request For Proposals: The city, in its discretion, may issue one or more RFPs to solicit applications from applicants or shall otherwise
identify a qualifying grantee for the use of any affordable housing funds or housing assistance grants to be awarded, loaned, donated or
otherwise distributed under the act.
B. Applicant Eligibility:
1. The following applicants are eligible under the act to apply for affordable housing funds or housing assistance grants to provide
housing or related services to persons of low or moderate income in their community:
a. All individuals who are qualified to receive assistance pursuant to the act, the rules, and this chapter that are approved by the city;
b. All regional housing authorities and any governmental housing agencies;
c. All for profit organizations, including any corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, syndicate or association;
d. All nonprofit organizations meeting the following requirements:
(1) A primary mission of the nonprofit organization must be to provide housing or housing related services to persons of low or
moderate income; and
(2) The nonprofit organization must have received its 501(c)(3) designation prior to submitting an application;
(3) Have no part of its net earnings inuring to the benefit of any member, founder, contributor, or individual;
2. All nonindividual applicants must:
a. Be organized under state or local laws and can provide proof of such organization and be approved by the city;
b. Have a functioning accounting system that is operated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles or has
designated an entity that will maintain such an accounting system consistent with generally accepted accounting principles;
c. Have among its purposes significant activities related to providing housing or services to persons or households of low or moderate
income; and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 41/318
d. Have no significant outstanding or unresolved monitoring findings from the city, the MFA, or its most recent independent financial
audit, or if it has any such findings, it has a certified letter from the city, the MFA, or auditor stating that the findings are in the
process of being resolved.
C. Applications:
1. Process For Applying: Applicants wishing to apply for a housing assistance grant, including the use of any affordable housing funds,
or to participate in any affordable housing program are required to submit to the city the following (as applicable):
a. An original application, together with all required schedules, documents, or such other information which may be required by the
city or in any RFP which may have been issued by the city, must be included in the completed application;
b. A proposal describing the nature and scope of the affordable housing project proposed by the applicant and for which the applicant
is applying for funds or a grant under the act, and which describes the type and/or amount of assistance which the applicant
proposes to provide to persons of low or moderate income;
c. Executive summary and project narrative(s) that address the evaluation criteria set forth in any RFP issued by the city for the
affordable housing funds or the housing assistance grant for which the applicant is applying;
d. A proposed budget for the affordable housing project for which the applicant is applying for affordable housing funds or for a
housing assistance grant;
e. Current independent financial audit;
f. If the applicant is a nonprofit organization:
(1) Proof of 501(c)(3) tax status;
(2) Documentation that confirms that no part of its net earning inures to the benefit of any member, founder, contributor or individual;
g. If an applicant is a legal entity, including a nonprofit organization:
(1) A current annual budget for the applicant, including all sources and uses of funds, not just those related to relevant programs,
and/or current annual budget only for the program for which the applicant is applying for a housing assistance grant, or as
otherwise may be required by the city and/or the MFA in its discretion;
(2) An approved mission statement that the applicant has among its purposes significant activities related to providing housing or
housing related services to persons of low or moderate income;
(3) A list of members of the applicant's current board of directors or other governing body, including designated homeless
participation, where required by the city;
(4) Evidence (or a certification as may be allowed by the city) that the applicant has a functioning accounting system that is
operated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, or has a designated entity that will maintain such an
accounting system consistent with generally accepted accounting principles;
(5) Evidence that the applicant has no significant outstanding or unresolved monitoring findings from the city, the MFA, or its most
recent independent financial audit; or if it has any significant outstanding or unresolved monitoring findings from the city, the MFA,
or its most recent independent financial audit, it has a certified letter from the city, the MFA, or its auditor stating that the findings
are in the process of being resolved;
(6) An organizational chart, including job titles and qualifications for the applicant's employees or as otherwise may be required by
the city and/or the MFA in its discretion. Job descriptions may be submitted as appropriate;
(7) Documentation that the applicant is duly authorized under state or local law and certification that the applicant is in good
standing with any state authorities, including the public regulation commission and the secretary of state;
h. Information as may be required by the city in order for it to determine the financial and management stability of the applicant;
i. Information as may be required by the city in order for it to determine the demonstrated commitment of the applicant to the
community;
j. A completed cost-benefit analysis of the affordable housing project proposed by the applicant. Any cost-benefit analysis must
include documentation that clearly evidences that there is or will be a direct benefit from the project proposed by the applicant to the
community and/or to the purported beneficiaries of the project, consistent with the provisions of the act;
k. Information to the city supporting the benefits to the community of the affordable housing project proposed by the applicant;
l. Proof of substantive or matching funds or contributions and/or in-kind donations to the proposed affordable housing project in
connection with the application for funds under the act. Nothing contained herein shall prevent or preclude an applicant from
matching or using local, private, or federal funds in connection with a specific housing assistance grant or a grant of affordable
housing funds under the act;
m. Any certifications or other proof which it may require in order for the city to confirm that the applicant is in compliance with all
applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and ordinances;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 42/318
n. A verification signed by the applicant before a notary public that the information provided, upon penalty of perjury, is true and
correct to the best of the applicant's information, knowledge, and belief;
o. Certifications as may be required by the city and signed by chief executive officer, board president, mayor or other authorized
official of the applicant, provided that the city at its discretion may waive any of the foregoing requirements if not deemed applicable.
2. Additional Requirements For Multi-Family Housing Projects: Applicants who are submitting applications in connection with a multifamily
housing program must also submit to the city the following additional information:
a. A verified certificate that, among other things:
(1) Identifies every multi-family housing program, including every assisted or insured project of HUD, RHS, FHA and any other state
or local government housing finance agency in which such applicant has been or is a principal;
(2) States that, except as shown on such certificate:
(A) No mortgage on a project listed on such certificate has ever been in default, assigned to the federal government or
foreclosed, nor has any mortgage relief by the mortgagee been given;
(B) There has not been a suspension or termination of payments under any HUD assistance contract in which the applicant has
had a legal or beneficial interest;
(C) Such applicant has not been suspended, debarred or otherwise restricted by any department or agency of the federal
government or any state government from doing business with such department or agency because of misconduct or alleged
misconduct; and
(D) The applicant has not defaulted on an obligation covered by a surety or performance bond.
If such applicant cannot certify to each of the above, such applicant shall submit a signed statement to explain the facts and
circumstances that such applicant believes will explain the lack of certification. The city may then determine if such applicant is or
is not qualified.
b. The experience of the applicant in developing, financing and managing multiple-family housing projects; and
c. Whether the applicant has been found by the United States equal employment opportunity commission or the New Mexico human
rights commission to be in noncompliance with any applicable civil rights laws.
3. Additional Requirements For Mortgage Lenders: If the applicant is a mortgage lender, the city shall consider, among other things:
a. The financial condition of the applicant;
b. The terms and conditions of any loans to be made;
c. The aggregate principal balances of any loans to be made to each applicant compared with the aggregate principal balances of the
loans to be made to all other applicants;
d. The city's assessment of the ability of the applicant or its designated servicer to act as originator and servicer of mortgage loans for
any multi-family housing programs or other programs to be financed; and
e. Previous participation by the applicant in the MFA's programs and HUD, federal housing authority, or rural housing service
programs.
4. Submission Procedure:
a. Time, Place And Method Of Submission Delivery:
(1) If the city has issued an RFP, all applications must be received by the city no later than the deadline set forth in the RFP;
otherwise, all applications must be received by the city by the deadline the city has established in connection with the respective
award or grant. So that any qualifying grantees may be selected prior to January of the year in which any MFA housing
assistance grant would be made, the city shall issue any RFPs, solicit any applications, or otherwise identify any qualifying
grantees no later than October 15 of any year in order to allow sufficient time for prospective applicants to respond to any such
RFP, solicitation, or otherwise, and further to allow the MFA not less than forty five (45) days in which to review any such
applications or otherwise determine or confirm that an applicant is a qualifying grantee under the act and consistent with the
rules.
(2) Applications shall be submitted by applicants to the city in the form required by the city and shall contain all information which is
required by this chapter and any RFP which may have been issued.
b. Additional Factors: The application procedures shall take into consideration:
(1) Timely completion and submission to the city of an application or other appropriate response to any solicitation by the city;
(2) Timely submission of all other information and documentation related to the program required by the city as set forth in this
chapter or as set forth in the rules;
(3) Timely payment of any fees required to be paid to the city at the time of submission of the application; and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 43/318
(4) Compliance with program eligibility requirements as set forth in the act, the rules and this chapter.
c. Submission Format:
(1) City forms or MFA forms (if available) must be used when provided and no substitutions will be accepted; however, attachments
may be provided as necessary.
(2) An applicant's failure to provide or complete any element of an application, including all requirements of the city or as may be
listed on any RFP, may result in the rejection of the application prior to review.
(3) Illegible information, information inconsistent with other information provided in the application, and/or incomplete forms will be
treated as missing information and evaluated accordingly.
(4) The city and the MFA reserve the right to request further information from any applicant so long as the request is done fairly and
does not provide any applicant an undue advantage over another applicant.
(5) The city in its discretion may cancel any RFP or reject any or all proposals in whole or part submitted by any applicant.
(6) Neither the city nor the MFA shall be responsible for any expenses incurred by an applicant in preparing and submitting an
application. However, the city or the MFA, as applicable, may establish and collect fees from applicants who file applications.
Notice that fees will be charged and the amount of any such fees shall be included by the city or the MFA, as applicable, in any
RFP or otherwise shall be advertised as part of the application solicitation process.
5. Review By The City: On receipt of an application, the city shall:
a. Determine whether the application submitted by the applicant is complete and responsive;
b. Determine whether the applicant is a "qualifying grantee" as defined herein and in the act;
c. Review and analyze whether the applicant has shown a demonstrated need for activities to promote and provide affordable housing
and related services to persons of low or moderate income;
d. Determine whether the applicant has demonstrated experience related to providing housing or services to persons of low or
moderate income, as well as experience and/or the capacity to administer the affordable housing program or project for which the
applicant has applied;
e. Determine whether the applicant's proposal provides a plan for coordinating with other service providers in the community; whether
the applicant's plan addresses how persons of low income or moderate income in need of housing and/or housing related
supportive services can receive supportive services and referrals to federal, state and local resources; and, whether the applicant's
plan addresses outreach efforts to reach the population to be served as identified by the city in any RFP or otherwise;
f. Determine whether the applicant has support from public service agencies, or such other support as may be required by the city
and/or the MFA in its discretion, for its proposed services in the community;
g. Ascertain the amount of any matching funds or in-kind services specific to the program that may be utilized by the applicant in
connection with the program;
h. Ascertain whether any local, private, or federal funds will be used by the applicant in connection with the specific grant for which the
applicant is applying;
i. Ascertain whether the applicant has and can demonstrate the capability to manage the implementation of the program for which the
applicant is applying;
j. If applicant is a prior recipient of either a housing assistance grant, affordable housing funds and/or other program funds, confirm
that the applicant had no outstanding findings or matters of noncompliance with program requirements from the city or the MFA, as
applicable, or if it has any such findings, it has a certified letter from the city, the MFA, or auditor stating that the findings are in the
process of being resolved;
k. If applicant is a prior recipient of either a housing assistance grant, affordable housing funds and/or other program funds, confirm
that the applicant reasonably committed and expended the funds under the prior program and/or met anticipated production levels
as set forth in any contract with the city or the MFA, as applicable, for those prior program funds;
l. Evaluate the applicant's proposal in part based upon the applicant's current financial audit;
m. Evaluate the applicant's proposed budget for the project for which the applicant is applying for affordable housing funds or a
housing assistance grant which proposed budget must be approved by the city before applicant can be approved as a qualifying
grantee and any expenditure of grant funds under the act or granted property is transferred to the applicant;
n. On receipt of an application from a builder, the city will analyze the builder's ability to construct and sell sufficient residential housing
units to persons of low or moderate income within the time or times as may be required by the town; and
o. Consider other factors it deems appropriate to ensure a reasonable geographic allocation for all affordable housing programs.
6. Certification By The City To The MFA: The city shall certify an application to the MFA in writing upon:
a. Completion of its review of the application;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 44/318
b. Determination that the application is complete;
c. Determination that the requirements of the act, the rules and this chapter have been satisfied; and
d. Determination that the applicant is a qualifying grantee.
7. Review By The MFA: The MFA upon its receipt of the certification from the city may, in its discretion, review the application and any of
the materials submitted by the applicant to the city. The MFA may also request any additional information from the applicant, which it
may require in order to determine whether the applicant is a qualifying grantee under the act and the application is complete. The MFA
will then notify the city of its determination of whether or not the application is complete and that the requirements of the act and the
rules have been satisfied and the applicant is a qualifying grantee. Unless the period is extended for good cause shown, the MFA
shall act on an application within forty five (45) days of its receipt of any application, which the MFA deems to be complete, and, if not
acted upon, the application shall be deemed to be approved.
8. Notification Of Acceptance: The city, upon completion of its review of the application and an evaluation of the criteria for approval of
the application as set forth in this chapter and in any RFP issued by the city and upon its determination that the applicant is a
qualifying grantee, and upon its receipt of notification from the MFA that it agrees that the application is complete and that the act and
rules have been satisfied and the applicant is a qualifying grantee, by written notice shall notify each applicant which has submitted an
application of the approval or disapproval of its application. Upon approval of its application, the applicant shall be considered
approved to participate in the affordable housing program. The city's and the MFA's determination of any application shall be
conclusive.
D. Additional Requirements: Upon acceptance, the following additional requirements shall apply to any applicant, who is a qualifying
grantee:
1. Contractual Requirements: The qualifying grantee shall enter into one or more contracts with the city, which contract(s) shall be
consistent with the act and subject to the review of the MFA, in its discretion, and which contract(s) shall include remedies and default
provisions in the event of the unsatisfactory performance by the qualifying grantee.
2. Security Provisions; Collateral Requirements: In accordance with the act, the rules and this chapter, the city shall require the
qualifying grantee to execute documents, which will provide adequate security against the loss of public funds or property in the event
the qualifying grantee abandons or fails to complete the affordable housing project, and which shall further provide, as may be
permitted by law, for the recovery of any attorney fees and costs which the city and/or the MFA may incur in enforcing the provisions
of this chapter, the rules, the act and/or any agreement entered into by the city and the qualifying grantee, and which documents may
include, but are not limited to, the following: note, mortgage, loan agreement, land use restriction agreement, restrictive covenant
agreements and/or any other agreement which the city may require in order to allow for any funds which the qualifying grantee may
receive under a housing assistance grant or affordable housing funds to be adequately secured and to allow the city and the MFA to
ensure that such funds shall be utilized by the qualifying grantee in accordance with the act, the rules and this chapter.
3. Performance Schedule And Criteria: The qualifying grantee shall be required to abide by a reasonable performance schedule and
performance criteria that the city, in its discretion, may establish.
4. Examination Of Books And Records: The qualifying grantee shall submit to and the city shall cause to be made such examinations of
the books and records of each qualifying grantee as the city and/or the MFA deems necessary or appropriate to determine the
qualifying grantee's compliance with the terms of the act, the rules, this chapter and any contracts between the qualifying grantee and
the city. The city and/or the MFA may require each qualifying grantee to pay the costs of any such examination.
5. Infrastructure Cost Reimbursement Contracts:
a. Cost Reimbursements: Payment to a qualifying grantee under cost reimbursable contract provisions shall be made upon the city's
receipt from the qualifying grantee of certified and documented invoices for actual expenditures allowable under the terms of any
agreement between the qualifying grantee and the city.
b. Cost Reimbursements For Units Of Service: Payment under any unit cost contract provisions shall be made upon the city's receipt
from the qualifying grantee of a certified and documented invoice showing the number of units of service provided during the billing
period.
c. Rate At Which Costs Incurred: Under unit cost or cost reimbursable contracts, it is anticipated that costs will be incurred by the
qualifying grantee at an approximate level rate during the term of any agreement between the qualifying grantee and the city. If the
city determines that the qualifying grantee is underspending or overspending, then the city may reduce the budget and/or exercise
such other budgetary fiscal controls it deems appropriate.
d. Invoices: Qualifying grantees shall not submit invoices more than once a month, unless written approval is obtained in advance
from the city. Failure to submit invoices within twenty (20) days of the close of the month for which payment is sought may result in
the nonavailability of funds for reimbursement.
e. No Dual Application Of Costs: The qualifying grantee shall certify that any direct or indirect costs claimed by the qualifying grantee
will not be allocable to or included as a cost of any other program, project, contract, or activity operated by the qualifying grantee
and which has not been approved by the city in advance, in writing.
f. Prohibition Of Substitution Of Funds: Any affordable housing funds or other amounts received by qualifying grantee may not be
used by qualifying grantee to replace other amounts made available or designated by the state or local governments through
appropriations for use for the purposes of the act.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 45/318
g. Cost Allocation: The qualifying grantee shall clearly identify and distribute all costs incurred pertaining to the affordable housing
project by a methodology and cost allocation plan at times and in a manner prescribed by, or acceptable to the city.
6. Additional Information: Qualifying grantees shall provide the city with any and all information which the city reasonably may require in
order for it to confirm that the qualifying grantees continue to satisfy the requirements of the act, the rules and this chapter throughout
the term of any contract and/or any affordability period or otherwise as may be required by the city or the MFA in its discretion. At a
minimum, on an annual basis, the city shall certify to the MFA in writing that to the best of its knowledge the qualifying grantee is in
compliance with applicable provisions of the act, the rules and this chapter.
7. Compliance: All projects qualified to receive assistance pursuant to the act, the rules and this chapter shall also comply with all
requirements of this code, as amended from time to time.
E. Affordable Housing Requirements: All affordable housing funds or housing assistance grants awarded under the act are to be used by
qualifying grantees for the benefit of persons of low or moderate income subject to the provisions of the act and with particular regard to
their housing related needs.
1. Single-Family Property: Qualifying grantees shall agree that they shall maintain any single-family property which has been acquired,
rehabilitated, weatherized, converted, leased, repaired, constructed, or which property has otherwise benefited from affordable
housing funds, including, but not limited to, any loans which have been repaid with affordable housing funds and which loans
previously were secured by such properties, as affordable housing for so long as any or all of the affordable housing funds which have
been awarded, loaned, or otherwise conveyed to the qualifying grantee are unpaid and outstanding or the affordability period,
whichever is longer.
2. Multi-Family Property:
a. Single Apartment Within A Multi-Family Property: Qualifying grantees shall agree that, if any single apartments are to be
rehabilitated, weatherized, converted, leased, repaired, constructed, or otherwise are to benefit from affordable housing funds,
those apartments shall be leased to persons of low or moderate income at the time of any such award. Qualifying grantees, who are
the landlords and/or owners of such properties, shall further agree to contribute at least sixty percent (60%) of the cost of the
rehabilitation, weatherization, conversion, lease, repair, and/or construction. Qualifying grantees also shall agree that the persons of
low or moderate income, who are tenants of those apartments, shall be allowed to remain tenants for so long as there are no
uncured defaults by those tenants under their respective leases and provided that there is no just cause for the landlord to terminate
any lease agreement with those tenants.
b. Multiple Apartments: Qualifying grantees shall agree that, if multiple apartments or an entire multi-family property are to be
acquired, rehabilitated, weatherized, converted, leased, repaired, constructed, or otherwise are to benefit from affordable housing
funds, including, but not limited to, any loans which have been repaid with affordable housing funds and which loans previously
were secured by such properties, they shall maintain not less than sixty percent (60%) of the housing units as affordable housing for
so long as any or all of the affordable housing funds which have been awarded, loaned, or otherwise conveyed to the qualifying
grantee are unpaid and outstanding or the affordability period, whichever is longer.
3. Nonresidential Property: Qualifying grantees shall agree that they shall maintain any nonresidential property which has been
acquired, rehabilitated, weatherized, converted, leased, repaired, constructed, or which property has otherwise benefited from
affordable housing funds, including, but not limited to, any loans which have been repaid with affordable housing funds and which
loans previously were secured by such properties, as a facility which provides housing related services to persons of low or moderate
income for so long as any or all of the affordable housing funds which have been awarded, loaned, or otherwise conveyed to the
qualifying grantee are unpaid and outstanding or the affordability period, whichever is longer.
4. Housing Assistance Grant Affordability Requirements: Qualifying grantees shall agree that they shall maintain any land or buildings
received as a housing assistance grant as either single-family or multi-family affordable housing in accordance with subsections E1
and E2 of this section or as a facility which provides housing related services to persons of low or moderate income in accordance
with subsection E3 of this section (as applicable) for the duration of the affordability period. Qualifying grantees shall agree that they
shall maintain any land or buildings for which they have received the costs of infrastructure as a housing assistance grant as either
single-family or multi-family affordable housing or as a facility which provides housing related services to persons of low or moderate
income (as applicable) for the duration of the affordability period. In calculating the affordability period for housing assistance grants of
either land or buildings, the fair market value of the land or buildings or the costs of infrastructure at the time of the donation by the
state or city shall apply.
5. Affordability Period: The city, in its discretion, may increase the affordability period in any contract, note, mortgage, loan agreement,
land use restriction agreement, restrictive covenant agreements and/or any other agreement which the city may enter into with any
qualifying grantee or beneficiary of the affordable housing funds or of the housing assistance grant. (See definition of "affordability
period" in section 1-14-3 of this chapter.) Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the discretion of the MFA, weatherization funds conveyed
from the state to the MFA and/or any other similar conveyances where an affordability period is not practical, shall not be subject to
the affordability period requirements of this subsection E; but nevertheless, any such conveyances may be subject to recapture on
some prorated basis as determined by the city and/or the MFA.
F. Consent To Jurisdiction: Each qualifying grantee shall consent to the jurisdiction of the courts of the state over any proceeding to enforce
compliance with the terms of the act, the rules and this chapter and any agreement between the qualifying grantee and the city and/or
the MFA.
G. Recertification Procedures:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 46/318
1. The qualifying grantee must meet the requirements of the act, the rules and this chapter both at the time of any award and throughout
the term of any grant and contract related thereto.
2. The city may establish procedures for recertifying qualifying grantees from time to time.
3. Qualifying grantees that fail to satisfy the requirements for recertification shall cease to be eligible and shall be denied further
participation in affordable housing programs until the requirements of the city and the MFA are satisfied.
H. Compliance With The Law: Qualifying grantee shall provide the city with any certifications or other proof that it may require in order for
the city and the MFA to confirm that the qualifying grantee and the qualifying grantee's proposed project are in compliance with all
applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and ordinances.
I. Extension Of Affordable Housing Programs: The MFA shall have the power to create variations or extensions of affordable housing
programs, or additional programs that comply with the act and the rules.
J. City Grant Requirements:
1. The city is authorized to make housing assistance grants under the act. Upon determination that the city will make a housing
assistance grant, including the use of any affordable housing funds, the city shall provide the MFA with the following:
a. Documentation that confirms that the city has an existing valid affordable housing plan;
b. A copy of the proposed ordinance which provides for the authorization of the housing assistance grant, including the use of any
affordable housing funds, together with a written certification that the proposed grantee is in compliance with the act and the rules
so that the MFA may confirm that the ordinance is in compliance with the act, that the application is complete, and that the proposed
grantee is a qualifying grantee under the act and the rules.
2. Prior to the submission of the ordinance to the council, the council must approve the budget submitted by the applicant.
3. An ordinance authorizing the city to make a housing assistance grant and/or distribute affordable housing funds:
a. Must authorize the grant, including use of affordable housing funds, if any;
b. Must state the requirements and purpose of the grant;
c. Must authorize the transfer or disbursement to the qualifying grantee only after a budget is submitted to and approved by the
council;
d. Must comply with the rules, as amended; and
e. May provide for matching or using local, private or federal funds either through direct participation with a federal agency pursuant to
federal law or through indirect participation through the MFA.
4. The MFA shall act to approve the proposed housing assistance grant authorized by the city within forty five (45) days of its receipt of
the documentation required in subsections J1, J2, and J3 of this section.
5. The city, in its discretion, may also hold any award of affordable housing funds or any housing assistance grant made by the city in
suspense pending the issuance by the city of any RFP or pending the award of the affordable housing funds or of the housing
assistance grant by the city to the qualifying grantee without the issuance of an RFP by the city. Any award of affordable housing
funds or a housing assistance grant by the city shall subject the qualifying grantee of the award or grant to the oversight of the city and
the MFA under this chapter and the rules.
K. School District And Postsecondary Educational Institution Grant Requirements: If a school district or a postsecondary education
institution intends to make a housing assistance grant, then it shall provide the MFA with written certification that the proposed grantee is
in compliance with the act, the rules and this chapter so that the MFA may confirm that the application is complete and that the proposed
grantee is a qualifying grantee under the act, rules and this chapter. Any transfer of land by a school district to the city to be further
granted as part or all of an affordable housing grant shall be subject to the additional limitations contained in the act that the school
district and the council enter into a contract that provides the school district with a negotiated number of affordable housing units that will
be reserved for employees of the school district. Any transfer of land by a postsecondary educational institution shall be subject to the
additional limitations contained in the act that: 1) the property transferred shall be granted by the city as part or all of an affordable
housing grant; and 2) the governing board of the postsecondary educational institution and the council enter into a contract that provides
the postsecondary educational institution with affordable housing units. As used in this section, "postsecondary educational institution"
means a state university or a public community college. The city, in its discretion, may also hold any housing assistance grant made by
any school district or postsecondary educational institution in suspense pending the issuance by the city of any RFP or pending the
award of the housing assistance grant by the city to the qualifying grantee without the issuance of an RFP by the city. Any award of a
housing assistance grant by a school district or a postsecondary educational institution shall subject the qualifying grantee of the grant to
the oversight of the city and the MFA under these rules.
L. Appropriation: All housing assistance grants from the state pursuant to the act shall be appropriated to the department of finance and
administration for disbursement by the MFA to a qualifying grantee consistent with the rules adopted by the MFA for whatever program
to which the grant is applicable and consistent with the act. In the event that the MFA does not currently have a program in place which
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 47/318
is consistent with the terms of any grant being made by the state, then the MFA, in its discretion, may create a program to fulfill the
terms of the grant and shall adopt rules consistent with the act. Such rules may include provisions for matching or using local, private, or
federal funds in connection with a specific grant, but matching or using federal funds shall not be prohibited. (Ord. 1173, 12-10-2007)
1-14-5: DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED:
The development, construction, occupancy and operation of an affordable housing program or an affordable housing project financed or
assisted under the act shall be undertaken in a manner consistent with principles of nondiscrimination and equal opportunity, and the city
shall require compliance by all qualifying grantees with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations relating to affirmative action,
nondiscrimination and equal opportunity. (Ord. 1173, 12-10-2007)
1-14-6: ADMINISTRATION:
The city and the MFA shall administer any affordable housing programs in accordance with provisions of the act, the rules, this chapter, any
applicable state and federal laws and regulations as each of which may be amended or supplemented from time to time. The city and the
MFA, in establishing, funding and administering the affordable housing programs and by making, executing, delivering and performing any
award, contract, grant or any other activity or transaction contemplated by the act, shall not violate any provision of law, rule or regulation or
any decree, writ, order, injunction, judgment, determination or award and will not contravene the provisions of or otherwise cause a default
under any of its agreements, indentures, or other instruments to which it may be bound. (Ord. 1173, 12-10-2007)
1-14-7: TERMINATION:
The council may repeal this chapter and terminate the city's affordable housing program and any or all contracts undertaken in its authority.
Termination shall be by ordinance at a public hearing or in accordance with the terms of the contract. If an ordinance or a contract is
repealed or terminated, all contract provisions of the contract regarding termination shall be satisfied. (Ord. 1173, 12-10-2007)
Chapter 15
LOCAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN
1-15-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter may be cited as the CITY OF DEMING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN ORDINANCE (the "economic development plan").
(Ord. 1247, 5-12-2014)
1-15-2: AUTHORITY:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority conferred upon municipalities and counties to allow public support of economic
development projects through the local economic development act, sections 5-10-1 through 5-10-13 New Mexico Statutes Annotated, 1978
(the "act"). (Ord. 1247, 5-12-2014)
1-15-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to allow, promote, foster and enhance the establishment within the city or outside the city, and pursuant to a
joint powers agreement with one or more other municipalities or counties as authorized by the "act", if desirable and necessary, of any
economic development projects, including investments in arts and cultural districts created pursuant to the arts and cultural district act1 that
may be qualified under the said "act", and be approved by the city, and its joint powers partner or partners, if applicable. Through this
economic development plan the city intends to create new investment and job opportunities by providing land, buildings, infrastructure for
facilities to support new or expanding businesses or other resources, as appropriate. The city will employ adequate safeguards to protect
against the unauthorized use of public monies, property and other resources. (Ord. 1247, 5-12-2014)
1-15-4: DEFINITIONS:
The definition of terms used in this chapter shall be as set forth in the "local economic development act" section 5-10-3 New Mexico
Statutes Annotated, 1978. (Ord. 1247, 5-12-2014)
1-15-5: EARLIER ACTIONS CONFIRMED:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 48/318
All action heretofore taken not consistent with the provisions of this chapter, by the city and officers of the city, directed toward the adoption
of the economic development plan described below is hereby ratified, approved and confirmed. (Ord. 1247, 5-12-2014)
1-15-6: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
Pursuant to section 5-10-6 New Mexico Statutes Annotated, 1978, there is hereby adopted the city's comprehensive plan, July 2010, which
plan contains an economic development component, which component may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 1247, 5-12-2014)
1-15-7: CITY AUTHORITY:
The city shall have the authority pursuant to this chapter and the economic development plan to exercise the full powers permitted under
the act, except as specifically provided in this chapter. It is the intent of the city to evaluate the form and extent of aid provided to qualifying
entities as defined in the act, the security to be provided to the city and other details of each economic development project on a case by
case basis dependent upon the particular circumstances of each proposed project. (Ord. 1247, 5-12-2014)
1-15-8: CONSERVATION OF CITY RESOURCES:
In order to conserve the city's financial resources, the city shall attempt, to the extent reasonable and practicable, to provide aid to
qualifying entities in the form of the use of land, buildings, infrastructure already owned by the city or other resources available to the city, in
preference to aid consisting of expenditures for the purchase of land and the construction and installation of infrastructure, or other similar
expenditures. (Ord. 1247, 5-12-2014)
1-15-9: RESTRICTIONS ON PUBLIC EXPENDITURES AND PLEDGES OF CREDIT:
A. The total amount of public money expended and the value of credit pledged in the fiscal year in which that money is expended by the city
for economic development projects pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of the act shall not exceed ten percent
(10%) of the annual general fund expenditures of the city in that fiscal year. These limits shall not apply to:
1. The value of any land or building contributed to any project pursuant to a project participation agreement.
2. Revenue generated through the imposition of the municipal infrastructure gross receipts tax pursuant to the municipal local option
gross receipts taxes act2 for furthering or implementing economic development plans and projects as defined in the act or projects as
defined in the statewide economic development finance act3; provided that no more than the greater of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) or ten percent (10%) of the revenue collected shall be used for promotion and administration of professional services
contracts related to the implementation of any such economic development plan adopted by the city council.
3. The proceeds of a revenue bond issue to which the municipal infrastructure gross receipts tax revenue is pledged.
4. Funds donated by private entities to be used for defraying the cost of a project.
B. Where the city generates revenue for economic development projects to which the limits of subsection A of this section do not apply shall
create an economic development fund into which such revenues shall be deposited. The economic development fund and income from
the fund shall be deposited as provided by law. Monies in the economic development fund may be expended only as provided in the act
or in the statewide economic development finance act. (Ord. 1247, 5-12-2014)
1-15-10: ARTS AND CULTURAL DISTRICTS; RESTRICTIONS ON EXPENDITURES:
Where the city intends to expend monies from an economic development fund for arts and cultural district purposes, the provisions of
sections 5-10-4D through 5-10-4G, New Mexico Statutes Annotated, 1978, shall apply. (Ord. 1247, 5-12-2014)
1-15-11: COMPETITIVE AND NONCOMPETITIVE PROPOSALS:
The city may require the qualifying entities to submit competitive proposals for the economic development projects, or may, to the extent
consistent with law, consider and approve project applications without a competitive proposal process. Whether or not the city solicits
proposals for projects, the city, in its sole discretion, shall have the right to reject any proposal. (Ord. 1247, 5-12-2014)
1-15-12: PROJECT EVALUATION:
The city will evaluate proposed projects on the basis of the provisions of the economic development plan, the financial and management
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 49/318
capability and stability of the qualifying entity, the demonstrated commitment of the qualifying entity to the city, the benefit of the project to
the city and any other information the city believes necessary for a full review of the project. The city may negotiate with a qualifying entity
on the type or amount of assistance to be provided or on the scope of the project. (Ord. 1247, 5-12-2014)
1-15-13: PUBLIC INSPECTION OF PROPOSAL:
Where the city proposes to approve an economic development project application, it shall make the application and all relevant supporting
documentation available for public inspection except to the extent that such disclosure would impair the qualifying entity's legitimate interest
in protecting trade secrets or other confidential information. Nonconfidential portions of the application shall be available for public
inspection at the office of the city clerk for at least the period from the date of publication of notice of intent to adopt an ordinance approving
the project through the date of the adoption of such ordinance. (Ord. 1247, 5-12-2014)
1-15-14: PROJECT PARTICIPATION AGREEMENT; DUTIES AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. The city shall enter into a project participation agreement with the successful qualifying entity and shall require a substantive contribution
from the qualifying entity for each economic development project. Public support provided for an economic development project shall be
in exchange for a substantive contribution from the qualifying entity. The contribution shall be of value and may be paid in money, in-kind
services, jobs, expanded tax base, property or other thing or service of value for the expansion of the economy. The qualifying entity
shall provide security to the city and to any other governmental entity providing public support for an economic development project. The
security shall reflect the amount of public support provided to the qualifying entity.
B. At a minimum, the project participation agreement shall set out:
1. The contributions to be made by each party to the participation agreement.
2. The security provided to the city and to each other governmental entity that provides public support for the economic development
project by the qualifying entity in the form of a lien, mortgage or other indenture and the pledge of the qualifying business's financial or
material participation and cooperation to guarantee the qualifying entity's performance pursuant to the project participation agreement.
3. A schedule for project development and completion, including measurable goals and time limits for those goals.
4. Provisions for performance review and actions to be taken upon a determination that project performance is unsatisfactory. (Ord.
1247, 5-12-2014)
1-15-15: PROJECT REVENUES; SPECIAL FUND; ANNUAL AUDIT:
A. City revenues dedicated or pledged for funding or financing of economic development projects shall be deposited in a separate account.
Separate accounts shall be established for each separate project. Money in the special account shall be expended only for economic
development project purposes, which may include the payment of necessary professional service contract costs.
B. The city shall provide for an annual independent audit in accordance with the audit act4 of each special fund and project account. The
audit shall be submitted to the city. The audit is a public record. (Ord. 1247, 5-12-2014)
1-15-16: PLAN AND PROJECT TERMINATION:
A. At any time after approval of an economic development plan, the city council may enact an ordinance terminating the economic
development plan and dissolving or terminating any or all of the projects. An ordinance terminating an economic development plan shall
not be effective unless the ordinance provides for satisfying existing contracts and the rights of the parties arising from those contracts.
B. Any unexpended and unencumbered balances remaining in any project fund or account upon termination of the plan and termination or
dissolution of a project may be transferred to a general fund of the city. (Ord. 1247, 5-12-2014)
1-15-17: AUTHORITY OF CITY OFFICERS:
The officers of the city are hereby authorized and directed to take all action necessary and/or appropriate to effect the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 1247, 5-12-2014)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 50/318
Chapter 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
2-1-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
There shall be, and hereby is created a planning and zoning commission of the city pursuant to New Mexico Statutes Annotated sections 3-
19-1 to 3-19-12. (Ord. 406, 5-18-1966; amd. Ord. 944, 2-20-1997; 2001 Code)
2-1-2: APPOINTMENTS; TERMS; VACANCIES:
A. Membership; Appointment: The planning and zoning commission shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be residents of the city.
The members of the planning and zoning commission shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council.
B. Terms: All of said members shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years.
C. Failure To Attend Meetings; Removal: In the event a member shall fail to attend three (3) consecutive legally scheduled and advertised
meetings of the planning and zoning commission, the commission may remove that member from the commission by a majority vote of
the other members.
D. Filling Vacancies: Any vacancy thereby created on the commission shall be filled by the mayor and city council as provided in this
section. (Ord. 944, 2-20-1997)
2-1-3: ELECTION OF OFFICERS:
The planning and zoning commission shall elect its officers and transact such business, hold such meetings and keep such records as are
required by law. (Ord. 406, 5-18-1966; amd. Ord. 944, 2-20-1997)
2-1-4: POWERS; AUTHORITY:
The planning and zoning commission shall have all powers granted to it by law and shall have authority to adopt subdivision regulations, to
plat and adopt major street plans, and to adopt a master plan for the city and the area around the city within the platting and planning
jurisdiction of the planning and zoning commission, and shall have the power, authority, jurisdiction and duty to enforce and carry out the
provisions of law relating to zoning in the city. (Ord. 406, 5-18-1966; amd. Ord. 944, 2-20-1997)
2-1-5: MASTER PLAN; RECOMMENDATIONS:
Any master plan prepared and adopted by the planning and zoning commission shall be submitted to the city council, who shall adopt,
revise, amend or rescind such plan by ordinance duly adopted. The city council may only revise, amend or rescind such plan by a two-thirds
(2/3) vote of all members of the council. (Ord. 406, 5-18-1966; amd. Ord. 944, 2-20-1997)
2-1-6: PROTEST; NOTICE:
When any person is dissatisfied with any order, decision or determination of the planning and zoning commission, review may be had with
the city council by written notice filed with the city clerk within twenty (20) days after the effective date of such order, decision or
determination of the planning and zoning commission. The city council may overrule the decision of the planning and zoning commission
only by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all of its members. (Ord. 406, 5-18-1966; amd. Ord. 944, 2-20-1997)
Chapter 2
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
2-2-1: PUBLIC LIBRARY:
There shall be and hereby is established in the city a free public library to be hereafter known as the Deming public library to be established
as a proper and legitimate object of city expenditures and operation and as a part of the government of the city. (Ord. 1064, 7-8-2002)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 51/318
2-2-2: LIBRARY BOARD ESTABLISHED; TERMS:
A. Appointments: There shall be, and hereby is established for the operation of said library a board of trustees to be known as the Deming
public library board of trustees, which board shall consist of seven (7) members and shall be appointed from among the residents of
Luna County, New Mexico. Four (4) members shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council; two (2)
members shall be appointed by the chair of the board of county commissioners of Luna County, with the advice and consent of the
board of county commissioners of Luna County; and one member shall be appointed by the chair of the Deming public schools board of
education, with the advice and consent of said board of education.
B. Terms: The terms of appointments shall be as follows: the member appointed by said board of education, one member appointed by said
board of county commissioners and one member appointed by the city shall serve for the term of one year; one of the members
appointed by the city and one member appointed by said board of county commissioners shall serve for the term of two (2) years; and
two (2) members appointed by the city shall serve for the term of three (3) years from and after the initial appointment and the adoption
of this section in 2002. (Ord. 1226, 7-9-2012)
2-2-3: VACANCIES:
Upon the death, resignation or inability of members of said board to act, the vacancy of said member shall be filled by appointment of the
organization who appointed such member, to fill the unexpired term. (Ord. 264, 3-3-1957)
2-2-4: COMPENSATION:
All members of said board shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 264, 3-3-1957)
2-2-5: ORGANIZATION:
At the first meeting of the said board the members thereof shall elect a president, vice president, and other officers as may be necessary
and proper to properly carry out the functions of said library. (Ord. 264, 3-3-1957)
2-2-6: LIBRARY PROPERTY:
Said board of trustees shall enter into any such transactions relating to the establishment, support and maintenance of said library with the
board of county commissioners and the board of education, to effectuate the purposes for which this chapter is adopted; and for the
purpose of establishing a library, the city shall and hereby does accept as a gift the conveyance of all of the real and personal property of
any kind whatsoever now belonging to, or in the name of Deming Library Association, a nonprofit corporation of the state. (Ord. 264, 3-3-
1957)
2-2-7: CONTRACTS:
The city shall and hereby is authorized and empowered to enter into any contract to carry out the purposes of the establishment and
maintenance of the public library and to that end may enter into such contracts with any state, federal, county or municipal agency as the
city may deem necessary and proper. (Ord. 264, 3-3-1957)
2-2-8: MEETINGS:
The library board shall meet on the last Tuesday of even numbered months or as needed basis as determined by staff or by the board.
Time and place of the meeting will be set by staff. (Ord. 1226, 7-9-2012)
Chapter 3
PARK COMMISSION
2-3-1: COMMISSION CREATED; APPOINTMENT; TERMS:
A. Appointments; Terms: A park commission is hereby created, to consist of seven (7) members, appointed as follows: two (2) for a term of
one year, two (2) for a term of two (2) years, two (2) for a term of three (3) years. The seventh member of the commission shall be
appointed for a term of two (2) years. The members of the commission shall draw lots to determine among themselves the tenure of
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 52/318
their respective terms. After the first appointment, all terms shall be for three (3) years, so that two (2) commissioners shall be appointed
each year. They shall be appointed by the mayor and the city council.
B. Compensation: Commissioners shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 934, 11-12-1996; amd. 2001 Code)
C. Removal: Any member of the commission may be removed from office by the city council. In the event a commission member fails to
attend three (3) consecutive legally scheduled and advertised meetings of the park commission, or fails to attend at least fifty percent
(50%) of the legally scheduled meetings in one calendar year, the commission may remove the member from the commission by a
majority vote of the other members, subject to the approval of the city council. Any vacancy thereby created on the commission shall be
filled by the mayor and city council. (Ord. 1022, 4-10-2000)
2-3-2: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the park commission as a recommending body to make recommendations regarding the acquisition of new parks and
other activities or expenditures directly related to parks within the city of Deming to city council. (Ord. 1212, 5-9-2011)
2-3-3: ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS:
A. Elect Officers: The park commission shall meet within ten (10) days of its appointment and organize by election of one of its members as
the chairperson. Election of a chairperson will be conducted annually.
B. Preside At Meetings: The chairperson shall preside at all meetings; in his or her absence, the commission shall elect one of its members
to act as the chair, who, while so acting shall have all the authority of the chairperson.
C. Record Of Actions: City staff shall keep a complete record of all acts and doings of the commission.
D. Meetings: The commission shall meet on every odd numbered month on the second Tuesday of the month or as needed as determined
by staff or by the commission. The time and place of the meeting will be set by staff.
E. Provide Minutes To City Council: City staff shall furnish the city clerk with a copy of the commission minutes for approval of the city
council. (Ord. 1212, 5-9-2011)
2-3-4: RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall be eligible to appointment as a member of the park commission who does not reside in the city. (Ord. 244, 1954)
Chapter 4
AIRPORT COMMISSION
2-4-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
There is hereby created the Deming airport commission of the city for the purpose of making recommendations to the city council to
administer the operations, condition and performance of all activities relating to the Deming airport property, its facilities and leases and
arrangements. (Ord. 694, 3-8-1982)
2-4-2: APPOINTMENT; TERMS; RESIDENCY:
A. Appointment; Terms: The Deming airport commission shall consist of six (6) members to be appointed by the mayor with the consent of
the city council. Two (2) of the members shall hold office for a term of two (2) years after appointment; two (2) members shall hold office
for a term of three (3) years; and two (2) members shall hold office for a term of four (4) years after their appointment. The original
members of the Deming airport commission shall draw lots to determine the terms of their office.
B. Residency: No person shall be eligible to be a member of said airport commission who does not reside either within the city limits or
within the boundaries of Luna County. (Ord. 694, 3-8-1982)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 53/318
2-4-3: ORGANIZATION; OFFICERS:
Within ten (10) days after the appointment of the members, the Deming airport commission shall meet and organize by the election of one
of its members as chair and another as vice chair. The chair shall preside at all meetings. Should the chair and vice chair, for any reason,
be unable to attend any meetings, then the members of the Deming airport commission shall elect one of its members to act as chair. (Ord.
1160, 8-13-2007)
2-4-4: MEETINGS:
The Deming airport commission shall meet on every even numbered month on the second Tuesday of the month or as needed basis as
determined by staff or by the commission. The time and place of the meeting will be set by staff. (Ord. 1213, 5-9-2011)
2-4-5: COMPENSATION:
All members of the Deming airport commission shall serve without compensation except for actual expenses incurred, but only when
authorized by the chair and approved by the city administrator. (Ord. 1160, 8-13-2007)
2-4-6: REMOVAL OF MEMBERS:
Any member of the Deming airport commission may be removed from his office by the city council. In the event a commission member fails
to attend three (3) consecutive legally scheduled and advertised meetings of the Deming airport commission, the commission may remove
that member from the commission by a majority vote of the other members, subject to approval of the city council. Any vacancy thereby
created on the commission shall be filled by the mayor and council. (Ord. 1160, 8-13-2007)
Chapter 5
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
2-5-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
There is hereby created the industrial development commission of the city for the purpose of making recommendations to the city council to
administer the operations, condition and performance of all activities relating to the Deming industrial park proper, its property, facilities,
leases and arrangements. The commission shall, as a unit, provide support to existing commerce and industry, and coordinate and
administer the effort(s) necessary to develop and attract commerce and industry to Deming/Luna County. (Ord. 697, 5-10-1982)
2-5-2: APPOINTMENT; TERMS; RESIDENCY:
A. Appointment: The industrial development commission shall consist of nine (9) members, of which five (5) members shall be appointed by
the city and four (4) members shall be appointed by the Deming/Luna County chamber of commerce.
B. Terms: Three (3) of the members shall hold office for a term of three (3) years after appointment; three (3) members shall hold office for a
term of two (2) years; and three (3) members shall hold office for a term of one year after their appointment. The original members of the
industrial development commission shall draw lots to determine the terms of their office. All members hereafter appointed shall hold
office for a term of three (3) years after appointment.
C. Residency: No person shall be eligible to be a member of said industrial development commission who does not reside either within the
city limits or within the boundaries of Luna County. (Ord. 697, 5-10-1982)
2-5-3: ORGANIZATION; OFFICERS:
Within ten (10) days after the appointment of the members, the industrial development commission shall meet and organize by the election
of one of its members as chair and another as secretary. The chair shall preside at all meetings. Should the chair, for any reason be unable
to attend any meetings, then the members of the industrial development commission shall elect one of its members to act as chair. The
secretary shall keep a complete record of all of the acts and doings of the commission. (Ord. 697, 5-10-1982)
2-5-4: MEETINGS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 54/318
The industrial development commission shall meet at least once each month at a regular time and place to be fixed by the commission, and
shall provide for the call of special meetings. (Ord. 697, 5-10-1982)
2-5-5: DUTIES OF SECRETARY:
The secretary shall keep a complete record of all the acts and doings of the commission and all recommendations made shall be submitted
to the city council at any regular or special city council meeting. Copies of all recommendations, together with the minutes of the meetings
shall be furnished to the city administrator at least once each month. (Ord. 697, 5-10-1982)
2-5-6: COMPENSATION:
All members of the industrial development commission shall serve without compensation except for actual expenses incurred, but only
when authorized by the chair and approved by the city council. (Ord. 697, 5-10-1982)
2-5-7: REMOVAL OF MEMBERS:
Any member of the industrial development commission may be removed from his office by action of the city council upon recommendation
by the chair of the commission. (Ord. 697, 5-10-1982)
Chapter 6
HISTORIC LANDMARK COMMISSION
2-6-1: AUTHORITY:
This chapter is established under authority of the New Mexico historic district and landmark act1. (Ord. 810, 1-8-1990)
2-6-2: PURPOSE:
Recognizing that much of the historic and cultural past of the community of Deming has been lost through various means, and is without
exception irreplaceable, and that the remaining sites should be retained in the most useful and effective manner, the purpose of this chapter
is to identify, protect and maintain the historic structures and sites of architectural, archaeological, cultural, historical and geographical
significance located within the city limits or under the authority and control of the city, to stimulate interest in the identity of the city by
protecting and maintaining its cultural heritage and by prohibiting the unnecessary destruction or defacement of its remaining cultural assets
and to conserve the economic and social viability of the city. (Ord. 810, 1-8-1990)
2-6-3: TERMS AND DEFINITIONS:
ALTERATION: Any change to exterior of a structure that is visible from any street, alley or other public way, which could affect the historic,
aesthetic or architectural significance of the property or of other properties in the surrounding area. Examples include: painting, restuccoing,
alterations to windows, roof designs, external lighting, addition or deletion of awnings, alterations to doors and doorways, etc.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS: A certificate granted by the historic landmark commission after plans for proposed work in a
historic district or on a historic site have been determined by the commission to have no negative effect on the historic structure, district or
site. A certificate of appropriateness must be issued prior to the granting of a building permit.
COMMISSION: The Deming historic landmark commission.
CONTRIBUTING PROPERTY: A structure or site in a historic district which has been determined by the city to meet one or more of the
criteria set forth in section 2-6-6 of this chapter. Contributing properties are usually at least fifty (50) years old.
DEMING HISTORIC REGISTER: The official city listing of landmarks and districts formally determined by the commission and city council
to meet one or more criteria of eligibility as set forth in section 2-6-6 of this chapter.
HISTORIC DISTRICT: A group of structures and sites which is determined by the city to meet one or more of the criteria set forth in section
2-6-6 of this chapter and is entered in the Deming historic register.
HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, structure or site which is determined by the city to meet one or more criteria of eligibility as set forth in
section 2-6-6 of this chapter and is entered in the Deming historic register.
NONCONTRIBUTING PROPERTY: A structure or site in a historic district which has been determined by the city to meet none of the
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 55/318
criteria set forth in section 2-6-6 of this chapter. Noncontributing properties are generally less than fifty (50) years old, or have been so
remodelled as to lose their historic character.
OVERLAY ZONE: A defined district or site, the boundaries of which do not necessarily coincide with the boundaries of any existing usage
or of other zones. An overlay zone may overlap two (2) or more other types of zones, but shall not alter their boundaries.
PRESERVATION: The act or process of applying measures to sustain the existing form, integrity and material of a building or structure and
the existing form and vegetative cover of a site. It may include protective maintenance or stabilization, where necessary, in the case of
archaeological sites.
PROFESSIONAL CONSULTANT: One who works full time as an expert in history, archaeology, historic preservation or a closely related
field and who by a combination of training and experience meets the professional standards set forth in 36 code of federal regulations 61.
RECONSTRUCTION: Reproducing by new construction, on the basis of detailed photographic or documentary evidence, the exact form
and detail of a vanished building, structure or site, or a major part thereof as it appeared at a specific time.
REHABILITATION: The act or process of returning a property to a state of utility through repair or alteration which makes possible an
efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions or features of the property which are significant to its historical, architectural and
cultural values.
REMODELING: Changing or altering the exterior of a structure or site without regard to its distinctive architectural features or style.
Remodeling will not be considered an appropriate option for designated significant or contributing structures or site.
RESTORATION: The act or process of accurately recovering the form and details of a property and its setting as it appeared at a particular
period of time by means of the removal of later work or by the replacement of missing earlier work. (Ord. 810, 1-8-1990)
2-6-4: CREATION; APPOINTMENT; TERMS:
A. Commission Created: There is hereby created a Deming historic landmark commission (hereinafter referred to as "commission") for the
city. (Ord. 810, 1-8-1990)
B. Membership; Residency: The commission shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be residents of the city or of the county of Luna
and who shall have demonstrated a continuing interest in the identification, preservation and protection of the historic and cultural
resources of the area. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that two (2) members of the seven (7) are professionals in
architecture, historic architecture, architectural history, archaeology, planning, real estate, the building trades, landscape architecture,
law or finance; provided, that such professionals are available in the community. The commission shall also have at least one associate
who shall be a full-time professional in archaeology, history, architecture, architectural history, historic preservation or closely related
field, who shall act as a consultant to the commission. The residence requirements shall not necessarily apply to the consultant. When
no qualified professional is available, alternatives will be discussed with the historic preservation division of the state. (Ord. 810, 1-8-
1990; amd. 2001 Code)
C. Initial Appointments; Terms; Filling Vacancies: Initially three (3) members shall be appointed for two (2) years, and four (4) members shall
be appointed for four (4) years. Thereafter all terms shall be for four (4) years. Appointments shall be made by the mayor with the
concurrence of the city council. The commission shall have the opportunity to recommend candidates for appointment when vacancies
occur.
D. Compensation: No member of the commission shall receive any compensation except for reimbursement for properly incurred expenses.
E. Officers; Meetings: The commission shall elect as its officers a chair and such other officers as the commission may determine. The
commission shall hold such meetings, transact such business and maintain such records as are required by law or regulation. (Ord. 810,
1-8-1990)
2-6-5: POWERS AND DUTIES OF COMMISSION:
A. Duties Generally: The commission shall have all the powers granted to it by all applicable laws and regulations and shall have authority
to adopt standards and guidelines to ensure consistent application of these laws and regulations as they apply to the city. The
commission shall have authority to establish historic districts and to designate historic landmarks in the city subject to approval by the
city council, but no historic district shall alter or affect the usage zoning established by other agencies of the city. The commission shall
advise other officials and departments of local government about protection of local cultural resources. The commission shall conduct a
continuous program of public education in matters relating to historic preservation, and shall serve as the liaison between the city and
individuals involved in preservation. The commission shall review all nominations of properties within the city to the state register of
cultural properties and national register of historic places, and shall report regarding the eligibility of each property to the historic
preservation division of the state. (Ord. 810, 1-8-1990)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 56/318
B. Meetings; Notice Posted: The commission shall meet not less than four (4) times a year. Other meetings shall be held as necessary to
accomplish the purposes of the commission. The commission shall hold at least one meeting a year to inform the interested public of its
activities. A representative of the historic preservation division of the state shall be requested to attend this meeting. Public notice of
meetings shall be prominently posted in the offices of the city government not less than seven (7) days prior to the meeting, and all
meetings shall be open to the public. Notice shall include the date, time, place and agenda of the meeting. Minutes of each meeting
shall be kept and made available to the public. All designations of landmarks, establishment of historic districts and issuance of
certificates of appropriateness will take place at regular public meetings. (Ord. 810, 1-8-1990; amd. Ord. 1019, 3-13-2000)
C. Identifying And Evaluating Sites: The commission shall establish a process for undertaking surveys of cultural properties and shall
conduct, or cause to be conducted, on a continuing basis, research and surveys for the purpose of identifying and evaluating all sites
and properties of historical and cultural significance, and shall coordinate with other entities of local and state government to accomplish
long term planning and zoning to maintain the integrity of historic landmarks and districts. The commission shall maintain and expand an
inventory of historic properties containing the information required by the archaeological records management and historic building
inventory systems of the state. All inventory material shall be periodically updated to reflect changes, alterations and demolitions. The
commission shall also maintain and expand a Deming historic register of districts and landmarks approved by the city council. (Ord. 810,
1-8-1990)
2-6-6: ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
To be considered eligible for entry in the Deming historic register, a proposed historic or landmark must meet one or more of the following
criteria:
A. Be associated with events that have contributed significantly to local, state or national history;
B. Be associated with the lives of persons significant in local, state or national history;
C. Have yielded, or be likely to yield, information significant to the prehistory or history of the area;
D. Be significant because of artistic, engineering or construction characteristics related to a particular type or period. In addition, such
structure or site must retain its basic historic integrity without significant modification, modernization or pseudo-historic treatment. (Ord.
810, 1-8-1990)
2-6-7: REGISTRATION:
A. Recommendations To Commission: Any structure, site or sites considered to meet one or more of the above criteria of eligibility may be
recommended to the Deming historic register by a property owner, individual, neighborhood or other organization. Recommendations
shall be made in writing to the commission and shall describe the site, give the owner's name and state the reason for the
recommendation. The property owner or owners shall be notified in writing by the commission when a district or landmark is to be
recommended for registration. All property owners of any proposed landmark or within any proposed historic district shall be notified by
certified mail with a return receipt at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of hearing by the commission. Public notice of nominations to
the Deming historic register shall also be made not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of hearing. All notifications shall include a
legal description or address of the property and the date, time and place of hearing.
B. Commission Decisions Forwarded To City Council: All decisions of the commission to register any landmark or district shall be forwarded
to the city council for confirmation and recording. The commission shall recommend to the city council that the landmark or district be
placed on the Deming historic register and forwarded to the historic preservation division of the state for consideration for the state
register of cultural properties and national register of historic places.
C. Notice Of Decision To Owners: Owners of individually nominated historic sites shall receive written notice of entry in the Deming historic
register within ten (10) working days of decision. A decision to list a historic district shall be made public by written notice in a newspaper
of local circulation.
D. Recording Of Boundaries: The boundaries of historic landmarks and districts shall be recorded on the official city zoning map.
E. Overlay Zone: Historic district or landmark boundaries shall be considered an overlay zone subject to the requirements of this regulation
in addition to all other applicable regulations. (Ord. 810, 1-8-1990)
2-6-8: MARKING OF LANDMARKS AND DISTRICTS:
Marking of registered historic landmarks and districts shall be accomplished by means of plaques the design and placement of which shall
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 57/318
be approved by the commission. All registered landmarks and districts shall be marked in the same manner. (Ord. 810, 1-8-1990)
2-6-9: PLANNING REQUIREMENTS:
A. New Construction: All plans for new construction, alteration, addition or demolition in or of designated historic landmarks and districts
must be granted a certificate of appropriateness by the commission prior to request for a building permit. All such certificates shall be
issued at regular advertised public meetings of the commission and must be submitted to the commission at least fifteen (15) days in
advance of the meeting. When the commission requests changes to a submitted plan, the amended plan must be resubmitted within
thirty (30) days of request. An extension of time may be granted for sufficient cause if requested in writing.
B. Demolish Landmark: When a property owner proposes to demolish a landmark or any structure contributing to a district, notice of such
proposal shall be prominently posted in the offices of the city government and at the location of proposed demolition (so as to be clearly
legible from a public street or way) not less than seven (7) days prior to a hearing by the commission. A request for a certificate of
appropriateness for demolition of a structure shall consider all possible alternatives, evaluate the need for demolition, consider feasibility
of returning the property to a useful condition, and consider leasing or sale, the effect on the historic district or on other historic sites, and
plans for future use.
C. Repairs: No certificate of appropriateness shall be required for repairs that do not in any way alter the exterior appearance of a structure,
or for repainting it the same color. (Ord. 810, 1-8-1990)
2-6-10: STANDARDS:
A. Federal Standards: The basic standards for construction, alteration, rehabilitation, restoration, preservation or reconstruction in and of
historic districts and landmarks shall be the secretary of the interior's standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic
buildings (U.S. department of the interior, national park service, preservation assistance division, Washington, D.C.; including all
amendments or revisions). Any other standard or design criterion adopted by the commission shall also apply.
B. Local Regulations: All designated landmarks or districts shall be maintained to meet local building code and all other applicable
regulations and standards to ensure compliance with the intent of this regulation and with public health and safety regulations. (Ord.
810, 1-8-1990)
2-6-11: MORATORIUM:
When the commission has sent written notice to a property owner of a hearing to consider entry of a structure or site in the Deming historic
register, no application for a certificate of appropriateness to construct, alter or demolish any structure or other feature on or within a
proposed historic landmark or district shall be considered until such hearing has been held. Such moratorium may remain in effect for sixty
(60) days, and may be extended for two (2) additional periods of thirty (30) days for good and cogent reason while the designation is
pending. Any permits approved prior to the date of written notification by the commission or any approved work in progress may continue as
planned and shall not affect or be affected by such moratorium. (Ord. 810, 1-8-1990)
2-6-12: APPLICABILITY:
This regulation shall apply equally to all designated historic properties, however owned. No construction, reconstruction, exterior erection,
alteration or demolition planned to be undertaken by any department, agency, officer or commission of the city or by any entity of
government shall begin without first having properly obtained a certificate of appropriateness. (Ord. 810, 1-8-1990)
2-6-13: APPEAL:
Any decision or determination of the commission may be appealed to the city council for review when requested in writing. The request
shall state the reason for the request and must be filed with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days following issuance of notification of the
decision. The commission shall be informed of any appeal at the time of filing. A decision of the commission may be confirmed or reversed
by a majority vote of all the members of the city council. No building permit shall be issued while an appeal is pending. (Ord. 810, 1-8-1990)
2-6-14: REPORTS:
The commission shall report in writing not less often than quarterly to the city council and shall make such other reports to the city council
as the city council shall require, including any requested photographs, maps and other documentation. The quarterly report shall include,
but is not limited to, the number of cases reviewed, all designations of landmarks or districts, revised resumes of commission members,
attendance records and minutes of all meetings. The commission shall make an annual report to the historic preservation division (a copy of
the annual report to the commission may serve this purpose). (Ord. 810, 1-8-1990)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 58/318
2-6-15: MISCELLANEOUS FUNDING:
The commission is authorized to receive, hold and expend funds legally received from any source for the purpose of carrying out the
provisions of this chapter. Funds so obtained shall not reduce or otherwise affect any portion of appropriated funds or grant funds, nor shall
they be absorbed by any general fund. Any donation for this purpose may entitle the donor to favorable tax consideration. The city or
commission shall maintain an adequate system of financial management (subject to any applicable local, state or federal rule or regulation)
of all monies received and disbursed for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 810, 1-8-1990)
Chapter 7
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS ORGANIZATION
2-7-1: ESTABLISHING DEPARTMENT OF EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS:
There is hereby established under the executive branch of the government of the city, in accordance with New Mexico Statutes Annotated
section 12-10-5, as amended, a department of emergency preparedness, which shall consist of:
A. A coordinator of emergency preparedness who shall be appointed by the mayor with the concurrence of the city council and subject to
approval by the state director.
B. Such additional professional and administrative staff personnel as may be required to effectively carry out the emergency preparedness
program.
C. All other city officers and employees, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during periods of emergency, shall be
considered as part of the emergency preparedness organization of the city. (Ord. 517, 7-1-1974; amd. 2001 Code)
2-7-2: PURPOSE OF EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS ORGANIZATION:
The purpose of the emergency preparedness organization is to coordinate the efforts of all city agencies and employees and
nongovernmental agencies to prepare for, and function in the event of emergencies endangering the lives and property of the citizens of the
city. It shall be the duty of said organization to coordinate the development of plans for the effective employment of city resources to protect
the lives and health of the citizens of Deming and the private and public property therein from the effects of natural or human-caused
disasters, including acts of war, and to coordinate the implementation of said plans during periods of emergency. Such plans shall be
coordinated with those of Luna County, and in consonance with the state emergency preparedness plans. (Ord. 517, 7-1-1974; amd. 2001
Code)
2-7-3: EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS COORDINATOR:
A. The emergency preparedness coordinator shall be the executive head of the department of emergency preparedness and shall be
responsible to the city administrator for the organization, administration and operation of the emergency preparedness program of the
city. The coordinator shall coordinate the emergency preparedness activities of all city departments and agencies and nongovernmental
agencies, and shall maintain liaison with and cooperate with the emergency preparedness agencies of the federal government, the state
and the other political subdivisions therein.
B. The coordinator shall have the necessary authority to act for the government of the city in all matters pertaining to emergency
preparedness. He shall develop an organizational structure for the department, subject to the approval of the city council. (Ord. 517, 7-1-
1974; amd. 2001 Code)
2-7-4: FUNDS; SALARIES:
A. Funds for necessary expenses of the department of emergency preparedness, including salaries for approved paid positions, may be
made available through appropriations by the city council in accordance with New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 12-10-7, as
amended.
B. The coordinator shall prepare and submit to the city council an annual proposed budget for emergency preparedness expenditures, and
shall indicate therein those amounts eligible for matching funds under the federal emergency preparedness assistance programs. (Ord.
517, 7-1-1974; amd. 2001 Code)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 59/318
Chapter 8
TOURISM DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
2-8-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created the Deming tourism development committee (TDC) of the city for the purpose of making recommendations to city
council on expenditure of funds authorized under section 3-2-5 of this code for advertising, publicizing and promoting tourist attractions and
facilities in the city and surrounding area and in conformance with New Mexico Statutes Annotated 3-38-22. (Ord. 1186, 5-11-2009)
2-8-2: APPOINTMENTS; TERMS; VACANCIES:
The tourism development committee shall consist of five (5) members to be appointed, or dismissed, by the mayor with the consent of the
city council. Two (2) members who are owners or operators of lodgings subject to the occupancy tax within the municipality, two (2)
members who are owners or operators of industries located within the municipality that primarily provide services or products to tourists and
one member who is a resident of the municipality and represents the general public. Three (3) members shall be appointed for a term of two
(2) years after their initial appointment; and two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of one year for their initial appointment. All
appointments thereafter shall be for two (2) years. All positions will be reconfirmed following a municipal election. (Ord. 1186, 5-11-2009)
2-8-3: ELECTION OF OFFICERS:
Within thirty (30) days after the appointment of the members, the tourism development committee shall meet and organize by the election of
one of its members as chair and another as vice chair. The chair shall preside at all meetings. Should the chair and vice chair, for any
reason, be unable to attend any meetings, then the members of the tourism development committee shall elect one of its members to act as
chair. (Ord. 1186, 5-11-2009)
2-8-4: POWERS; AUTHORITY:
The tourism development committee is a recommending body. (Ord. 1186, 5-11-2009)
2-8-5: ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS:
A. Preside At Meetings: The chair shall preside at all meetings.
B. Record Of Actions: The city liaison or designee shall act as secretary and shall keep a complete record of all proceedings of the
committee. (Ord. 1186, 5-11-2009)
C. Meetings: The committee shall meet quarterly at a regular time and place to be fixed by the committee. The committee may hold special
meetings as circumstances dictate. (Ord. 1222, 5-14-2012)
D. Provide Minutes To City Council: The secretary shall furnish the city clerk with a copy of their minutes for the information and approval of
the city council. (Ord. 1186, 5-11-2009)
2-8-6: REMOVAL OF MEMBERS:
Any member of the tourism development committee may be removed from his office by the city council. In the event a committee member
fails to attend three (3) consecutive legally scheduled and advertised meetings of the tourism development committee, the committee may
remove that member from the committee by a majority vote of the other members, subject to approval of the city council. Any vacancy
thereby created on the committee shall be filled by the mayor and council. (Ord. 1186, 5-11-2009)
2-8-7: RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall be eligible to appointment as a member of the tourism development committee who does not reside within the city limits.
(Ord. 1186, 5-11-2009)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 60/318
Title 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL LICENSES
3-1-1: APPLICATION FOR BUSINESS LICENSE REGISTRATION:
A. Application; Payment Of Fee: Any person proposing to engage in business within city limits shall apply for and pay a business license
registration fee for each outlet, branch or location within the city limits prior to engaging in business.
B. Annual Renewal: During the month of January each year, any person engaging in business within the city, and subject to this chapter,
shall apply or renew their business license registration with the city clerk.
C. Tax Identification Number: Any person filing an application for issuance of a business license registration shall include in the application
their current revenue division taxpayer identification number or evidence of application for a current revenue division taxpayer
identification number. Any change in revenue division taxpayer identification assigned numbers shall be reported to the city clerk. (Ord.
1217, 12-28-2011)
3-1-2: BUSINESS LICENSE REGISTRATION FEES:
A. Fee Imposed:
1. There is imposed on each place of business conducted in the city a business license registration fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
The fee is imposed pursuant to New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 3-38-3 as it now exists or is amended and shall be known as
the "business license registration fee".
2. The business license registration fee may not be prorated for business conducted for a portion of the year. (Ord. 1217, 12-28-2011)
3-1-3: ISSUANCE OF RECEIPTS:
A. All business license registration fees imposed and provided for in this chapter shall be paid in advance to the city clerk and when any
business license registration fee is paid to the city clerk, it shall be their duty to issue, sign and deliver to the person paying such a fee, a
proper receipt therefor. (Ord. 1217, 12-28-2011)
3-1-4: REVOCATION OF BUSINESS LICENSE REGISTRATION:
A. Cause For Revocation:
1. In any case where a person is required to obtain a business license registration as provided in this chapter and has violated any of the
provisions of this chapter or any other city ordinance relating thereto, or whenever, in the judgment of the city administrator or
designee the public welfare shall require it, any license issued to such a person by the city may be revoked.
2. If a business has a red tag, and the building is deemed hazardous to the health, safety, and welfare of the occupant or the community,
business shall not be conducted during the appeal process unless and until the public hazard has been eliminated from the premises.
B. Notice; Hearing: No such business license registration shall be revoked until the city administrator notifies the holder in writing that the
revocation is pending and will become final in thirty (30) days, unless said revocation is stayed by filing a request for a hearing with the
city administrator to appeal the decision. The city council will act as the board for hearing such business license registration hearing
appeals. If no appeal request is filed within the thirty (30) day notification period, the revocation decision shall become final. (Ord. 1217,
12-28-2011)
3-1-5: PENALTY:
A. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord.
1217, 12-28-2011)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 61/318
Chapter 2
LODGERS' TAX
3-2-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as and cited as the LODGERS' TAX ORDINANCE. (Ord. 851, 6-8-1992)
3-2-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to impose a tax which will be borne by persons using commercial lodging accommodations which tax will
provide revenues for the purpose of advertising, publicizing and promoting facilities, tourist attractions and recreational facilities, as
authorized in section 3-2-15 of this chapter. (Ord. 851, 6-8-1992)
3-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
BOARD: The advisory board established herein to make recommendations to the city council, keep minutes of its proceedings and submit
its recommendations, correspondence and other pertinent documents to the city council.
CITY CLERK: The city clerk of Deming, New Mexico.
GROSS TAXABLE RENT: The total amount of rent paid for lodging, not including the state gross receipts tax or local sales tax.
LODGING: The transaction of furnishing rooms or other accommodations by a vendor to a vendee who for rent uses, possesses or has the
right to use or possess any room or rooms or other units of accommodations in or at a taxable premises.
The rooms or other accommodations furnished by a vendor to a vendee by a taxable service of lodgings.
OCCUPANCY TAX: The tax on lodging authorized by the lodgers' tax act1.
PERSON: A corporation, firm, other body corporate, partnership, association or individual, includes an executor, administrator, trustee,
receiver or other representative appointed according to law and acting in a representative capacity, but does not include the United States
of America, the state of New Mexico, any corporation, department, instrumentality or agency of the federal government or the state
government, or any political subdivision of the state.
RENT: The consideration received by a vendor in money, credits, property or other consideration valued in money for lodgings subject to an
occupancy tax authorized in the lodgers' tax act.
TAXABLE PREMISES: A hotel, apartment hotel, apartment house, lodge, lodging house, rooming house, motor hotel, guest house, guest
ranch, ranch resort, guest resort, mobile home, motor court, auto court, auto camp, trailer court, trailer camp, trailer park, tourist camp,
cabin or other premises for lodging.
VENDEE: A natural person to whom lodgings are furnished in the exercise of the taxable service of lodging.
VENDOR: A person furnishing lodgings in the exercise of the taxable service of lodging. (Ord. 851, 6-8-1992)
3-2-4: IMPOSITION OF TAX:
Effective January 1, 2005, there is hereby imposed an occupancy tax increase to five percent (5%), from three percent (3%), of gross
taxable rent for lodging within the city paid to vendors. (Ord. 1098, 11-8-2004)
3-2-5: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
A. License Required: No vendor shall engage in the business of providing lodging in the city who has first not obtained a license as
provided in this section.
B. Application For License; Contents: Applicants for a vendor's license shall submit an application to the city clerk stating:
1. The name of the vendor, including identification of any person, as defined in this chapter, who owns or operates or both owns and
operates a place of lodging and the name or trade names under which the vendor proposes to do business and the post office
address thereof;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 62/318
2. A description of the facilities, including the number of rooms and the usual schedule of rates therefor;
3. A description of other facilities provided by cleaning, laundry, courtesy car, stenographer, tailor or others, and a statement identifying
the license issued, to whom issued, the authority issuing, and the period for which issued. If applicable, also the identification number
provided by the bureau of revenue of the state;
4. The nature of the business practices of the vendor and to what extent, if any, his business is exempt from the lodgers' tax;
5. Other information reasonably necessary to effect a determination of eligibility for such license.
C. Review And Issuance Of License: The city clerk shall review applications for license within ten (10) days of receipt thereof, and grant the
license in due course if the applicant is doing business subject to the lodgers' tax.
D. Appeal Decision Of City Clerk; Hearing:
1. An applicant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the city clerk may appeal the decision to the city council by written notice to the
city clerk of such appeal to be made within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision of the city clerk on the application.
2. The matter shall be referred to the city council for hearing at a regular or special meeting in the usual course of business. The
decision of the city council made thereon shall be expressed, in writing, and be communicated in the same manner as the decision of
the city clerk is transmitted. The action of the city council shall be deemed final. (Ord. 851, 6-8-1992)
3-2-6: EXEMPTIONS:
The occupancy tax shall not apply:
A. If a vendee:
1. Has been a permanent resident of the taxable premises for a period of at least thirty (30) consecutive days; or
2. Enters into or has entered into a written agreement for lodgings at the taxable premises for a period of at least thirty (30) consecutive
days.
B. If the rent paid by the vendee is less than two dollars ($2.00) a day.
C. To lodging accommodations at institutions of the federal government, the state or any political subdivision thereof.
D. To lodging accommodations at religious, charitable, educational or philanthropic institutions, including, without limitation, such
accommodations at summer camps operated by such institutions.
E. To clinics, hospitals or other medical facilities.
F. To privately owned and operated convalescent homes, or homes for the aged, infirm, indigent or chronically ill.
G. If the taxable premises does not have at least three (3) rooms or three (3) other units of accommodation for lodging. (Ord. 851, 6-8-1992)
3-2-7: COLLECTION OF TAX AND REPORTING PROCEDURES:
A. Every vendor providing lodgings shall collect the tax thereon on behalf of the city and shall act as a trustee therefor.
B. The tax shall be collected from vendees and shall be charged separately from the rent fixed by the vendor for the lodgings.
C. Each vendor licensed under this chapter shall be liable to the city for the tax provided herein on the rent paid for lodging at his respective
place of business.
D. Each vendor shall make a report by the twenty fifth day of each month, on forms provided by the city clerk, of the receipts for lodging in
the preceding calendar month, and shall submit the proceeds of the lodgers' tax to the city and include sufficient information to enable
the city to audit the reports and shall be verified on oath by the vendor. (Ord. 851, 6-8-1992)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 63/318
3-2-8: DUTIES OF VENDOR:
Vendor shall maintain adequate records of facilities subject to the tax and of proceeds received for the use thereof. Such records shall be
maintained in the city, and shall be open to the inspection of the city during reasonable hours and shall be retained for three (3) years. (Ord.
851, 6-8-1992)
3-2-9: FAILURE TO MAKE RETURN; PENALTY; LIEN:
A. Liability For Payment; Civil Penalty For Delinquency: Every vendor is liable for the payment of the proceeds of any occupancy tax that
the vendor failed to remit to the city, whether due to his failure to collect the tax or otherwise. He shall be liable for the tax plus as civil
penalty equal to the greater of ten percent (10%) of the amount not remitted or one hundred dollars ($100.00). The city clerk shall give
the delinquent vendor written notice of the delinquency, which notice shall be mailed to the vendor's local address. (Ord. 851, 6-8-1992)
B. Collection By City; Interest Charged: If payments are not received within fifteen (15) days of the mailing of the notice, the city may collect
any amounts due, including, without limitation, penalties thereon, interest on the unpaid principal at a rate not exceeding one percent
(1%) a month. If the city attempts collection through an attorney or the city attorney for any purpose with regard to this chapter, the
vendor shall be liable to the city for all costs of collection and reasonable attorney fees incurred in connection therewith. (Ord. 851, 6-8-
1992; amd. 2001 Code)
C. Lien: The occupancy tax imposed by the city constitutes a lien in favor of the city upon the personal and real property of the vendor
providing lodgings. The lien may be enforced as provided in New Mexico Statutes Annotated sections 3-36-1 through 3-36-7. Priority of
the lien shall be determined from the date of filing.
D. Restriction On Sale Of Property: Under process or order of court, no person shall sell the property of a vendor without first ascertaining
from the city clerk or city treasurer the amount of any occupancy tax due the city. Any occupancy tax due the city shall be paid from the
proceeds of the sale before payment is made to any judgment creditor or any other person with a claim on the proceeds of the sale.
(Ord. 851, 6-8-1992)
3-2-10: CRIMINAL PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter for a failure to pay the tax, to remit proceeds thereof to the city or to properly account
for any lodging and tax proceeds pertaining thereto shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 851, 6-8-1992)
3-2-11: REFUNDS AND CREDITS:
If any person believes he has made payment of any lodgers' tax in excess of that for which he was liable, he may claim refund thereof by
directing to the city clerk, no later than ninety (90) days from the date of payment was made, a written claim for refund. Every claim for
refund shall state the nature of the person's complaint and the affirmative relief requested. The city clerk shall allow the claim in whole or in
part or may deny it. Refunds of tax and interest erroneously paid and amounting to one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more may be made
only with the approval of the city council. (Ord. 851, 6-8-1992)
3-2-12: VENDOR AUDITS:
A. Annual Random Audits: If the city collects more than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) in annual occupancy tax proceeds,
the city council shall select for annual random audits one or more vendors to verify the amount of gross rent subject to the occupancy
tax and to ensure that the full amount of occupancy tax on that rent is collected. If the city collects less than two hundred fifty thousand
dollars ($250,000.00) in annual occupancy tax proceeds, the city council shall conduct random audits to verify full payment of occupancy
tax receipts. (Ord. 1015, 1-10-2000)
B. Number Of Vendors Audited: The city council shall determine each year the number of vendors within the city to audit.
C. Performance Of Audit: The audits may be performed by the city clerk or by any other designee of the city council. A copy of the audits
shall be filed annually with the local government division of the department of finance and administration. (Ord. 851, 6-8-1992)
3-2-13: CONFIDENTIALITY OF RETURN AND AUDIT:
It is unlawful for any employee of the city to reveal to any individual other than another employee of the city any information contained in the
return or audit of any taxpayer, including vendors subject to the lodgers' tax act, except to a court of competent jurisdiction in response to an
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 64/318
order thereof in an action relating to taxes to which the city is a party, and in which information sought is material to the inquiry; to the
taxpayer himself or to his authorized representative; and in such manner, for statistical purposes, the information revealed is not identified
as applicable to any individual taxpayer. (Ord. 851, 6-8-1992)
3-2-14: ADMINISTRATION OF MONIES COLLECTED:
The city council shall administer the lodgers' tax monies collected. The mayor shall appoint an advisory board of five (5) residents of the
city; two (2) of whom shall represent the lodging industry, two (2) of whom are directly involved in tourist-related industries and one
member-at-large who shall represent the general public. The board shall advise the city council on expenditure of funds authorized under
section 3-2-5 of this chapter for advertising, publicizing and promoting tourist attractions and facilities in the city and surrounding area. (Ord.
851, 6-8-1992)
3-2-15: USE OF MONIES:
The city may use the proceeds of the tax to defray the costs of:
A. Collecting and otherwise administering the tax.
B. Establishing and operating, constructing, purchasing, otherwise acquiring, reconstructing, extending, bettering or otherwise improving
fairgrounds, exposition buildings, field houses, auditoriums, welcome centers, tourist information centers, museums, performing arts
facilities, in operation prior to January 1, 1989, convention halls or other convention facilities of the city, of the county within which the
city is located or of the county and acquiring improvements incidental thereto.
C. Equipping and furnishing such facilities, as specified in this section, of the city or county.
D. Acquiring a suitable site, grounds or other real property or any interest therein for such facilities of the city or county.
E. The principal of and interest on prior redemption premiums due in connection with any other charges pertaining to revenue bonds
authorized by New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 3-38-23 or section 3-38-24.
F. Advertising, publicizing and promoting such facilities of the city or county and tourist located in a class A county or a class A county
imposing an occupancy tax of more than two percent (2%) shall use not less than one-half (1/2) of the proceeds derived from the tax for
the purposes of this subsection; provided, that this use of the proceeds of the occupancy tax shall not affect the payment of 1977
pursuant to New Mexico Statutes Annotated sections 3-38-23 or 3-38-24 which shall be made in accordance with the retirement
schedules of the bonds established at the time of issuance. The amount of expenditures required by this subsection shall be reduced
each year, if necessary, to make required payments of principal and interest of all outstanding bonds issued prior to July 1, 1977.
G. Any combination of the foregoing purposes or transactions stated in this section.
H. Provision of public transportation within a three (3) mile area of a ski lift facility; provided, such ski lift facility originates inside the
boundaries or within three hundred feet (300') of the boundaries of the city. (Ord. 851, 6-8-1992)
Chapter 3
GASOLINE TAX
3-3-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as and cited as the GASOLINE TAX MONITORING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 804, 9-13-1989)
3-3-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for monitoring vendors' purchases of all motor vehicle fuels sold within the corporate limits of the
city to assure that the city will receive the proper share of gasoline tax to be distributed by the department of taxation and revenue of the
state. (Ord. 804, 9-13-1989)
3-3-3: DEFINITIONS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 65/318
As used in this chapter:
CITY MANAGER: The city clerk of Deming, or other representatives of the city clerk as the case may be.
DISTRIBUTOR: Any jobber, wholesaler, agent, or other person, firm or corporation who delivers motor vehicle fuels to any vendor as
hereinafter defined, and is required to report taxable sales to the state.
MOTOR VEHICLE FUELS: Any type of gasoline, diesel or other fuels, which is subject to a tax.
TOTAL GALLONS: The total amount of gallons that are purchased by a vendor during each calendar month.
VENDOR: Any person, firm or corporation who furnishes motor vehicle fuels to any person purchasing such fuels. (Ord. 804, 9-13-1989)
3-3-4: LICENSE REQUIRED; REPORT:
A. License Required: No vendor shall engage in the business of furnishing motor vehicle fuels in the city who has not first obtained a license
from the city manager.
B. Submission Of Report: Each vendor shall submit a report to the city by the twentieth day of each month on forms provided by the city
manager of the total gallons of all purchases of motor vehicle fuels in the preceding calendar month, and such report shall include
sufficient information to enable the city to audit the reports and shall be verified on oath by the vendor. (Ord. 804, 9-13-1989)
3-3-5: DUTY OF VENDOR:
The vendor shall maintain adequate records of all motor vehicle fuels. Such records shall be maintained in Deming and shall be open to
inspection by the city during all reasonable hours and shall be retained by the vendor for six (6) months. (Ord. 804, 9-13-1989)
3-3-6: FAILURE TO MAKE RETURNS; PENALTY; NOTICE:
If any vendor neglects or refuses to make reports as is required by this chapter, the city manager shall examine the vendor's books and
records, or other written material including pump readings, and make an estimate of the amount of purchases of motor vehicle fuel made by
the vendor. The city manager shall notify the vendor by certified mail of such failure, the estimate made by him of the amount of the
purchases, and of the penalty clause set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 804, 9-13-1989)
3-3-7: ADMINISTRATION:
The duties assigned to the city manager in this chapter may be delegated to the department of taxation and revenue of the state, or other
departments or officials in whole or in part as to the city manager shall appear useful. Duties may be, from time to time, reassigned. (Ord.
804, 9-13-1989)
3-3-8: PENALTY:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter by failure to make reports of fuel purchases to the city, or to account properly for any
fuel purchases, shall be subject to penalties as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 804, 9-13-1989; amd. 2001 Code)
Chapter 4
CIGARETTE TAX
3-4-1: DEFINITION:
The word "cigarette" is used in its most common acceptance, and shall mean all rolls of tobacco or substitute thereof wrapped in paper or
other substance. (Ord. 245, 7-9-1954)
3-4-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A. Tax Amounts: A special tax is hereby assessed upon the sale of cigarettes in the city as follows:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 66/318
1. Five (5) mills on each package of ten (10) cigarettes or less;
2. One cent ($0.01) on each package containing more than ten (10) and not more than twenty (20) cigarettes; and
3. An additional five (5) mills for each ten (10) cigarettes or less over twenty (20) cigarettes contained in one package.
B. Persons Liable: Every person selling cigarettes in the city is liable for the payment of the tax imposed by this section. (Ord. 245, 7-9-
1954)
3-4-3: LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT:
A. Wholesalers: All wholesale dealers in cigarettes doing business in the city, before selling any cigarettes in the city, shall pay to the city
clerk taxes on the number of sales he desires to make, and shall receive stamps evidencing such payment, which stamps shall be, by
the wholesalers, affixed to the containers of cigarettes in evidence thereof.
B. Retailers: Retail dealers who buy in interstate commerce, and not from resident wholesale dealers, shall, before selling any cigarettes so
bought, or any other cigarettes they may have or acquire that bear no city issued receipt for taxes, in the city, pay to the city clerk taxes
to cover proposed sales of such cigarettes, and shall affix the stamps issued to them upon the containers of such cigarettes in evidence
thereof. (Ord. 245, 7-9-1954)
3-4-4: RECORDS AND INVOICES:
A. Records Of Sales: Every wholesale dealer in cigarettes having a place of business in the city shall keep records showing all sales of
cigarettes to retailers in the city, which records shall be subject to inspection by the officials and agents of the city.
B. Invoices: Retail dealers of cigarettes shall procure and keep invoices of all cigarettes, showing the dates and amounts of each purchase,
and shall open them for inspection of the officials and agents of the city. (Ord. 245, 7-9-1954)
3-4-5: REFUNDS:
Any person who has paid in excess of the needed number of stamps for sales may return such excess and receive a refund. (Ord. 245, 7-9-
1954)
3-4-6: DISPOSITION OF FUNDS:
All money collected under and by virtue of this chapter shall be deposited to the credit of the city, in a special fund designated "Recreational
Funds" and shall be used exclusively for playgrounds and similar recreational facilities for juveniles within the city. (Ord. 245, 7-9-1954)
Chapter 5
LIQUOR CONTROL
3-5-1: LICENSES REQUIRED:
A. Generally: The sale or the possession for the purpose of sale, or offering for sale, of alcoholic liquors is hereby prohibited in the city
without a license from the city council. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor.
B. Dispensers: Any qualified person who is the proprietor or owner of any hotel, restaurant, or club, in the city, may apply for, and if the
application be approved by the city council, receive a dispenser's license for the sale of alcoholic liquors. Under said license alcoholic
liquors may be sold by the drink or in packages containing less than five (5) gallons. Any such hotel or restaurant so licensed shall not
permit any disorderly conduct on the part of any of its patrons or guests, and shall not sell to any intoxicated person or habitual
drunkard.
C. Retailers: Any qualified person who is the proprietor or owner of any mercantile business, or who shall desire to start or to continue a
business for the sale of alcoholic liquors, may apply for and receive a retailer's license. No person licensed as a retailer of alcoholic
liquors shall permit any alcoholic liquors to be drunk or consumed on his premises, nor shall he sell at any other place than his regular
place of business, and all alcoholic liquors permitted to be sold by his license shall be sold at said retail store in the original bottles, or
other containers of less than five (5) gallons, in which they are received from the wholesalers. (Ord. 190, 1937)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 67/318
3-5-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
All persons desiring a license for the sale of alcoholic liquors under the provisions of this chapter shall file an application with the city clerk
stating the location of the proposed place of business and kind of alcoholic liquors that the applicant desires to sell and the date on which
he intends to commence business. (Ord. 190, 1937; amd. 1961 Code)
3-5-3: PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
The following classes of persons shall be prohibited from receiving licenses under the provisions of this chapter:
A. Persons who have been convicted of a felony or for any violation of this chapter.
B. A person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
C. A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
D. A corporation which is not duly qualified to do business in the state.
E. A person who is not the real party in interest in the business to be conducted under the license.
F. Any person who shall not, as a condition precedent, secure a license from the New Mexico regulation and licensing, gambling and
alcohol division. (Ord. 190, 1937; amd. 2001 Code)
3-5-4: LICENSE FEES:
Every applicant for a license to sell, or offer for sale, any alcoholic liquors in the city shall, before receiving such license, pay to the city the
following fees:
For retailer's license for all liquors $ 250.00
For retailer's license for beer and wine 200.00
For dispenser's license for beer and wine 100.00
For dispenser's license for all liquors 250.00
For club license for all liquors 100.00
(Ord. 863, 5-24-1992; amd. 2001 Code)
3-5-5: TERM OF LICENSE:
Effective January 12, 2009, the expiration of liquor licenses will be changed from June 30 to December 31. During the transition period,
licensees will be billed for a half year from June 30 to December 31, 2009. The next billing term will then be for a full year and thereafter all
licenses shall be for one year and shall expire December 31 of each year. The license fees provided herein shall be payable annually in
advance. If the date upon which any licensee commences business shall be any date after the beginning of a taxable year, the full annual
license fee shall be payable hereunder. (Ord. 1183, 1-12-2009)
3-5-6: BONDS:
All bonds required of dispensers and retailers shall be payable to the city, and the conditions thereof shall be that the holder of said license
shall comply with all the provisions of New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 7-24-1 et seq., and the amendments thereof or additions
thereto with respect to the sale of alcoholic liquors, and also that the applicant shall pay to the proper authority any and all license fees and
taxes provided by said statute sections, as amended or supplemented, to be paid by such dispenser or retailer. (Ord. 190, 1937; amd. 1961
Code; 2001 Code)
3-5-7: REVENUE STAMPS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 68/318
It shall be unlawful for any dispenser or retail dealer to sell any liquors under his license unless and until said liquor shall have been
stamped with United States revenue stamps as provided by law and also shall have affixed to it the stamps required by the laws of New
Mexico. (Ord. 190, 1937; amd. 1961 Code)
3-5-8: HOURS OF SALE:
Dispensers and retailers may sell, service, furnish or permit the drinking or using of alcoholic liquors on their premises only between the
hours provided by state law; and every dispenser and retailer is hereby prohibited from selling, serving, furnishing or permitting the drinking
or using of alcoholic liquors on their premises as provided in this section. (Ord. 190, 1937; amd. 2001 Code)
3-5-9: PROHIBITED SALES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or give within the city any alcoholic liquor of any kind to any minor or intoxicated person. (Ord. 190,
1937; amd. 1961 Code; 2001 Code)
3-5-10: CANCELLATION OF LICENSE:
A. Cancellation For Violation: The city may, for any violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person licensed to dispense or retail
alcoholic liquors, cancel said license; and in the event that any license shall be so canceled, no new license to dispense or retail
alcoholic liquors shall be granted to the person holding such license so canceled for a period of one year, nor shall any license be issued
to any person whomsoever for a period of one year licensing him to sell, or possess for sale, alcoholic liquors at the place where such
violations shall have occurred.
B. Hearing; Notice: Before the cancellation of said license as herein provided, the city council shall hold a public hearing and shall give the
person holding such license at least ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of said hearing, together with a copy of the charges
against said licensee. (Ord. 190, 1937)
Chapter 6
ADULT BUSINESSES AND ENTERTAINMENT
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
ADULT BOOKSTORE: Any building or structure which contains or is used for display or sale of books, magazines, movie films, still pictures
and any and all other written materials, photographic material, novelties, devices and related sundry items, which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities", or "specified anatomical areas",
or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material. All other uses allowed within any district other
than C commercial district shall exclude adult bookstores unless such uses are specifically stated to include adult bookstores. No general
use descriptions set out elsewhere shall be deemed or construed to include such use.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT: All businesses which are primarily adult bookstores or adult theaters.
ADULT THEATER: A building or structure which is used for the viewing of performances or activities by others, whether such performances
are in the form of live shows, motion pictures, slide shows or other forms of photographic or visual display, which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas",
as heretofore defined, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material.
RESIDENTIAL ZONE: An A single-family dwelling district, A-1 single-family dwelling district, A-3 single-family dwelling district, B multiple
dwelling district, B-1 dwelling district, and T use district as defined in title 12 of this code.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. Less than completely and opaquely covered:
1. Human genitals, pubic region,
2. Buttock, and
3. Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: A. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy or acts of bestiality.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 69/318
B. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or breast of either male or female.
C. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. (Ord. 752, 8-12-1985)
3-6-2: FINDINGS; ESTABLISHMENT DISCOURAGED:
A. Deleterious Effect: The establishment of adult businesses, bookstores, entertainment establishments and theaters in business districts
will have a deleterious effect on both the existing businesses and the surrounding residential segments of the neighborhoods, causing
blight and the downgrading of property values.
B. Excessive Illumination: Such businesses characteristically utilize excessive illumination to identify their location and to attract patrons at
night, thus distracting motorists.
C. City Policy: The city is committed to a policy of attracting new business and the presence of any concentration of such adult
entertainment will interfere with the most diversified and best use of available business property, thereby adversely affecting the
community. (Ord. 752, 8-12-1985)
3-6-3: RESTRICTIONS OF OPERATION:
A. Concentration In Certain Areas: In order to avoid the aforementioned problems, these businesses should be dispersed and kept from
concentrating in any particular business area and should be kept away from residential areas.
B. Location Restriction: It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any adult entertainment establishment to operate within one thousand feet
(1,000') of any other such adult entertainment established or within five hundred feet (500') of any residential zone. Hotels and motels
are specifically excluded. The city administrator shall not issue a business license to any such adult entertainment establishment which
would be or is in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 752, 8-12-1985)
Chapter 7
CABLE TELEVISION RATES
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
BASIC CABLE RATES: The monthly charges for a subscription to the basic service tier and the associated equipment.
BASIC SERVICE TIER: A separately available service tier to which subscription is required for access to any other tier of service, including
as a minimum, but not limited to, all must-carry signals, all PEG channels, and all domestic television signals other than superstations.
BENCHMARK: A per channel rate of charge for cable service and associated equipment which the FCC has determined is reasonable.
CABLE ACT OF 1992: The cable television consumer protection and competition act of 1992.
CABLE OPERATOR: Any person or group of persons:
A. Who provide cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such a
cable system; or
B. Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system.
CHANNEL: A unit of cable service identified and selected by a channel number or similar designation.
COST OF SERVICE SHOWING: A filing in which the cable operator attempts to show that the benchmark rate or the price cap is not
sufficient to allow the cable operator to fully recover the costs of providing the basic service tier and to continue to attract capital.
FCC: The federal communications commission.
INITIAL BASIC CABLE RATES: The rates that the cable operator is charging for the basic service tier, including charges for associated
equipment, at the time the city notifies the cable operator of the city's qualification and intent to regulate basic cable rates.
MUST-CARRY SIGNAL: The signal of any local broadcast station (except superstations) which is required to be carried on the basic service
tier.
PEG CHANNEL: The channel capacity designated for public, educational or governmental use, and facilities and equipment for the use of
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 70/318
that channel capacity.
PRICE CAP: The ceiling set by the FCC on future increases in basic cable rates regulated by the city, based on a formula using the GNP
fixed weight price index, reflecting general increases in the cost of doing business and changes in overall inflation.
REASONABLE RATE STANDARD: A per channel rate that is at, or below, the benchmark or price cap level.
SUPERSTATION: Any nonlocal broadcast signal secondarily transmitted by satellite. (Ord. 882, 6-13-1994)
3-7-2: INITIAL REVIEW OF BASIC CABLE RATES:
A. Notice: Upon the adoption of this chapter and the certification of the city by the FCC, the city shall immediately notify all cable operators
in the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the city intends to regulate subscriber rates charged for the basic service tier
and associated equipment as authorized by the cable act of 1992.
B. Cable Operator Response: Within thirty (30) days of receiving notice from the city, a cable operator shall file with the city, its current rates
for the basic service tier and associated equipment and any supporting material concerning the reasonableness of its rates.
C. Expedited Determination And Public Hearing:
1. If the city council is able to expeditiously determine that the cable operator's rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment
are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard, as determined by the applicable benchmark, the city council shall:
a. Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express their views; and
b. Act to approve the rates within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator filed its basic cable rates with the city.
2. If the city council takes no action within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator filed its basic cable rates with the city, the
proposed rates will continue in effect.
D. Extended Review Period:
1. If the city council is unable to determine whether the rates in issue are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard based on the
material before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing, the city council shall, within thirty (30) days from the date
the cable operator filed its basic cable rates with the city and by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the following additional periods
of time, as applicable, to make a final determination:
a. Ninety (90) days if the city council needs more time to ensure that a rate is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard; or
b. One hundred fifty (150) days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing seeking to justify a rate above the
applicable benchmark.
2. If the city council has not made a decision within the ninety (90) or one hundred fifty (150) day period, the city council shall issue a
brief written order at the end of the period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate account of all amounts received by reason
of the proposed rate and on whose behalf the amounts are paid.
E. Public Hearing: During the extended review period and before taking action on the proposed rate, the city council shall hold at least one
public hearing at which interested persons may express their views and record objections.
F. Objections: An interested person who wishes to make an objection to the proposed initial basic rate may request the city clerk to record
the objection during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing any time before the decision resolution is adopted. In order
for an objection to be made part of the record, the objector must provide the city clerk with the objector's name and address.
G. Benchmark Analysis: If a cable operator submits its current basic cable rate schedule as being in compliance with the FCC's reasonable
rate standard, the city council shall review the rates using the benchmark analysis in accordance with the standard form authorized by
the FCC. Based on the city council's findings, the initial basic cable rates shall be established as follows:
1. If the current basic cable rates are below the benchmark, those rates shall become the initial basic cable rates and the cable
operator's rates will be capped at that level.
2. If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark, the rates shall be the greater of the cable operator's per channel rate on
September 30, 1992, reduced by ten percent (10%), or the applicable benchmark, adjusted for inflation and any change in the number
of channels occurring between September 30, 1992, and the initial date of regulation.
3. If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark, but the cable operator's per channel rate was below the benchmark on
September 30, 1992, the initial basic cable rate shall be the benchmark, adjusted for inflation.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 71/318
H. Cost-Of-Service Showings: If a cable operator does not wish to reduce the rates to the permitted level, the cable operator shall have the
opportunity to submit a cost-of-service showing in an attempt to justify initial basic cable rates above the FCC's reasonable rate
standard. The city council will review a cost-of-service submission pursuant to FCC standards for cost-of-service review. The city council
may approve initial basic cable rates above the benchmark if the cable operator makes the necessary showing; however, a cost-ofservice
determination resulting in rates below the benchmark or below the cable operator's September 30, 1992, rates minus ten
percent (10%), will prescribe the cable operator's new rates.
I. Decision:
1. By Formal Resolution: After completion of its review of the cable operator's proposed rates, the city council shall adopt its decision by
formal resolution. The decision shall include one of the following:
a. If the proposal is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard or is justified by a cost-of-service analysis, the city council shall
approve the initial basic cable rates proposed by the cable operator; or
b. If the proposal is not within the FCC's reasonable rate standard and the cost-of-service analysis, if any, does not justify the
proposed rates, the city council shall establish initial basic cable rates that are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard or that are
justified by a cost-of-service analysis.
2. Rollbacks And Refunds: If the city council determines that the initial basic cable rates as submitted exceed the reasonable rate
standard or that the cable operator's cost-of-service showing justifies lower rates, the city council may order the rates reduced in
accordance with subsection G or H of this section, as applicable. In addition, the city council may order the cable operator to pay to
subscribers, refunds of the excessive portion of the rates with interest (computed at applicable rates published by the internal revenue
service for tax refunds and additional tax payments), retroactive to September 1, 1993. The method for paying any refund and the
interest rate will be in accordance with FCC regulations as directed in the city council's decision resolution.
3. Statement Of Reasons For Decision And Public Notice: If rates proposed by a cable operator are disapproved in whole or in part, or if
there were objections made by other parties to the proposed rates, the resolution must state the reasons for the decision and the city
council must give public notice of its decision. Public notice will be given by advertisement once in the official newspaper of the city.
J. Appeal: The city council's decision concerning rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment may be appealed to the FCC in
accordance with applicable federal regulations. (Ord. 882, 6-13-1994)
3-7-3: REVIEW OF REQUEST FOR INCREASE IN BASIC CABLE RATES:
A. Notice: A cable operator in the city who wishes to increase the rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment shall file a request
with the city and notify all subscribers at least thirty (30) days before the cable operator desires the increase to take effect. This notice
may not be given more often than annually and not until at least one year after the determination of the initial basic cable rates.
B. Expedited Determination And Public Hearing:
1. If the city council is able to expeditiously determine that the cable operator's rate increase request for basic cable service is within the
FCC's reasonable rate standard, as determined by the applicable price cap, the city council shall:
a. Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express their views; and
b. Act to approve the rate increase within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator filed its request with the city.
2. If the city council takes no action within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator filed its request with the city, the proposed
rates will go into effect.
C. Extended Review Period:
1. If the city council is unable to determine whether the rate increase is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard based on the material
before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing, the city council shall, by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke
the following additional periods of time, as applicable, to make a final determination:
a. Ninety (90) days if the city council needs more time to ensure that the requested increase is within the FCC's reasonable rate
standard as determined by the applicable price cap; and
b. One hundred fifty (150) days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing seeking to justify a rate increase above
the applicable price cap.
2. The proposed rate increase is tolled during the extended review period.
3. If the city council has not made a decision within the ninety (90) or one hundred fifty (150) day period, the city council shall issue a
brief written order at the end of the period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate account of all amounts received by reason
of the proposed rate increase and on whose behalf the amounts are paid.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 72/318
D. Public Hearing: During the extended review period and before taking action on the requested rate increase, the city council shall hold at
least one public hearing at which interested persons may express their views and record objections.
E. Objections: An interested person who wishes to make an objection to the proposed rate increase may request the city clerk to record the
objection during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing any time before the decision resolution is adopted. In order for
an objection to be made part of the record, the objector must provide the city clerk with the objector's name and address.
F. Delayed Determination: If the city council is unable to make a final determination concerning a requested rate increase within the
extended time period, the cable operator may put the increase into effect, subject to subsequent refund if the city council later issues a
decision disapproving any portion of the increase.
G. Price Cap Analysis: If a cable operator presents its request for a rate increase as being in compliance with the FCC's price cap, the city
council shall review the rate using the price cap analysis in accordance with the standard form authorized by the FCC. Based on the city
council's findings, the basic cable rates shall be established as follows:
1. If the proposed basic cable rate increase is within the price cap established by the FCC, the proposed rates shall become the new
basic cable rates.
2. If the proposed basic cable rate increase exceeds the price cap established by the FCC, the city council shall disapprove the
proposed rate increase and order an increase that is in compliance with the price cap.
H. Cost-Of-Service Showings: If a cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing in an attempt to justify a rate increase above the price
cap, the city council will review the submission pursuant to FCC standards for cost-of-service review. The city council may approve a
rate increase above the price cap if the cable operator makes the necessary showing; however, a cost-of-service determination resulting
in a rate below the price cap or below the cable operator's then current rate will prescribe the cable operator's new rate.
I. Decision: The city council's decision concerning the requested rate increase shall be adopted by formal resolution. If a rate increase
proposed by a cable operator is disapproved in whole or in part, or if objections were made by other parties to the proposed rate
increase, the resolution must state the reasons for the decision. Objections may be made at the public hearing by a person requesting
the city clerk to record the objection or may be submitted in writing at any time before the decision resolution is adopted.
J. Refunds:
1. The city council may order refunds of subscribers' rate payments with interest if:
a. The city council was unable to make a decision within the extended time period as described in subsection C of this section; and
b. The cable operator implemented the rate increase at the end of the extended review period; and
c. The city council determines that the rate increase as submitted exceeds the applicable price cap or that the cable operator failed to
justify the rate increase by a cost-of-service showing, and the city council disapproves any portion of the rate increase.
2. The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in accordance with FCC regulations as directed in the city council's
decision resolution.
K. Appeal: The city council's decision concerning rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment may be appealed to the FCC in
accordance with applicable federal regulations. (Ord. 882, 6-13-1994)
3-7-4: CABLE OPERATOR INFORMATION:
A. City May Require:
1. In those cases when the cable operator has submitted initial rates or proposed an increase that exceeds the reasonable rate
standard, the city council may require the cable operator to produce information in addition to that submitted, including proprietary
information, if needed to make a rate determination. In these cases, a cable operator may request the information be kept confidential
in accordance with this section.
2. In cases where initial or proposed rates comply with the reasonable rate standard, the city council may request additional information
only in order to document that the cable operator's rates are in accord with the standard.
B. Request For Confidentiality:
1. A cable operator submitting information to the city council may request in writing that the information not be made routinely available
for public inspection. A copy of the request shall be attached to and cover all of the information and all copies of the information to
which it applies.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 73/318
2. If feasible, the information to which the request applies shall be physically separated from any information to which the request does
not apply. If this is not feasible, the portion of the information to which the request applies shall be identified.
3. Each request shall contain a statement of the reasons for withholding inspection and a statement of the facts upon which those
reasons are based.
4. Casual requests which do not comply with the requirements of this subsection shall not be considered.
C. City Council Action: Requests which comply with the requirements of subsection B of this section will be acted upon by the city council.
The city council will grant the request if the cable operator presents, by a preponderance of the evidence, a case for nondisclosure
consistent with applicable federal regulations. If the request is granted, the ruling will be placed in a public file in lieu of the information
withheld from public inspection. If the request does not present a case for nondisclosure and the city council denies the request, the city
council shall take one of the following actions:
1. If the information has been submitted voluntarily without any direction from the city, the cable operator may request that the city return
the information without considering it. Ordinarily, the city will comply with this request. Only in the unusual instance that the public
interest so requires, will the information be made available for public inspection.
2. If the information was required to be submitted by the city council, the information will be made available for public inspection.
D. Appeal: If the city council denies the request for confidentiality, the cable operator may seek review of that decision from the FCC within
five (5) working days of the city council's decision, and the release of the information will be stayed pending review. (Ord. 882, 6-13-
1994)
3-7-5: AUTOMATIC RATE ADJUSTMENTS:
A. Annual Inflation Adjustment: In accordance with FCC regulations, the cable operator may adjust its capped base per channel rate for the
basic service tier annually by the final GNP-PI index.
B. Other External Costs:
1. The FCC regulations also allow the cable operator to increase its rate for the basic service tier automatically to reflect certain external
cost factors to the extent that the increase in cost of those factors exceeds the GNP-PI. These factors include retransmission consent
fees, programming costs, state and local taxes applicable to the provision of cable television service, and costs of franchise
requirements. The total cost of an increase in a franchise fee may be automatically added to the base per channel rate, without regard
to its relation to the GNP-PI.
2. For all categories of external costs other than retransmission consent and franchise fees, the starting date for measuring changes in
external costs for which the basic service per channel rate may be adjusted will be the date on which the basic service tier becomes
subject to regulation or February 28, 1994, whichever occurs first. The permitted per channel charge may not be adjusted for costs of
retransmission consent fees or changes in those fees incurred before October 6, 1994.
C. Notification And Review: The cable operator shall notify the city at least thirty (30) days in advance of a rate increase based on automatic
adjustment items. The city shall review the increase to determine whether the item or items qualify as automatic adjustments. If the city
makes no objection within thirty (30) days of receiving notice of the increase, the increase may go into effect. (Ord. 882, 6-13-1994)
3-7-6: ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY:
A. Refunds: The city may order the cable operator to refund to subscribers a portion of previously paid rates under the following
circumstances:
1. A portion of the previously paid rates has been determined to be in excess of the permitted tier charge or above the actual cost of
equipment; or
2. The cable operator has failed to comply with a valid rate order issued by the city.
B. Fines: If the cable operator fails to comply with a rate decision or refund order, the cable operator shall be subject to a fine of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day the cable operator fails to comply. (Ord. 882, 6-13-1994)
Chapter 8
PAWNBROKERS
3-8-1: BUSINESS LICENSE REGISTRATION AND BOND REQUIRED:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 74/318
A. Business License Registration Fee Required: No pawnbroker whose business is to trade or receive by way of pledge or pawn any kind of
personal property as security for the repayment of money loaned or advanced shall engage in business within the city without having
paid the required business license registration fee under section 3-1-2 of this title, and having obtained the bond required below. (Ord.
1217, 12-28-2011)
B. Bond: Such pawnbroker shall execute and deliver to the city a bond to be approved by the city council in the penal sum of two thousand
five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) with corporate surety authorized by the laws of the state to write surety bonds therein, and conditioned
for the conduct of such pawnbroker's business according to law and for the due and faithful observance of each and every provision of
this chapter. Such bond shall be for the benefit of the city and of each and every person damaged by a breach of any condition thereof.
(Ord. 365, 11-4-1963)
3-8-2: RECORD OF TRANSACTIONS; INSPECTION:
It shall be the duty of every person engaged in the business of a pawnbroker in the city to provide a well bound book or ledger, to be kept at
his place of business, in which a record of all transactions had by the person shall be kept. The record shall contain an accurate and
complete description of each and every article taken in as a pledge, or purchased by such pawnbroker, together with goods received or
purchased, together with the name of the person, his address, giving the house or street number of same, which book shall be open at all
times to the inspection of the chief of police, or any member of the police department, any member of the city council or any person who
shall be authorized by the chief of police or the mayor. There shall also be entered in the book the amount of the loan or purchase price of
all the articles or things pawned or bought, the rate of interest to be paid on the loan, if the transaction be a loan; and such other information
as may from time to time be required by the chief of police. The book and record above required to be kept shall be written in the English
language in a clear and legible manner. (Ord. 365, 11-4-1963)
3-8-3: REPORT TO POLICE CHIEF:
It shall be the duty of every person engaged in the business of a pawnbroker to furnish to the police department when requested, an
accurate and complete report, which accurate and complete report shall show all property of every kind received or purchased by him,
together with the description of the property, the description of the person offering the same to him, together with the person's address. The
report shall give the age, complexion, sex, and approximate height of the person delivering the property to the pawnbroker, together with
the time at which the property was received and the report shall contain any other information which from time to time may be required by
the chief of police. (Ord. 365, 11-4-1963; amd. 2001 Code)
3-8-4: ACCEPTANCE OF PROPERTY UNLAWFULLY:
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of pawnbroker in the city to buy or accept property as a pledge from any minor,
under the age of eighteen (18), without the written consent of the parent or guardian of such minor, to so deliver or dispose of the property;
or to buy or accept property as a pledge from any person who is at the time intoxicated, or from a habitual drunkard, or from any person
known by him to be a thief or an associate of thieves or a receiver of stolen property. (Ord. 365, 11-4-1963; amd. 2001 Code)
3-8-5: UNLAWFUL SALE OF PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of a pawnbroker to buy any property of any kind, or receive the same as a
pledge, which property is distinctly and plainly marked as being the property of any person other than the party offering to sell or pledge the
same, unless the party offering to sell or pledge the same shall show satisfactory evidence, in writing, that he is the legal and lawful owner
of the property. Failure to require such written evidence shall be prima facie evidence of guilty knowledge on the part of the pawnbroker, his
agents or employees, that the party offering to pledge or sell the same is not the rightful owner thereof, and shall be sufficient cause for the
revocation of the license of the pawnbroker by the city council, after a public hearing. (Ord. 365, 11-4-1963)
3-8-6: ACTING AS AGENT UNLAWFULLY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to act as the agent, servant or employee of any person engaged in the business of a pawnbroker who
does not keep a record book as required by the provisions of this chapter, and who does not make reports to the chief of police, as herein
required. (Ord. 365, 11-4-1963)
3-8-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided under the general penalties as contained in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 365, 11-4-1963)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 75/318
Chapter 9
SECONDHAND AND JUNK STORES
3-9-1: LICENSE TAX:
A. Payment Of Tax: Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling secondhand goods or junk of any kind in the city shall pay an
annual license tax as provided in section 3-1-3 of this title. (Ord. 99, 7-2-1917; amd. Ord. 142, 3-14-1922; 2001 Code)
B. Failure To Obtain License, Misdemeanor: Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling secondhand goods or junk of any
kind in the city or who shall enter upon such pursuit or occupation in the city without first having obtained said license shall, upon
conviction thereof, be adjudged guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 99, 7-2-1917)
3-9-2: PURCHASES FROM MINORS:
A. Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of buying or selling secondhand goods or junk of any kind in the
city to purchase or receive any article whatsoever from any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, without the written consent of
the parent or guardian of said minor.
B. Violation, Misdemeanor: Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling secondhand goods or junk of any kind in the city who
shall purchase or receive any article whatsoever from any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, without the written consent of
the parent or guardian of said minor, shall, on conviction thereof, be adjudged guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 657, 7-14-1980)
3-9-3: REPORT:
A. Report To Police Chief: It shall be the duty of every person engaged in the business of buying or selling secondhand goods or junk of any
kind in the city to furnish to the police department as requested, an accurate and complete report, which accurate and complete report
shall show all property of every kind received or purchased by him, together with the description of the property, the description of the
person offering the same to him, together with the person's address. The report shall give the age, race, sex, and approximate height of
the person delivering the property to the secondhand or junk dealer, together with the time at which the property was received and the
report shall contain any other information which from time to time may be required by the chief of police.
B. Penalty: Each person who shall fail or refuse to make such report shall, on conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
code. (Ord. 674, 5-11-1981; amd. 2001 Code)
Chapter 10
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, PEDDLERS, CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS
3-10-1: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all of articles A and B of this chapter. Where there is any conflict between the provisions of this
chapter and the provisions of any other title or chapter of this code, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. (Ord. 1065, 9-9-2002)
3-10-2: ENFORCEMENT:
All of the provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by any police officer of the city, or by the city code enforcement officer. (Ord. 1065, 9-9-
2002)
3-10-3: EXEMPTION:
No license fee shall be required and no fee shall be payable by any person selling products of the farm or orchard actually produced by the
seller in this state. Any person claiming exemption under this section may be required to establish his/her right to this exemption. (Ord.
1065, 9-9-2002)
3-10-4: REVOCATION:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 76/318
Licenses issued under this chapter may be revoked by the city clerk, after notice and hearing, for any one of the following causes:
A. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for the license.
B. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement by a transient merchant made in the course of the selling of goods, wares, merchandise or
services, or fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in the course of carrying on business as peddler, canvasser, or solicitor.
C. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter.
D. Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
E. Conducting the business licensed under this chapter in any unlawful manner or in a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace, or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public1. (Ord. 1065, 9-9-2002)
3-10-5: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by the decision or actions of the city clerk, the city code enforcement officer, the chief building inspector, or any city
police officer, under the provisions of this chapter, shall have the right of appeal to the city council, provided that such appeal shall be taken
by filing with the city clerk, within fourteen (14) days after notice of the action or decision complained of has been mailed to such person's
last known address, a written statement setting forth, fully, the grounds for appeal. The city council shall set a time and place for a hearing
on the appeal, and notice of the hearing shall be given to the appellant in the manner set out in subsection 3-1-4B of this title. The decision
and order of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 1065, 9-9-2002)
3-10-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1065, 9-9-2002)
ARTICLE A. TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
3-10A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
CLEAR SITE TRIANGLE: An area at the intersection of two (2) roads or streets measuring fifteen feet (15') along each side of a property,
measured along the property line, to form a triangle.
TEMPORARY: Any business activity(ies) whose expected duration is ninety (90) days or less.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee, or employee, whether a resident of the
city, or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and/or delivering goods, wares, merchandise, or services within the city, and
who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, including mobile or moveable structures, motor
vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, public room in hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops, or any other place in the city designated for
commercial use, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares, merchandise, and services, either privately or at public auction. No
person shall be relieved from complying with the provisions of this article merely by reason of a temporary association with any local dealer,
trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in with, as apart of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader,
merchant or auctioneer. The term "transient merchant" shall also include the words "itinerant merchant" and "itinerant vendor".
Notwithstanding the foregoing, "transient merchant" shall not include any individual, group, or organization selling goods or services on a
temporary basis for the purpose of raising funds for a legitimate charitable purpose.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a "transient merchant" shall not include a person, firm or corporation who shall occupy any location in the
city for the purpose of conducting a permanent business therein. (Ord. 1065, 9-9-2002)
3-10A-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation or any agent, servant or employee of any person, firm, or corporation to engage
in, carry on, or conduct the business of a transient merchant without first obtaining a license to do so from the city clerk.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 77/318
B. It shall be unlawful for any property owner, or his/her designated agent, in the city of Deming to allow any person, firm, or corporation to
use his/her property for the purpose of carrying on, or conducting the business of a transient merchant without first obtaining a license
from the city clerk to do so. Such license shall be an annual license and subject to the fee set out in subsection 3-10A-6B of this article.
This license does not relieve the "transient merchant" from obtaining a license as required by subsection A of this section.
C. No license shall be required of individual exhibitors or dealers participating in a flea market, or organized trade or craft fair provided the
sponsoring person, firm or corporation has itself obtained a license, abided by the regulations, and paid the fees as set out in title 3,
chapter 11 of this title.
D. No transient merchant shall be permitted to pay the annual business registration fee as set out in subsection 3-1-2A of this title in lieu of
obtaining a license under subsection A of this section and paying the fee set out in section 3-1-3 of this title and subsection 3-10A-6A of
this article. (Ord. 1065, 9-9-2002)
3-10A-3: APPLICATION:
A. An application for a license to carry on a transient merchant business shall contain the following information:
1. The name of the person, firm or corporation applying for the license. The person signing the application must have the authority to do
so, either being a principal or a designated agent of the firm or corporation. The applicant shall provide to the city clerk sufficient proof
of his/her authority. The name of the property owner, if the applicant is not the owner of the property from which the transient merchant
business is to be conducted. If the applicant is not the owner of the property, the applicant shall produce and shall attach to the
application a copy of the property owner's annual permit, which permit is required by subsection 3-10A-2B of this article.
2. The applicant's address, legal (head office location) and local (if appropriate).
3. A brief description of the nature of the business to be operated and a description of the goods and services to be sold, and how such
goods and services are proposed to be sold.
4. The location from which the business will be conducted.
5. The length of time for which the right to do business is required.
6. A description of any building, structure or vehicle that is to be used in the conduct of the business.
7. Copies of any newspaper ads, handbills, flyers or similar forms of advertising proposed to be used in the conduct of the business are
to be attached to the application.
8. Such other reasonable information as to the identity and authority of applicant to conduct the proposed business as may be deemed
proper by the city clerk.
9. A site plan or sketch, drawn to scale, showing the following information shall be attached to the application:
a. Property lines and their dimensions.
b. Location of all structures, permanent or temporary, proposed to be used in the conduct of the business and the distances of these
structures from the property lines. Temporary structures include recreational and other types of vehicles, trailers, fences, tents, and
kiosks, display stands, signs, buildings.
c. The clear site triangle, if applicable.
d. Proposed traffic circulation including parking spaces and driving aisles.
e. The size, as well as the location of any proposed sign.
f. The location and size of trash containers.
g. The location of any areas proposed for storage.
h. Location of the closest fire hydrant.
i. Location of the nearest restroom where the transient merchant is engaged in or conducting a business that sells food products.
B. All applications shall be reviewed and approved by the code enforcement officer for the city of Deming. (Ord. 1065, 9-9-2002)
3-10A-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Transient merchants shall locate only in areas zoned for "commercial uses" according to the city of Deming zoning regulations set out in
this code.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 78/318
B. All temporary and/or permanent structures shall comply with applicable building regulations of the city of Deming.
C. No temporary buildings shall be used as a dwelling unit.
D. Each temporary building or structure must maintain a setback of ten feet (10') from side and rear yard property lines, and a minimum
setback of fifteen feet (15') from the property line along any public street or road.
E. Transient merchants shall not in any way occupy or obstruct the clear site triangle.
F. Transient merchants shall not in any way obstruct any public street, roadway or walkway.
G. All transient merchants engaged in the sale of food, shall comply with the standards of the New Mexico environmental improvement
division (EID). An EID food service permit must be obtained prior to approval of a license by the city clerk.
H. Each building or structure must have a minimum of one trash receptacle and such receptacle shall have a minimum height of three feet
(3').
I. Each transient business engaged in the sale of food products shall provide on site restroom facilities for staff or shall provide proof to the
city clerk of arrangements for access to restroom facilities.
J. Display signs shall not obstruct vehicular or pedestrian views. Display signs shall not occupy the clear site triangle.
K. A license issued to a transient merchant shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business named on the license. (Ord. 1065, 9-9-
2002)
3-10A-5: TIME LIMITATIONS:
Transient merchant businesses shall be permitted and licensed for up to a ninety (90) day period for multiple locations in a calendar year. If
prior to the expiration of the ninety (90) day period the location is changed to one not listed on the original application and license, a new
application and a new license are required for the remaining days of the ninety (90) day period. In no event is a transient merchant allowed
to be licensed for more than ninety (90) days during any calendar year. At the end of the ninety (90) day period, or cessation of activity, all
improvements must be removed.
A. Time limitations shall not apply until the expiration of a ninety (90) day license obtained prior to October 1, 2005.
B. A transition period is hereby established. From October 1, 2005 to December 31, 2006, the time limitation shall be one hundred eighty
(180) days notwithstanding the provision in subsection A of this section. From January 1, 2007 to December 31, 2007, the time limitation
shall be one hundred twenty (120) days. After January 1, 2008, the time limitation shall be ninety (90) days within a calendar year. Fees
during the transition period shall be prorated based upon one hundred dollars ($100.00) per ninety (90) days. (Ord. 1115, 7-11-2005)
3-10A-6: LICENSE FEE:
A. An applicant for a transient merchant license shall pay a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each ninety (90) day license period, or
part thereof.
B. The property owner applying for an annual fee to allow transient merchant business use of his/her property shall pay a fee of thirty five
dollars ($35.00). (Ord. 1065, 9-9-2002)
3-10A-7: TRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE:
No license issued under this article shall be transferred without written consent of the city council. Such consent shall be evidenced by an
endorsement on the face of the license by the city clerk showing to whom the license is transferred and the date of the transfer. A license
shall not be transferred to a site different from the site for which the license was originally issued. (Ord. 1065, 9-9-2002)
ARTICLE B. PEDDLERS, CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 79/318
3-10B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
CANVASSER OR SOLICITOR: A person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, automobile, motor truck, or any other
type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of
goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed
in the future, whether or not such person has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale, or whether he/she is
collecting advance payments on such sales or not.
PEDDLER: Any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance,
from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying, or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats,
fish, vegetables, fruits, truck garden, farm products or provisions, offering or exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering
articles to purchasers. Any person who solicits orders and as a separate transaction, makes deliveries to purchasers as part of a scheme or
design to evade the provisions of this article, shall be deemed a peddler subject to the provisions of this article. The word "peddler" shall
include the words "hawker" and "huckster". (Ord. 1065, 9-9-2002)
3-10B-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business as a peddler, canvasser, or solicitor in the city of Deming without first obtaining
a license from the city clerk. Persons soliciting, canvassing, or selling goods or services for the express purpose of raising funds for a
legitimate charitable organization or cause, shall not be required to obtain a license under this section. (Ord. 1065, 9-9-2002)
3-10B-3: APPLICATION:
A. An application for a license to carry on business as a peddler, canvasser or solicitor shall contain the following information:
1. The name and description of the applicant. If the applicant represents firm, corporation or other organization, the person signing the
application must provide to the city clerk sufficient proof of his/her authority to sign the application.
2. The applicant's address, legal (head office location) and local (if applicable).
3. A description of the nature of the business, the goods or services being sold, and, where such goods are located at the time of the
application for license, and the proposed method of delivery.
4. The length of time for which the right to do business is required.
5. If a vehicle is to be used in the conduct of the business, a description of such vehicle, including its license number or other means of
identification.
B. The city clerk prior to issuing a license to an applicant for a license under this article, may consult with the city's code enforcement officer
or the city's chief of police. (Ord. 1065, 9-9-2002)
3-10B-4: TIME LIMITATION:
Peddlers, canvassers and solicitors licenses may be issued for a period of one day up to a period of one year, subject to the fee schedule
set out in section 3-10B-5 of this article. (Ord. 1065, 9-9-2002)
3-10B-5: LICENSE FEE:
The fees payable for a license to engage in business as a peddler, canvasser, or solicitor shall be as follows:
A. Thirty five dollars ($35.00) per month or any part thereof, per peddler, canvasser or solicitor; or
B. One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year, or part thereof, per peddler, canvasser, or solicitor. (Ord. 1065, 9-9-2002)
3-10B-6: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Any person issued a license under this article shall show his permit at the request of any person with whom he/she seeks to negotiate for
business in the city, or to any city police officer, or the city code enforcement officer or any city building inspector. (Ord. 1065, 9-9-2002)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 80/318
Chapter 11
FLEA MARKETS, SWAP MEETS
3-11-1: DEFINITION:
A "flea market" shall be considered as any market in which spaces are rented or leased for the purpose of selling new or secondhand
articles and home crafts. Individual stand operators who operate a business of a flea market within the corporate limits for more than three
(3) consecutive days three (3) times during a year shall be required to be licensed as provided by section 3-1-1 of this title. (Ord. 798, 1-9-
1989)
3-11-2: ADMINISTRATION:
The city clerk may select and authorize a representative to administer and enforce the provisions herein, and may establish other standards
as deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions herein. (Ord. 798, 1-9-1989)
3-11-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
A. License Required; Term: A business license is hereby established for flea markets and similar enterprises and shall be required in order
to operate such an enterprise. An annual license shall be valid for the period between January 1 and December 31 of that year.
B. Application For License: An application shall be submitted and be approved by the city clerk prior to the operation of a flea market in any
area. (Ord. 798, 1-9-1989)
3-11-4: FEES; PLOT PLAN:
A. Fees Established:
1. Business License Fee: A business license fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year for each location shall be submitted with
the application for a flea market license.
2. Application Fee: A one hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) nonrefundable application fee is required along with the application. (Ord. 867,
10-11-1993; amd. 2001 Code)
B. Posting License And Regulations: The licensee shall be required to sign a receipt of a copy of this chapter and attach it to the business
license, and this chapter shall be posted in plain sight at the location site. (Ord. 867, 10-11-1993)
C. Plot Plan Required: Such application shall include a plot plan indicating the following:
1. Legal description of property.
2. Vehicular entryways and exits.
3. Stand locations.
4. Pedestrian walkways.
5. Traffic driveways.
6. Parking space layout. (Ord. 798, 1-9-1989)
3-11-5: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Maintenance Of Area: The applicant is responsible to ensure a neat, clean and orderly area at all times; and one trash container shall be
provided at each display stand and shall comply with the ordinances of the city relating to refuse containers.
B. Parking: A minimum of one parking space for each display stand or area or one space for every two hundred (200) square feet
designated as the entire display area, whichever is greater, is required. On street parking is prohibited.
C. Display Area: A minimum twenty (20) square foot area is required for each display stand.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 81/318
D. Operators' Signs: Signs shall comply with any zoning requirements, shall not create a traffic hazard, and shall be located on flea market
premises. Nothing herein shall be construed to affect or prohibit any temporary sign displayed by a vendor at a flea market.
E. Sanitation: Toilet facilities shall be provided at each flea market site at the rate of one female and one male facility per every forty (40)
display stands. If the city sanitary sewer is available at the property, sanitary facilities will be connected to such. If the sanitary sewer is
not available, chemical toilets shall be provided at the same ratio. (Ord. 798, 1-9-1989)
F. Time Limit: All merchandise for sale is to be removed from the sale site by eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. every day. (Ord. 867, 10-11-1993)
G. Camping Prohibited: Overnight parking or camping on any flea market or swap meet site is prohibited except as provided in subsection
12-4J-6B6 of this code. (Ord. 867, 10-11-1993; amd. Ord. 1103, 12-13-2004)
3-11-6: OPERATOR RESPONSIBILITIES:
The operator of the flea market shall make, keep, and maintain a list of persons and their addresses who rent space at the flea market, and
maintain one such list for each day of operation. Such list shall contain, in legible writing, the name and address of every vendor or person
who rents space at the flea market on the day the list is made. The operator shall preserve such lists for two (2) years after the close of the
calendar year in which the list was made, and shall have all such lists required to be preserved open to the inspection of the city or any law
enforcement officer. (Ord. 798, 1-9-1989)
3-11-7: VENDOR RESTRICTIONS:
No vendor shall sell, exchange, or display for the purpose of sale or exchange, any firearm, live ammunition, fresh meat, or any item of
contraband as such is defined by federal or state law. (Ord. 798, 1-9-1989)
3-11-8: PENALTIES:
A. Penalty: Violation of any provision herein shall be punishable as provided in the general penalty in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each shall
constitute a separate offense.
B. Revocation Of License: Noncompliance with any provision herein shall be cause for immediate revocation of license and vacation of
premises. (Ord. 798, 1-9-1989; amd. 2001 Code)
Chapter 12
ALARM SYSTEM REGULATIONS
3-12-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of installing, maintaining, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or causing to be installed in or on
any building, place or premises abutting on or adjacent to a public street, alley or way any device commonly known as a burglar alarm, fire
alarm, holdup alarm or similar protection device or system without first having obtained a license for such business from the city clerk. (Ord.
578, 1977)
3-12-2: LICENSE FEE:
Every licensee shall pay a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per connection, per month, payable in advance, provided no license fee shall be
charged for any person using alarm services and devices for medical emergencies. (Ord. 900, 2-13-1995)
3-12-3: IDENTIFICATION CARD:
A. Display Card Upon Request: Every person engaging in the alarm system business in any capacity shall carry on his person at all times
while so engaged a valid identification card and shall display such card to any police officer upon request. (Ord. 578, 1977)
B. Form: Such identification card shall be in a form prescribed by the chief of police. (Ord. 578, 1977; amd. 2001 Code)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 82/318
C. License Revocation, Relinquish Card: Upon the revocation of any license under which such identification card has been issued, the card
shall be returned to the chief of police.
D. False Information: It shall be unlawful for any person to carry, use, display or have in his possession any identification card containing
any false information or to possess an identification card when not actually employed by a person holding a license under this section.
(Ord. 578, 1977)
3-12-4: EMERGENCY SERVICE:
Every licensee shall have available at all hours service personnel to respond to emergency calls. Service personnel shall render emergency
service at all hours of the day upon the request of the police or fire departments or other authorized city officials. (Ord. 578, 1977)
3-12-5: INFORMATION POSTED:
Every licensee shall cause a notice containing the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the persons to be notified any time that
any alarm rings which is to be posted near the alarm in such position as to be readable from the ground level adjacent to the building in
which the alarm is located. Such notice shall be framed and enclosed in glass. (Ord. 578, 1977)
3-12-6: LICENSE REVOCATION:
Any burglar alarm business license may be revoked by the city council at any time it finds that the licensee has wilfully or negligently failed
to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 578, 1977)
3-12-7: ANNUNCIATORS IN POLICE DEPARTMENT:
Every licensee may install, service and maintain at his sole expense and without expense or liability on the part of the city a uniform
annunciator alarm cabinet approved by the chief of police, with accessories, connections and auxiliary equipment required for the operation
of the same in the radio dispatch room of the police department in a location where the visual and audible signals therefrom may be easily
seen and heard by the dispatcher and may connect the same by leased telephone wires to switches or other actuating devices in or on
various places within the city for the purpose of providing a direct burglar alarm system between any premises and radio dispatch room.
(Ord. 578, 1977)
3-12-8: EQUIPMENT CAPABILITY:
A. Minimum Capabilities: All equipment to be installed in the radio dispatch room of the police department shall contain the following
minimum capabilities:
1. It shall indicate the distinction between an actual alarm and telephone wires difficulty;
2. All systems shall have a standby power (DC) capability in case of AC power loss; and
3. If possible, all systems shall have resetting capabilities at the console.
B. Installation Uniform; Additional Standards: In addition to the foregoing, all equipment shall be installed in the radio dispatch room in a
uniform manner as directed by the chief of police; and, provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed to limit the right of the
chief of police to require additional reasonable minimum standards for such equipment. (Ord. 578, 1977)
3-12-9: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
All licenses are issued upon the following express conditions:
A. Every licensee shall always hold the city harmless from and on account of any and all damages arising out of the activities of such
licensee including, but not limited to, damages to the city, its agents, employees, invitees and licensees while in or on the municipal
building, and such damages shall expressly include those arising out of any difficulties in the alarm cabinet or the installation or
maintenance thereof.
B. If the location or design of the radio dispatch room shall be changed at any time, licensees shall not have the right to charge the city with
any cost resulting in the moving of the alarm system or any part thereof.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 83/318
C. In the event there is an excessive number of false alarms originating from a single licensed alarm system as determined by the chief of
police, the faulty system may be ordered removed from the public safety building until corrective action is taken. (Ord. 578, 1977)
Title 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 1
WEEDS AND RUBBISH
4-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herewith:
RUBBISH: Shall include, but not be limited to, all nonputrescible solid waste, including ashes, such as vehicle bodies and solid or
combustible or noncombustible waste such as paper, cardboard, cans, wood, leaves, dirt, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
WEEDS: All rank, noxious, poisonous, harmful, unhealthful vegetation, deleterious to the health, and shall include, but is not limited to, the
following named plants: pigweed (Amaranthus retroflexus), Russian thistle (Salsola pestifer), ragweeds (Ambrosia spp.), lambsquarter
(Kenopodium spp.), Kochia. (Ord. 728, 10-10-1983)
4-1-2: REMOVAL OF WEEDS:
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, or occupant, or any agent, servant, representative or employee of any such owner, lessee or
occupant having charge or control of any occupied or unoccupied lot or tract of land within the city to permit or maintain on any such lot or
tract of land, including the area located between the property line and the middle of the alley adjacent to the alley, and the area located
between the property line and the curb, the area of any curbs or sidewalks located on the property and the area located ten feet (10')
outside the property line where there is no curb, any growth of weeds to a greater height of twelve inches (12") or any accumulation of
weeds. (Ord. 728, 10-10-1983; amd. 2001 Code)
4-1-3: UNAUTHORIZED ACCUMULATIONS, NUISANCE:
A. Allowing Accumulation: It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant, or any agent, servant, representative or employee of any
such owner, lessee or occupant having charge or control of any occupied or unoccupied lot or tract of land within the city to allow any
rubbish to collect or accumulate on any lot or premises within the city.
B. Nuisance Declared: Any such unauthorized accumulation or collection is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited.
C. Removal By City; Costs A Lien: In the event such person fails or refuses to remove such accumulation or collection of rubbish, the city
may cause the same to be removed at the expense of such person and the charge thereof shall be a lien upon the property. (Ord. 728,
10-10-1983)
4-1-4: DEPOSITS OF RUBBISH:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the city any rubbish in such a manner that it may be
carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, parkway, sewer, other public place, vacant lot or into any premises. (Ord.
728, 10-10-1983)
4-1-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 728, 10-10-
1983)
Chapter 2
NOISE POLLUTION
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 84/318
4-2-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the CITY OF DEMING NOISE POLLUTION ORDINANCE. Hereinafter, this law is
sometimes referred to as "this chapter". (Ord. 1174, 11-13-2007)
4-2-2: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all areas of the city of Deming. (Ord. 1174, 11-13-2007)
4-2-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to preserve the public health, peace, comfort, repose, welfare, safety and good order by suppressing the
making, creation, or maintenance of excessive, unnecessary, unnatural or unusually loud noises which are prolonged, unusual or unnatural
in their time, place, and use or which are detrimental to the environment. (Ord. 1174, 11-13-2007)
4-2-4: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, the words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
ADULT PERSON: A person who is at least sixteen (16) years old.
CITY: All of the city of Deming.
DAYTIME HOURS: Sunrise to sunset.
EMERGENCY WORK: Work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work necessary to
protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger.
IMPULSIVE SOUND: A sound of short duration, usually less than one second, and of high intensity, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay.
MOTOR VEHICLES: Includes, but is not limited to, automobiles, trucks, buses, motorcycles, mopeds, minibikes, and any other vehicle as
defined by the vehicle and traffic law of the state of New Mexico, as it may be amended from time to time.
NIGHTTIME HOURS: Sunset to sunrise.
PERSON: Includes the singular and plural and also any individual, any property owner and/or lessee, any firm, corporation, political
subdivision, government agency, association or organization, including, but not limited to, officers, directors, employees, agents and/or
independent contractors thereof, or any legal entity whatsoever.
SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT: Any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, instrumental music, or any other
sound. Sound amplifying equipment shall not include standard automobile sound systems when used and heard only by the occupants of
the motor vehicle in which such automobile sound system is installed. As used in this chapter, sound amplifying equipment shall not include
warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on any vehicle used only for traffic safety purposes,
or authorized fire horns or other authorized emergency alarms.
UNREASONABLE NOISE: Any excessive or unusually loud sound which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose,
health, peace or safety of a reasonable person of normal sensitivities, or which causes injury to animal life or damage to property or
business. (Ord. 1174, 11-13-2007)
4-2-5: UNREASONABLE NOISE PROHIBITED:
A. No person shall intentionally cause public inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm, or recklessly create a risk thereof, by making
unreasonable noise or by causing unreasonable noise to be made.
B. For the purpose of implementing and enforcing the standard set forth in this section, factors to be considered in determining whether
unreasonable noise exists in a given situation include, but are not limited to, any or all of the following:
1. The intensity of the noise.
2. The duration of the noise.
3. The vibrations caused by the noise.
4. The intensity of the background noise, if any.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 85/318
5. The zoning district within which the noise emanates and all zoning districts that lie within five hundred feet (500') of the source of the
sound.
6. The time of the day or night the noise occurs.
7. The proximity of the noise to sleeping facilities.
8. Whether the noise is continuous or impulsive.
9. The existence of complaints concerning the noise from one or more persons who are affected by the noise.
10. Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual.
11. Whether the noise is due to a natural or a human made activity. (Ord. 1174, 11-13-2007)
4-2-6: RADIOS, TELEVISION SETS AND OTHER SOUND PRODUCING OR AMPLIFYING DEVICES:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city limits to use or to operate any radio or receiving set, musical instrument (including
drums), phonograph, television set, any other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound or any other sound
amplifying equipment in a loud, annoying or offensive manner such that noise from the device interferes with the comfort, repose, health
or safety of members of the public or recklessly creates a risk thereof, within any building, or outside of a building, on public property
including rights of way or private property at a distance of twenty five feet (25') or more from the source of such sound or interferes with
the conversation of members of the public who are twenty five feet (25') or more from the source of such sound. (Ord. 1174, 11-13-2007)
4-2-7: CONSTRUCTION AND OTHER MACHINERY:
A. During the "nighttime hours" as defined in section 4-2-4 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person within the city limits to operate
or cause to be operated any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist, electric drill, garbage
collection vehicles performing commercial pick ups, or other commercial industrial equipment, except to perform emergency work.
B. If any domestic power or hand tool, including, but not limited to, mechanically powered saws, sanders, grinders, and lawn and garden
tools, or air conditioner, is operated during nighttime hours, no person shall operate such machinery so as to cause noise within a
building or across a real property boundary where such noise interferes with the comfort, repose, health or safety of members of the
public within any building, or outside of a building, at twenty five feet (25') or more from the source of the sound.
C. Garbage collection vehicles may be operated for residential pick up beginning at six o'clock (6:00) A.M. local time.
D. The provisions of this section shall not apply to lawful farm operations on lands the principal use of which is as a farm and which are
located within an agricultural district.
E. The provisions of this section shall not apply to lawful industrial operations on lands located in industrial zoned districts.
F. The person or owner of any real property (except public highways, and other publicly owned facilities) from which sounds prohibited by
this chapter emanate shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter, whether or not such owner was on the premises or occupied the
premises when the proscribed sounds emanated.
G. City management may authorize permits for work during nighttime hours. (Ord. 1174, 11-13-2007)
4-2-8: PARTIES AND OTHER SOCIAL OR FUNDRAISING EVENTS OR GATHERINGS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of a party or other social or fundraising event or gathering that occurs on any private or
public property including rights of way, to allow that event to produce noise in a loud, annoying, or offensive manner, or recklessly create
the risk thereof, such that noise from the event interferes with the comfort, repose, health or safety of members of the public within any
building, or outside of a building, at a distance of twenty five feet (25') or more from the source of such sound. It shall also be unlawful
for any participant in that event to contribute to such noise.
B. For the purposes of this section, a "person in charge of a party or other social or fundraising event or gathering":
1. That occurs on any public property shall include the person or persons who obtained permission to utilize that property for that event.
2. That occurs on private property shall include the person who owns the premises involved and any adult person who lives in or on the
premises involved in such party or social event.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 86/318
3. Shall include the person who is listed on a permit granted pursuant to section 4-2-12 of this chapter with respect to such event. (Ord.
1174, 11-13-2007)
4-2-9: EXEMPT FACILITIES:
The following facilities shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
A. Amphitheater.
B. Courthouse park.
C. Fairgrounds.
D. Public sports facilities.
E. Mimbres Valley Learning Center. (Ord. 1174, 11-13-2007)
4-2-10: ANIMALS:
Any person who owns, harbors, or is the custodian of a dog in the city of Deming is subject to the noise and other requirements in title 6,
chapter 2, "Animal Control", of this code, and upon violation thereof shall be subject to the penalties set forth in that chapter. (Ord. 1174, 11-
13-2007)
4-2-11: AUTHORIZATION FOR PERMIT:
Where the enforcement of this chapter would create an unnecessary hardship, the city council, in its discretion, is authorized to grant a
permit for a specific waiver from the requirements of this chapter. Such waivers shall be granted only in those circumstances where the
applicant demonstrates that the waiver is necessary for a valid purpose, that the proposed waiver is the minimal intrusion needed, and that
on balance the need for and benefits of the waiver outweigh the needs and rights of the surrounding neighbors to a peaceable and quiet
environment. Violations of any conditions of the permit shall subject the permittee to enforcement as if the waiver had not been granted.
(Ord. 1174, 11-13-2007)
4-2-12: PERMIT PROCEDURE:
A. An application and payment of a two hundred dollar ($200.00) fee for such a permit shall be filed with the city clerk no less than forty five
(45) days before the anticipated need and shall provide the following information:
1. The name of the applicant.
2. The adult person responsible for compliance with the permit, if different from the applicant, which adult person shall also sign the
application and agree to be responsible for compliance with the permit terms and any conditions attached to the permit.
3. The reasons for such usage.
4. Plans and specifications of the use.
5. Noise abatement and control methods to be used.
6. Time schedule.
7. Demonstration why the applicant cannot conform to this chapter.
8. Such other information as the city clerk and/or city council may reasonably require to adequately consider the permit request.
9. For events that are not communitywide or public events, proof must be provided that notification of the application for the permit has
been given to each person reasonably expected to be affected by the noise, the content of such notification and the manner in which
such notification has been given. The notification shall state that any person objecting to the granting of such permit may contact the
city clerk to express his/her opposition to the granting of the permit.
B. A public hearing before the city council shall be held in connection with the application no less than five (5) days after publication of
notice of such hearing. The issuance of permits shall be discretionary. The city council may impose any conditions deemed necessary to
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 87/318
minimize the intrusion of sound that might occur by the exercise of the privileges granted by the permit. Any permit issued shall state
that the permit only applies to this chapter. (Ord. 1174, 11-13-2007)
4-2-13: ENFORCEMENT:
Enforcement may be facilitated by, but shall not be dependent upon, complaint by a resident of the city to a city code enforcement officer or
other law enforcement officer. Any police or code enforcement officer shall have the authority to issue citations in connection with any
violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1174, 11-13-2007)
4-2-14: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided by section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1174, 11-
13-2007)
Chapter 3
SANITARY REGULATIONS
4-3-1: ENFORCEMENT:
Any officer or employee of the city given authority to enforce the provisions of this code is hereby designated and appointed as the
enforcing official for the health and safety of the city. (Ord. 248, 6-1-1955; amd. 2001 Code)
4-3-2: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
Whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that an unhealthful or unsanitary condition exists on any private premises, which might
endanger the general health of the community, the enforcing official shall have the right to enter such premises and thoroughly investigate
the same. (Ord. 248, 6-1-1955)
4-3-3: LITTERING THOROUGHFARES:
No person shall throw or deposit any carrion, dead animal, laundry water, garbage, sewage, slop, offal, filth or other unwholesome or
offensive substance on any property not his own, or into any street, alley or gutter. (Ord. 248, 6-1-1955)
4-3-4: FILTHY PREMISES:
No person shall permit filth, offal or other offensive substances to remain on premises occupied by him so as to become offensive to other
persons residing in the vicinity, or become prejudicial to public health. (Ord. 248, 6-1-1955)
4-3-5: OVERNIGHT RENTALS; SANITARY FACILITIES REQUIRED:
A. Facilities Required: Every person or entity owning or controlling any property within the city limits who rents, leases or permits any
person to remain on the premises overnight shall provide reasonable sanitary facilities for such occupants.
B. Failure To Comply; Penalty: It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person or entity to violate the provisions of this section by failing or
refusing to comply herewith; and, upon conviction thereof, such person or entity shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
code. Such violation shall constitute a nuisance and may be enforced by the city in a manner consistent with law. (Ord. 842, 11-12-1991)
4-3-6: SLAUGHTERHOUSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a slaughterhouse within the city except in a D industrial use district, and only under and
subject to the conditions set forth in title 12, chapter 4, article M of this code. (Ord. 374, 5-4-1964)
Chapter 4
DISEASE VECTOR CONTROL
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 88/318
4-4-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The following provisions for disease vector control are intended to provide a set of general community standards designed to aid in the
control and prevention of vector borne diseases. These standards are intended to preserve and promote the safety, health and well being of
the residents of the city of Deming. The standards set out here are minimum standards. (Ord. 1085, 6-14-2004)
4-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herewith:
ARTHROPOD: Any of a large group of animals having a segmented body and legs, including insects, spiders, mites, scorpions and
crustaceans.
VECTOR: An arthropod capable of carrying and transmitting diseases such as viral encephalitis, yellow fever and malaria.
VECTOR BORNE DISEASES: A group of diseases made up of organisms that spend part of their life inside a mosquito, flea, tick or other
arthropod, and the other part of their life inside a vertebrate.
WEST NILE VIRUS: A vector borne disease similar to other encephalitises, cycled between birds and mosquitoes and transmitted to
mammals, including man, by infected mosquitoes. (Ord. 1085, 6-14-2004)
4-4-3: WEST NILE VIRUS; MOSQUITO ABATEMENT:
The following provisions shall apply to effectively control mosquitoes primarily to help prevent and/or control the inception and spread of the
west nile virus:
A. Storm Water Detention/Retention Ponds: Individual property owners, or any person, firm, corporation, agent, subdivider or association
having a legal or equitable interest in a property on which a storm water detention/retention pond is located shall be responsible for
disease vector control, specifically the control of mosquitoes in the pond. A control program may involve such things as the use of
approved chemical sprays (pesticides), reducing or removing vegetation or debris that may harbor mosquitoes, removing the standing
water, aeration of the pond water, or other approved methods. A control program must be implemented where water has been standing
more than five (5) days.
B. Sources Of Standing Water On Private Property: Storm water detention/retention ponds excepted, all property owners, or any person,
firm, corporation, agent, subdivider or association having a legal or equitable interest in any property in the city of Deming shall be
responsible for removing or eliminating sources of standing water on the property in which he/she/they/it has/have an interest. Such
removal or elimination may involve actions such as: the filling of holes on the site, proper disposal of old metal or plastic containers,
proper disposal of old tires, elimination of seepage from cisterns or septic tanks, regular changes of water in bird baths, aerating
ornamental ponds or pools, keeping the water in evaporation coolers clean, cleaning outside drains regularly, the removal of vegetation
or debris that may harbor mosquitoes, or the use of approved chemical sprays (pesticides).
It is important to note that no chemical spray (pesticide) is one hundred percent (100%) safe and great care is to be exercised in the use
of any pesticide. The "instruction for use" labels on any pesticide should be read and followed exactly and carefully. No pesticide spray
is to be used on any day with any appreciable wind capable of carrying the spray beyond the boundaries of an individual property.
C. Removal Of Standing Water On Private Property: All property owners, or any person, firm, corporation, agent, subdivider or association
having a legal or equitable interest in any property in the city of Deming shall be responsible for removing, eliminating, or treating any
water that has been standing more than five (5) days on the property in which he/she/they/it has/have an interest.
D. Enforcement: The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city code enforcement officer.
E. Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1085, 6-14-2004)
Chapter 5
SALES AND PURCHASES OF PRODUCTS CONTAINING EPHEDRINE
4-5-1: FINDINGS:
The city council finds that:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 89/318
A. In addition to its legal uses, ephedrine is used in the illegal manufacture of methamphetamine, and illicit drug manufacturers extract
ephedrine from various over the counter products containing as an ingredient ephedrine or pseudoephedrine;
B. There is a current and immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare in that the manufacture, processing, transportation,
possession and sales of illicit narcotics and drugs are inherently dangerous, and that the chemicals, compounds, substances,
byproducts and wastes associated with the manufacture of illicit narcotics and drugs are both dangerous and injurious to the health,
welfare and safety of the citizens of the city of Deming;
C. There has been an increase in the sales, thefts and possession of the over the counter products that contain as an ingredient ephedrine,
pseudoephedrine, ephedrine hydrochloride, pseudoephedrine hydrochloride, or pseudoephedrine sulfate, as well as other products
associated with the manufacture of methamphetamine;
D. Reasonable limitations on the quantity of products containing ephedrine that may be sold to or purchased by a customer on a single day
will assist the city in its efforts to combat the insidious criminal methods of illegal methamphetamine manufacturers in the city, and will
not unduly restrict legitimate businesses or customers from selling or buying these products. (Ord. 1109, 5-9-2005)
4-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COUNT: The number of pills, tablets, capsules or individual units of a substance contained within an individual package.
CUSTOMER: Any person who purchases or acquires products from any retail store.
EPHEDRINE: Any drug, substance or compound, whether legal or illegal, that contains ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, ephedrine
hydrochloride, pseudoephedrine hydrochloride, or pseudoephedrine sulfate.
PACKAGE: Any bottle, box, blister pack or other container in which products containing ephedrine are sold.
RETAIL STORE: Any single geographic location of any business, company, corporation, person, employee or associate, that sells products
to any customer. It does not include any wholesaler engaged in a wholesale transaction.
SELL: To furnish, give away, exchange, transfer, deliver, surrender, distribute, or supply, whether or not for monetary gain or other
consideration.
WHOLESALER: One whose business is the selling of goods in gross to retail stores for purposes of resale. (Ord. 1109, 5-9-2005)
4-5-3: LIMITATIONS ON THE SALE OR PURCHASE OF EPHEDRINE PRODUCTS:
A. No person, during a single transaction, shall sell to a customer more than three (3) packages of products containing ephedrine.
B. No person, during a single transaction, shall sell to a customer products containing ephedrine where the total count exceeds one
hundred (100).
C. No customer on any single day shall purchase or acquire more than three (3) packages of products containing ephedrine.
D. No customer on any single day shall purchase or acquire products containing ephedrine where the total count exceeds one hundred
(100).
E. It shall be the responsibility of retail store and wholesale owners to keep accurate customer and inventory records and have them
available on site for inspection by law enforcement personnel. (Ord. 1109, 5-9-2005)
F. Subsections A through D of this section shall not apply to pseudoephedrine in the form of gel capsules or liquids. (Ord. 1121, 9-12-2005)
4-5-4: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to the general penalty provision set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each
incident in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense and each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord.
1109, 5-9-2005)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 90/318
Title 5
FIRE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
5-1-1: COMPOSITION OF DEPARTMENT:
The fire department officers shall consist of one chief, three (3) captains and such other officers as deemed necessary by the city council.
(Ord. 80, 7-6-1915; amd. 2001 Code)
5-1-2: APPOINTMENTS AND REMOVALS:
The chief and all other officers of the fire department shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, and
the persons so nominated and confirmed shall hold their respective offices until their successors are chosen and qualified as herein
provided; provided, that any officer of the fire department may be suspended or removed for cause by the city council upon and after a full
investigation of any charges duly filed in writing with the city clerk. (Ord. 275, 4-1-1958; amd. 2001 Code)
5-1-3: COMPENSATION:
The officers and members of the fire department shall receive such compensation as the city council may by ordinance or resolution from
time to time adopt. (Ord. 80, 7-6-1915)
5-1-4: DUTIES OF OFFICERS AND FIREFIGHTERS:
A. Chief And Captains:
1. Fire Chief: The fire chief shall have the command at fires over all the members of the fire department, and over all other persons
assisting thereat, and shall take all proper measures for the extinguishment of fires and for the protection of property and the
preservation of order, and observance of the laws and regulations respecting fires, and shall examine into the condition of all fire
apparatus and fire hydrants, and shall have general supervision of the fire department and all things connected therewith. He shall
see that a correct roll of all the members of the fire department, and a correct inventory of the property under his charge, is kept on file
at all times, at the office of the city clerk, and he shall report monthly to the city council.
2. Shift Captains: The duties of the fire chief shall, in his absence, devolve upon and be performed by the captain on shift. The captain
shall have immediate charge, care, custody and supervision of the fire engine and equipment, apparatus, engine room and sleeping
room of the fire department. He shall take the fire engine to and from fires, drills, or tests. In the absence of the captain, the chief shall
assign some other competent officer or member of the department to perform his duties. In addition to the above, the captains shall
perform such other duties as may be assigned to them from time to time by the chief, and shall be subject to the regulations
prescribed.
B. Firefighters: The firefighters shall sleep in the room provided for that purpose at the fire house, and shall keep such hours and shall
perform such duties as may be required of them by the chief or by the captains.
C. Volunteer Firefighters:
1. Duties Generally: Promptly upon every alarm of fire, it shall be the duty of all volunteer firefighters belonging to the fire department to
respond to the place of fire and there perform such duties as may be required of them by the chief or his assistants. Any volunteer
firefighter who wilfully fails to respond to any order or direction of any proper officer, at any fire or going to or coming from the same,
shall be summarily dismissed from the service by the chief; provided, that the chief may excuse any member from attending to an
alarm of fire upon good cause shown.
2. Wearing Of Badge: Every firefighter and officer of the fire department, when on duty, shall wear a suitable badge, to be provided by
the city council, and any person wearing such badge unlawfully shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 80, 7-6-1915;
amd. 2001 Code)
5-1-5: USE OF FIRE APPARATUS:
A. Firefighters In Charge: No unauthorized person, except an officer or member of the fire department, shall be permitted to touch, handle
or operate any EMS call or fire apparatus belonging to the department, either at a fire, inspection, drill or while the same is in the
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 91/318
firehouse. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. Private Use Restricted: No person having charge of any fire apparatus belonging to the fire department shall suffer the same to be
applied to private use without the consent of the city council duly obtained at the regular meeting by a majority vote of all members
present at such meeting. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 80, 7-6-
1915; amd. 2001 Code)
5-1-6: FALSE ALARMS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to give a false alarm of fire within the corporate limits, or to wilfully or carelessly destroy in any manner
or injure any part of the fire alarm apparatus of the city. Any person violating any of the provisions of this subsection shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. "Medical alert" or alarms may be activated and require a public safety response. In the event the party(ies) activating the alarm is found
to have done so and is not in need of immediate medical attention, the penalty will be a warning on the first offense and fifty dollars
($50.00) for each false alarm thereafter within a six (6) month period. (Ord. 1169, 11-13-2007)
5-1-7: AMBULANCE CALLS, CHARGES IMPOSED:
From and after the effective date hereof there shall be, and hereby is, imposed a charge for each call for ambulance service made by the
fire department of the city, which charge shall be the same as that now or hereafter adopted as the rate and charges for such service by the
state publication regulation commission. (Ord. 695, 2-22-1982)
Chapter 2
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
5-2-1: FIRE PREVENTION CODE:
A. Adoption: There is adopted by the city, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property
from fire, hazardous materials or explosion, that certain code known as the international fire code, 2012 edition, including the following
appendix chapters:
Appendix B, fire flow requirements for buildings
Appendix C, fire hydrant locations and distribution
Appendix D, fire apparatus access roads
B. Copies On File: The international fire code mentioned in subsection A of this section is adopted, save and except such portions as are
deleted, modified or amended by subsection D of this section. One copy of the code is filed in the office of the city clerk. The
international fire code is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this section, and the provisions thereof shall be
controlling within the city limits.
C. Enforcement: The fire code as adopted in subsections A and B of this section and as amended in subsection D of this section, shall be
enforced by the fire chief or his designee; interchangeable with the term fire code official.
D. Amendments: The fire code adopted in this section is amended as set forth in this subsection. When an existing section number of the
fire code is referred to in this subsection, the text in this subsection shall control. When a new section or subsection is referred to in this
section it shall be added to the fire code as adopted. The fire code is amended and changed as follows:
Chapter 1 Administration
Section 101.1 Title. Shall be amended to read as follows:
These regulations shall be known as the fire code of the city of Deming, hereinafter referred to as "this code".
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 92/318
Section 104.6 Official Records. Shall be amended to read as follows:
The fire code official shall keep official records as required by sections 104.6 through 104.6.4. Such records shall be retained in
accordance with the record retention requirements established by the city of Deming and the state of New Mexico.
Section 105.1 General. Shall be amended to read as follows:
Permits required by the fire code official shall be in accordance with section 105.
Section 105.4 Construction Documents. Shall be amended to read as follows:
Construction documents shall be in accordance with this section and requirements established by the city of Deming and the
state of New Mexico.
Section 105.7.1.1 Hydraulic Calculations Required. Shall be added to read as follows:
Hydraulic calculations shall be provided for modification to an existing automatic fire-extinguishing system requiring the
installation of additional heads when either of the following occur:
1. Number of heads being added exceeds 10.
2. Number of heads being added is greater than 10 percent of total heads for the system.
The fire code official may require hydraulic calculations be submitted for any modification to an existing system when deemed
necessary to adequately evaluate the impact on the system.
Section 105.7.16 Temporary Membrane Structures, Tents And Canopies. Shall be amended to read as follows:
A construction permit is required to erect an air-supported temporary membrane structure having an area in excess of 200 square
feet.
Section 105.7.16 Exceptions. Shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 108.1 Board Of Appeals Established. Shall be amended to read as follows:
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations, made by the fire chief or his designee or when it is
claimed that the provisions of this code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of this code has been misconstrued or
wrongly interpreted, the affected party may appeal, from the decision, to city council, by writing to the fire chief, requesting an
appeal within 30 days of the aggrieved action.
Section 108.2 Limitations On Authority. Shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 108.3 Qualifications. Shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 109.3 Violation Penalties. Shall be amended to read as follows:
Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect,
install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a
permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than
500 dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding 179 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues
after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 111.4 Failure To Comply. Shall be amended to read as follows:
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be considered to be in violation of this code and shall be
subject to the penalties as set forth in section 109.3.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 93/318
Chapter 2 Definitions
Section 202 General Definitions. Definitions and language shall be added to read as follows:
Fire Marshal. The fire chief or designated fire code official, charged with enforcement of the fire code; interchangeable with the
term fire code official, under this code.
Jurisdiction. This code shall be applicable to all property within the corporate limits of the city of Deming, New Mexico.
Chapter 4 Emergency Planning And Preparedness
Table 405.2 Fire And Evacuation Drill Frequency And Participation. Shall be amended as follows:
Group H occupancies shall be included with group A occupancies in the table.
Chapter 5 Fire Service Features
Section 505.1 Address Numbers. Shall be amended to read as follows:
New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in
a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their
background. Numbers shall be a minimum of 2.5 inches high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inches. Address identification
shall also conform to section 11-3-3: A and B of the city of Deming municipal code.
Section 507.5.1 Where Required. Shall be amended to read as follows:
Where a portion of the facility or building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction is more than 400 feet
(122 m) from a hydrant on a fire apparatus access road, as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the facility or
building, on-site fire hydrants and mains shall be provided where required by the fire code official.
Exceptions:
1. For group R-3 and group U occupancies, the distance requirement may be increased to 600 feet (183 m) upon approval of
the fire code official.
2. For buildings equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section
903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, the distance requirement may be increased to 600 feet (183 m) upon approval of the fire code official.
Section 507.5.1.1 Fire Protection In Recreational Vehicle, Mobile Home And Manufactured Housing Parks, Sales Lots And
Storage Lots. Is added to read as follows:
Fire protection in recreational vehicle, mobile home and manufactured housing parks, sales lots and storage lots shall provide
and maintain fire hydrants and access roads in accordance with sections 503 and 508.
Section 511 will be added to Chapter 5. Hazards To Fire Fighters. Will read as follows:
510.6.4 Trapdoors To Be Closed. Trapdoors and scuttle covers, other than those that are within a dwelling unit or automatically
operated, shall be kept closed at all times except when in use.
510.6.5 Shaft Way Markings. Vertical shafts will be identified as required by this section.
510.6.6 Exterior Access To Shaft Ways. Outside openings accessible to the fire department and which open directly on a hoist
way or shaft way communicating between two or more floors in a building shall be plainly marked with the word SHAFT WAY in
red letters at least 6 inches (152 mm) high on a white background. Such warning signs shall be placed as to be readily discernible
from the outside of the building.
510.6.7 Interior Access To Shafts. Door or window openings to a hoist way or shaft way from the interior of the building shall be
plainly marked with the word SHAFT WAY in red letters at least 6 inches (152mm) on a white background. Such warning signs
shall be placed as to be readily discernible.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 94/318
Exception: Markings shall not be required on shaft way openings which are readily discernible as openings onto a shaft way
by the construction or arrangement.
Chapter 9 Fire Protection Systems
Section 902.1 Definitions. Shall have the definition of Standpipe System, Classes Of. Standpipe classes are as follows:
amended to read as follows:
Class I System. A system providing 2.5-inch (64 mm) hose connections to supply water for use by fire departments and those
trained in handling heavy fire streams.
Class II System. A system providing 1.5-inch (38 mm) hose stations to supply water for use primarily by the building occupants
or by the fire department during initial response. 1.5-inch hoses & hose cabinets shall not be provided, unless required by the fire
code official.
Class III System. A system providing 1.5-inch (38 mm) hose stations to supply water for use by building occupants and 2.5-inch
(64 mm) hose connections to supply a larger volume of water for use by fire departments and those trained in handling heavy fire
streams. 1.5-inch hoses & hose cabinets shall not be provided, unless required by the fire code official.
Section 903.2 Exception. Shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 903.2.8 Group R. Shall be amended to read as follows:
An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a group R
fire area.
Exception: In detached one and two family dwellings.
Section 903.4 Exceptions. 2. Shall be amended to read as follows:
2. Limited area systems serving fewer than 20 sprinklers in other than group H and group I occupancies.
Section 903.4.3 Floor Control Valves. Shall be amended to read as follows:
Approved supervised indicating control valves shall be provided at the point of connection to the riser on each floor in multi-story
buildings. For the purpose of this section a basement shall be considered a story.
Section 904.11 Exception. Shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 904.12 Commercial Cooking Systems In Existing Facilities. Is added to read as follows:
Existing facilities with an automatic fire-extinguishing system that does not conform to section 904.11 shall replace their nonconforming
system when one of the following conditions occur:
1. Within 12 months from the effective date of the ordinance adopting this code.
2. Upon any alteration or repair to the non-conforming system during the 12 month period.
3. Upon discharge of the non-conforming system during the 12 month period.
Section 906.1 Exception. Shall be amended to read as follows:
Exception: When approved by the fire code official, in all group A, B, and E occupancies equipped throughout with quick
response sprinklers, fire extinguishers shall be required only in special hazard areas.
Section [B]909.8.1 Smoke Layer. Shall be amended to read as follows:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 95/318
The height of the lowest horizontal surface of the accumulating smoke layer shall be maintained at least 6 feet (1829 mm) above
any walking surface which forms a portion of a required egress system within the smoke zone. The required exhaust rate for the
zone shall be the largest of the calculated plume mass flow rates for the possible plume configurations. Provisions shall be made
for natural or mechanical supply of air from outside or adjacent smoke zones to make up for the air exhausted. Makeup air flow
rates, when measured at the potential fire location, shall not increase the smoke production rate beyond the capabilities of the
smoke control system. The temperature of the make-up air shall be such that it does not expose temperature-sensitive fire
protection systems beyond their limits.
Section [B]909.8.3 Balcony Spill Plumes. Shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section [B]909.8.4 Window Plumes. Shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section [B]909.9 Design Fire. Shall be amended to read as follows:
The design fire shall be based on a rational analysis performed by a registered design professional and approved by the building
official. The design fire shall be based on the analysis in accordance with section 909.4 and this section.
Section 913.4 Valve Supervision. Shall be amended to read as follows:
Where provided, the fire pump suction, discharge and bypass valves, and the isolation valves on the backflow prevention device
or assembly shall be supervised open by one of the following methods.
1. Central-station, proprietary, or remote-station signaling service.
2. Local signaling service that will cause the sounding of an audible signal at a constantly attended location when approved by
the fire code official.
Numbers 3 and 4 shall be deleted in their entirety.
Section 2701.5 Permits. Shall be amended as follows:
Section 2701.6.2. Is added to read as follows:
Permanently Out Of Service Facilities: Facilities for which a permit is not kept current or is not monitored and inspected on a
regular basis shall be deemed to be permanently out of service and shall be closed in an approved manor. When required by the
fire code official, permittees shall apply for approval to close permanently storage, use or handling facilities. The fire code official
is authorized by an approval facility closure plan in accordance with section 2701.6.3.
Section 2701.6.3. Is added to read as follows:
Facility Closure Plan: When a facility closure plan is required in accordance with section 2701.5 to terminate storage,
dispensing, handling or use of hazardous materials, it shall be submitted to the fire code official at least 30 days prior to facility
closure. The plan shall demonstrate that hazardous materials which are stored, dispensed, handled or used in the facility will be
transported, disposed of or reused in a manner that eliminates the need for further maintenance and any threat to public health
and safety.
Chapter 56 Explosives And Fireworks
Section 5601.1.3 Exceptions. Shall be amended as follows:
Exception 2 shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 5608.11. Is added to read as follows:
Retail Display And Sale: Fireworks displayed for retail sale shall not be made readily accessible to the public. A minimum of one
pressurized-water portable fire extinguisher complying with section 906 shall be located not more than 15 feet (4572mm) and not
less than 10 feet (3048mm) from the hazard. "No Smoking" signs complying with section 310 shall be conspicuously posted in
areas where fireworks are stored or displayed for retail sale.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 96/318
Appendix D Fire Apparatus Access Roads
Appendix D of the fire code adopted in this section 5-2-1 shall be amended and changed as follows:
Section D103 Minimum Specifications
Section D103.1 Access Road Width With A Hydrant. Shall be amended to read as follows: Where a fire hydrant is located on a
fire apparatus access road, the minimum road width shall be 20 feet (6096 mm).
Section D103.5 Fire Apparatus Access Road Gates. Shall be amended to read as follows: Where required by the fire code
official, gates securing the fire apparatus access roads shall comply with all of the following criteria:
(Remainder of the section to remain unchanged)
Section D104 Commercial And Industrial Developments
Section D104.1 Buildings Exceeding Three Stories Or 30 Feet In Height. Shall be amended to read as follows:
Buildings or facilities exceeding 30 feet or three stories in height shall have at least two means of fire apparatus access for
each structure.
Section D104.2 Buildings Exceeding 62,000 Square Feet In Area. Shall be amended to read as follows:
Buildings or facilities having a gross building area of more than 62,000 square feet shall be provided with two separate and
approved fire apparatus access roads.
Exception: When approved by the fire code official, projects having a gross building area of up to 124,000 square feet
(11,520 m2) that have a single approved fire apparatus access road when all buildings are equipped throughout with
approved automatic sprinkler systems.
Section D105 Aerial Fire Apparatus Access Roads
Section D105.1 Where Required. Shall be amended to read as follows: by the fire code official, buildings or portions of buildings
or facilities exceeding 30 feet in height above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access shall be provided with approved
fire apparatus access roads capable of accommodating fire department aerial apparatus. Overhead utility and power lines shall
not be located within the aerial fire apparatus access roadway.
Section D106 Multiple-Family Residential Developments
Section D106.1 Exception. Shall be amended to read as follows:
Exception: When approved by the fire code official, projects having up to 200 dwelling units may have a single approved fire
apparatus access road when all buildings, including nonresidential occupancies, are equipped throughout with approved
automatic sprinkler systems installed in accordance with section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 of the fire code adopted in section 5-2-1
of the city code.
Section D107 One- Or Two-Family Residential Developments
Section D107.1 Exceptions. Shall be amended to read as follows:
Exceptions:
1. When approved by the fire code official, where there are 30 or more dwelling units on a single public or private access way
and all dwelling units are protected by approved residential sprinkler systems, access from two directions shall not be required.
2. The number of dwelling units on a single fire apparatus access road shall not be increased unless fire apparatus access
roads will connect with future development, as determined by the fire code official.
(Ord. 1239, 7-8-2013)
5-2-2: BURNING RESTRICTED:
A. Permission For Open Burning; Use Of Incinerator: It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or set fire to any rubbish, loose packing,
straw, waste, loose excelsior, loose or wooden boxes, or trash of any kind, in any street or alley or in any yard or lot in the city, unless
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 97/318
such person shall have written authorization for such burning from the fire department of the city, or unless the same is burned in an
incinerator or other receptacle approved by the chief of the fire department.
B. Time And Place Of Burning: It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or set fire to any material in the city at any other time or place
except as authorized, in writing, by the chief of the fire department. (Ord. 439, 3-3-1969)
5-2-3: STORAGE OF COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept or accumulated within the corporate limits any rubbish, loose packing, straw,
waste, loose excelsior, loose paper, paper or wood shavings, accumulations of waste wood and wastepaper boxes, or other readily
inflammable material except in fireproof rooms in buildings or in fireproof boxes outside of buildings; or to drop, throw or leave the same in
or on any lot, street, passageway, roof, yard, or in any private or public place in the city. (Ord. 81, 7-6-1915)
5-2-4: OBSTRUCTING EXITS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to be placed any obstruction before or on any fire escape or stairway or in any building
exit in or on any building within the corporate limits owned by him or in his possession or under his control. (Ord. 81, 7-6-1915)
Chapter 3
EXPLOSIVES
5-3-1: GASOLINE AND/OR FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS STORAGE:
A. Flammable Liquids Defined: "Flammable liquids" shall mean any liquid having a flash point below one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit
(140°F) and having a vapor pressure not exceeding forty (40) pounds per square inch (absolute) at one hundred degrees Fahrenheit
(100°F).
B. Storage Tank Installation Requirements: All storage tanks within the corporate limits shall be installed in accordance with the following
requirements:
1. They may be located at least three feet (3') underground and also three feet (3') below the level of the lowest pipe used for filling the
tank or in delivering fuel or in fireproof rooms. If fuel storage tanks are located within five feet (5') of any building, such tanks must be
below the level of the cellar or basement unless a brick, stone or concrete wall is built running at least one foot (1') below the cellar or
basement bottom and two feet (2') beyond each end of the tank between the tank and the building. If fuel storage tanks are located in
any building, they shall be enclosed in a fireproof room, having at least eight inch (8") brick, stone or reinforced concrete floors, walls
and ceilings and having only exterior openings. All fuel storage tanks must be constructed of iron or steel plate securely riveted or
pressed into form; and shall be galvanized or painted with a rustproof paint and shall be provided with a fill pipe and a vent pipe; if
located in a fireproof room, such room shall have an independent vent flue extending above the openings of all adjacent buildings.
When a tank is within five feet (5') of any building, the vent pipe must rise above the highest openings of adjacent buildings, and shall
have a disc of sixty (60) mesh brass wire gauze inserted and a return bend or goose neck top. When such tanks are located in
fireproof rooms, the above described vent pipes shall be connected with the vent flue. The vent pipes must be so arranged that the fill
pipe cannot be opened without also opening the vent, and must be terminated in an iron box, the cover of which shall be flush with the
ground and locked. No fuel shall be kept in any garage in the reservoirs of automobiles and in the measuring pumps used for filling;
provided, however, that there may be kept not to exceed two (2) quarts for cleaning purposes in and used from a safety metal can. No
filling, emptying or opening of any fuel reservoir of any automobile shall be done when the same is within a garage, except by daylight
or incandescent electric light; and no artificial light, blaze or fire shall be allowed in the room where and when such reservoir is open.
(Ord. 666, 12-8-1980)
2. Aboveground Storage; Permit:
a. In lieu of the requirements for the storage of gasoline and/or flammable liquids as provided for in subsection B1 of this section,
gasoline and/or flammable liquids may be stored in aboveground storage if such storage facility meets safety, environmental, and at
least a two (2) hour firewall containment protection requirement; and provided further, that such storage facility has a setback of at
least twenty five feet (25') from any building or permanent improvement.
b. Any person desiring to place any aboveground storage facility within the city shall request a permit from the fire chief of the city who
shall issue a permit for the installation thereof if he finds that the same conforms to the requirements of this subsection B2. (Ord.
848, 4-13-1992)
C. Zoning District Restriction: It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal or agent, to keep more than five (5) gallons of gasoline
on his premises at any one time in other than a commercial or industrial use zoning district within the city now or hereafter established
by the city. (Ord. 537, 6-2-1975)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 98/318
5-3-2: INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINES; PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to install any engine in any building within the corporate limits except by securing a permit so to do from
the city council upon written application therefor, which said application shall be in writing and shall show the dimensions and locations of all
adjoining buildings and lot lines, and the position and location of the cutoff valve, and all other important parts. (Ord. 666, 12-8-1980)
Chapter 4
FIREWORKS1
5-4-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be cited as the CITY OF DEMING FIREWORKS ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1060, 6-10-2002)
5-4-2: PURPOSE:
To provide authorized local enforcement of the New Mexico fireworks licensing and safety act and to assist in protecting the public health,
welfare and safety of the residents of Deming. (Ord. 1060, 6-10-2002)
5-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
AERIAL SPINNER: A tube containing no more than twenty grams (20 g) of chemical composition with a propeller or blade attached that
spins rapidly as it rises into the air with a visible or audible effect sometimes produced at or near the height of flight.
APPLICANT: The person issued a permit and the person responsible to the city of Deming as provided for in this chapter.
CHASER: A paper or cardboard tube venting out the fuse end of the tube that contains no more than twenty grams (20 g) of chemical
combustion and travels along the ground, often producing a whistling effect or other noise; an explosive composition not to exceed fifty
milligrams (50 mg) may be included to produce a report.
CHEMICAL COMPOSITION: All pyrotechnic and explosive composition contained in a fireworks device, not including inert materials such
as clay used for plugs or organic material such as rice hulls used for density control.
CLERK: The municipal clerk of the city of Deming.
CONE FOUNTAIN: A cardboard or heavy paper cone containing no more than fifty grams (50 g) of pyrotechnic composition that has the
same effect as a cylindrical fountain; and when more than one cone is mounted on a common base, total pyrotechnic composition not
exceeding two hundred grams (200 g).
COUNCIL: The Deming city council.
CRACKLING DEVICE: A sphere or tube containing no more than twenty grams (20 g) of pyrotechnic composition that produces a flash of
light and a mild, audible crackling effect upon ignition, which effect is not considered to be an explosion.
CYLINDRICAL FOUNTAIN: A tube containing no more than seventy five grams (75 g) of pyrotechnic composition that produces a shower of
colored sparks and sometimes a whistling effect or smoke, including a device with a spike for insertion into the ground or a wood or plastic
base for placing on the ground or a wood or cardboard handle to be handheld; and when more than one tube is mounded on a common
base, total pyrotechnic composition not exceeding two hundred grams (200 g).
DISPLAY DISTRIBUTOR: Any person, firm, company or organization selling display fireworks.
DISPLAY FIREWORKS: Devices designed to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration or detonation, including salutes,
and containing more than one hundred thirty milligrams (130 mg) of explosive composition; aerial shells containing more than forty grams
(40 g) of chemical composition exclusive of lift charge; and other exhibition display items that exceed the limits for fireworks permissible
herein.
EXPLOSIVE COMPOSITION: Any chemical compound or mixture, the primary purpose of which is to function by explosion, producing an
audible effect in a fireworks device.
FIRE CHIEF: The Deming fire chief or his designated representative.
FIRECRACKER: A small, paper wrapped or cardboard tube containing no more than fifty milligrams (50 mg) of explosive composition that
produces noise and a flash of light; provided that firecrackers used in aerial devices may contain up to one hundred thirty milligrams (130
mg) of explosive composition per report.
FIREWORKS: Devices intended to produce a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration or detonation and are categorized as
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 99/318
"permissible fireworks", "prohibited fireworks" or "display fireworks".
FLITTER SPARKLER: A narrow paper tube attached to a stick or wire and filled with no more than five grams (5 g) of pyrotechnic
composition that produces color and sparks upon ignition and the paper at one end of the tube is ignited to make the device function.
GROUND SPINNER: A small, rapidly spinning device containing no more than twenty grams (20 g) of pyrotechnic composition venting out
an orifice usually on the side of the tube that when ignited produces a shower of sparks and color; "ground spinner" is similar in operation to
wheel, but is intended to be placed flat on the ground and ignited.
HELICOPTER: A tube containing no more than twenty grams (20 g) of chemical composition with a propeller or blade attached that spins
rapidly as it rises into the air with a visible or audible effect sometimes produced at or near the height of flight.
ILLUMINATING TORCH: A cylindrical tube containing no more than one hundred grams (100 g) of pyrotechnic composition that produces a
colored flame upon ignition and may be spiked, based or handheld; and when more than one tube is mounted on a common base, total
pyrotechnic composition shall not exceed two hundred grams (200 g).
MINE: A heavy cardboard or paper tube usually attached to a wooden or plastic base and containing no more than forty grams (40 g) of
chemical composition plus not more than twenty grams (20 g) of lift charge per tube that individually expels pellets of pressed pyrotechnic
composition that burn with bright color in a star effect, or other devices propelled into the air, and that contains components producing
reports containing a maximum one hundred thirty milligrams (130 mg) of explosive composition per report; a mine may contain more than
one tube, but the tubes must fire in sequence upon ignition of one external fuse and the total chemical composition, including lift charges, of
a multiple tube shall not exceed two hundred grams (200 g).
MISSILE TYPE ROCKET: A device similar to a stick type rocket in size, composition and effect that uses fins rather than a stick for
guidance and stability and that contains no more than twenty grams (20 g) of chemical composition.
PERMISSIBLE FIREWORKS: Fireworks legal for sale to and use in New Mexico by the general public.
PORTABLE BUILDINGS: Any structure, tent, trailer or vehicle which is of temporary nature or design which is used separately or together
for the retail sale of fireworks to the general public.
PROHIBITED FIREWORKS: Fireworks which are not legal for sale or possession within the city limits of Deming.
PYROTECHNIC COMPOSITION: A chemical mixture that on burning and without explosion produces visible or brilliant displays or bright
lights or whistles or motion.
ROMAN CANDLE: A heavy paper or cardboard tube containing no more than twenty grams (20 g) of chemical composition that individually
expels pellets of pressed pyrotechnic composition that burn with bright color in a star effect.
SHELL: A heavy cardboard or paper tube usually attached to a wooden or plastic base and containing no more than forty grams (40 g) of
chemical composition plus not more than twenty grams (20 g) of lift charge per tube that individually expels pellets of pressed pyrotechnic
composition that burn with bright color in a star effect, or other devices propelled into the air, and that contains components producing
reports containing a maximum one hundred thirty milligrams (130 mg) of explosive composition per report; a mine may contain more than
one tube, but the tubes must fire in sequence upon ignition of one external fuse and the total chemical composition, including lift charges, of
a multiple tube device shall not exceed two hundred grams (200 g).
STATUTE: For the purposes of this chapter refers to the state of New Mexico fireworks licensing and safety act beginning with section 60-
2C-1, New Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978.
STICK TYPE ROCKET: A cylindrical tube containing no more than twenty grams (20 g) of chemical composition with a wooden stick
attached for guidance and stability that rises into the air upon ignition and produces a burst of color or sound at or near the height of flight.
TOY SMOKE DEVICE: A small plastic or paper item containing no more than one hundred grams (100 g) of pyrotechnic composition that
produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect.
VENDOR: Any person or business engaged in the retail sale of fireworks to the general public.
WHEEL: A pyrotechnic device that is made to attach to a post or other surface that revolves, producing a shower of color and sparks and
sometimes a whistling effect, and that may have one or more drivers, each of which contains no more than sixty grams (60 g) of pyrotechnic
composition and the total wheel contains no more than two hundred grams (200 g) total pyrotechnic composition. (Ord. 1060, 6-10-2002)
5-4-4: APPLICATION AND PERMIT:
A. All vendors of fireworks within the city must obtain a local fireworks retail sales permit from the clerk. Each sales location within the city
shall have a separate permit.
B. A permit may be issued by the city and upon issuance, shall be valid for one year unless revoked as otherwise provided in this chapter.
Vendors must present, at the time of application for permit, a copy of a written agreement for use, rent or lease of land intended for the
vendor's sales location, unless the vendor is located within a permanent structure. Such written agreements for use, rent or lease of land
for use as a fireworks sales location shall be signed by the owner, property manager or tenant having authority to execute such
documents.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 100/318
1. Applicants will be accepted up to the first day of any selling period. Vendors and/or businesses shall provide the city with a copy of the
state issued license or permit for the sale of fireworks with the application. (Ord. 1060, 6-10-2002)
2. Vendors who sell fireworks, except those retail businesses located at permanent locations possessing a current municipal business
registration or license, shall pay a nonrefundable application fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) upon submission of an application.
Vendors are also subject to all the provisions contained in title 3, chapter 10, article A, "Transient Merchants", of this code. (Ord. 1060,
6-10-2002; amd. Ord. 1100, 11-8-2004)
3. Vendors are responsible for the applicable municipal gross receipts taxes.
4. Portable buildings must be set back a reasonable distance from the roadway and shall not obstruct the public right of way. Any tent
intended for use as a sales location shall comply with rules adopted by the state fire marshal.
5. No fireworks shall be stored, kept, sold or discharged within fifty feet (50') of any gasoline pump or gasoline bulk station or any
building in which gasoline or volatile liquids are sold in quantities in excess of one gallon, except in stores where cleaner, paints and
oils are handled in sealed containers only.
6. At all places where fireworks are stored, sold or displayed, the words "NO SMOKING" shall be posted in letters at least four inches
(4") in height. Smoking, open flames and any ignition source are prohibited within twenty five feet (25') of any fireworks stock.
7. Original permits must be prominently displayed at each location at all times.
8. All fireworks permit holders and licensees shall keep and maintain upon the premises a fire extinguisher bearing an Underwriters
Laboratories Incorporated rated capacity of at least five (5) pound ABC per five hundred (500) square feet of space used for fireworks
sales or storage. (Ord. 1060, 6-10-2002)
9. Permitted seasonal fireworks stands must be attended by the operator twenty four (24) hours a day during their permit period while
inventory is on site for public safety concerns. Dry camped trailers, and recreational vehicles may be utilized to occupy the premises
to provide the twenty four (24) hour security. The operator is not allowed to sleep within the retail area or where inventory is stored.
(Ord. 1100, 11-8-2004)
5-4-5: DISPLAY FIREWORKS:
Nothing herein shall prohibit the public display of fireworks, except that any individual association, partnership, corporation, organization,
county or city, shall secure a permit from the governing body of Deming where the public display is to be fired. The display fireworks shall
be purchased from a distributor or display distributor licensed by the state fire marshal and the bureau of alcohol, tobacco and firearms of
the United States department of the treasury. (Ord. 1060, 6-10-2002)
5-4-6: RESTRICTIONS:
A. It is unlawful to offer for sale or to sell any fireworks to children under the age of sixteen (16) years or to any intoxicated person.
B. No person shall discharge fireworks within one hundred fifty feet (150') of any fireworks retail sales location.
C. No person shall ignite any fireworks within a motor vehicle or throw fireworks from a motor vehicle, nor shall any person place or throw
any ignited article of fireworks into or at a motor vehicle or at or near any person or group of people.
D. In addition to the requirements of this chapter, vendors will comply with all applicable requirements imposed under the fireworks licensing
and safety act. (Ord. 1060, 6-10-2002)
5-4-7: INSPECTION:
The fire chief may at any reasonable hour enter and inspect the premises, portable building or any structure temporarily or permanently
located at the site designated for the sale, packaging or handling of permissible fireworks and may seize nonpermitted fireworks as
provided in section 5-4-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 1060, 6-10-2002)
5-4-8: PERMISSIBLE FIREWORKS:
The following are permissible fireworks within the city:
A. Ground and handheld sparkling and smoke devices:
1. Cone fountains;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 101/318
2. Crackling devices;
3. Cylindrical fountains;
4. Flitter sparklers;
5. Ground spinners;
6. Illuminating torches;
7. Toy smoke devices; and
8. Wheels.
B. Aerial devices:
1. Mines;
2. Roman candles; and
3. Shells. (Ord. 1060, 6-10-2002)
5-4-9: PROHIBITED FIREWORKS:
The following are prohibited fireworks within the municipality:
A. Aerial devices:
1. Aerial spinners;
2. Helicopters;
3. Missile type rockets; and
4. Stick type rockets.
B. Ground audible devices:
1. Chasers; and
2. Firecrackers.
C. All other fireworks not specifically allowed pursuant to section 5-4-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 1060, 6-10-2002)
5-4-10: SEIZURE OF FIREWORKS:
The fire chief may inspect the fireworks stands for conformance to sections 5-4-8 and 5-4-9 of this chapter.
A. The fire chief shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the permit holder all stocks of fireworks offered or
exposed for sale in violation of section 5-4-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 1060, 6-10-2002)
5-4-11: PENALTY:
A. Any individual, firm, partnership or corporation that violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a petty misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a period of not more than
ninety (90) days or both fine and imprisonment.
B. In addition to any other criminal penalties that may be imposed, any individual, firm, partnership or corporation found guilty by a court of
competent jurisdiction of violating this chapter or the fireworks licensing and safety act two (2) or more times within a five (5) year period
shall, after notice and hearing, have its permit revoked for a period of one year. (Ord. 1060, 6-10-2002)
5-4-12: SEVERABILITY:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 102/318
If any section, subsection, paragraph, phrase or other portion of this chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever by a court
of competent jurisdiction, then such decision shall not affect the validity or enforceability of the remaining portions of this chapter. (Ord.
1060, 6-10-2002)
Title 6
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
CRIMINAL OFFENSES
ARTICLE A. OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
6-1A-1: ASSAULT1:
It is unlawful for any person to attempt to commit a battery upon the person of another, nor shall any person, by any unlawful act, threat or
menacing conduct, cause another person to believe he is in danger of receiving an immediate battery. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1A-2: BATTERY2:
It is unlawful for any person to beat, strike, wound, inflict violence or apply force to the person of another, nor shall a person intentionally
touch or apply force to the person of another in a rude, insolent, angry or hostile manner except in connection with an exhibition duly
authorized and licensed under law, or in lawful self defense, or in the line of duty as a duly authorized police officer as circumstances
warrant. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1A-3: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
It is unlawful for any person to disturb or aid in disturbing the peace of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive, or obstreperous conduct,
and no person shall knowingly permit such conduct upon any property owned by him or under his control or supervision. (Ord. 748, 8-12-
1985)
6-1A-4: PROPELLING OF MISSILES:
It is unlawful for any person to shoot, sling or throw any stone, rock or other propellant, missile or substance in any manner as to be
reasonably likely to cause injury to any person or property. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1A-5: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
It is unlawful for any person to commit disorderly conduct within the city limits. "Disorderly conduct" consists of engaging in violent, abusive,
indecent, profane, boisterous, unreasonably loud or otherwise disorderly conduct which tends to disturb the peace or maliciously disturbing,
threatening or, in an insolent manner, intentionally touching any house occupied by any person3. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1A-6: DRUNKENNESS:
It is unlawful for any person to be found drunk and disorderly within the limits of the city. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1A-7: INDECENT EXPOSURE:
It is unlawful for any person to make any indecent exposure of his or her genitals in any public place in the city. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1A-8: OBTAINING GOODS OR MONEY UNDER PROMISE TO PERFORM WORK:
It is unlawful for any person who under the pretense of hiring to do work for any person, to obtain in advance payment on account of
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 103/318
promise of work to be done by such person and afterwards, being able to do so, wilfully failing to perform the work agreed to be performed.
(Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1A-9: UNINVITED PEDDLING:
The practice of going in and upon private residences in the city by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors
of merchandise, not having been requested or invited so to do by the owner or occupant of said private residences, for the purpose of
soliciting orders for the sale of goods, magazine subscriptions, wares and merchandise, and/or for the purpose of disposing of and/or
peddling or hawking the same, is hereby declared to be unlawful. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1A-10: PENALTY:
A person who violates this chapter is guilty of a petty misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided for in section 1-4-1
of this code. (Ord. 1172, 11-13-2007)
ARTICLE B. OFFENSES INVOLVING GOVERNMENT
6-1B-1: FALSE ALARMS:
A. It is unlawful for any person to make, turn in or give a false alarm of fire or of need for police or ambulance assistance, or to interfere with
the proper functioning of an alarm system, or to aid or abet the commission of such an act.
B. Operation of property alarms within the city of Deming shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner/occupant. Within a six (6)
month period, when a false alarm is registered, sounded, or in any way that requires a police response and it is determined to be a
"false alarm", the owner/occupant will be warned upon their first offense. Upon the second false alarm the penalty shall be fifty dollars
($50.00). Upon a third false alarm the penalty shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). For the fourth and any subsequent violations the
penalty shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) each occurrence. (Ord. 1168, 11-13-2007)
6-1B-2: FALSE REPORTS:
It is unlawful for any person to maliciously make or file with the police department any false, misleading or unfounded report or statement
concerning the commission or alleged commission of any crime. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1B-3: INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS:
A. Prohibitions: It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to resist, evade, obstruct or hinder any police officer, firefighter, emergency
medical personnel, other municipal employees or judge of the city while in the lawful discharge of their duties. Resisting, evading,
obstructing or hindering any officer defined in this section consists of:
1. Knowingly obstructing, resisting or opposing any officer of the city or any other duly authorized person serving or attempting to serve
or execute any process or any rule or order of any of the courts of this state or any other judicial writ or process;
2. Intentionally fleeing, attempting to evade or evading an officer of the city when the person committing the act of fleeing, attempting to
evade or evasion has knowledge that the officer is attempting to apprehend or arrest him;
3. Wilfully refusing to bring a vehicle to a stop when given a visual or audible signal to stop, whether by hand, voice, emergency light,
flashing light, siren or other signal, by a uniformed officer in an appropriately marked police vehicle; or
4. Resisting or abusing any officer, firefighter, emergency medical personnel or city judge in the lawful discharge of his duties.
B. Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 849, 4-13-
1992; amd. 2001 Code)
6-1B-4: IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER:
It is unlawful for any person other than a duly commissioned police officer to wear or carry the uniform, apparel, badge, identification card or
other insignia of office, the same, similar or a colorable imitation of that adopted and worn or carried by duly commissioned police officers,
unless acting in the course of regular business and with the permission of the city or, without authority, to exercise or attempt to exercise the
functions of, or pretend to be, a peace officer or judge. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 104/318
6-1B-5: ASSAULT UPON PEACE OFFICER:
It is unlawful for any person to commit assault upon a peace officer. Assault upon a peace officer consists of:
A. An attempt to commit a battery upon the person of a peace officer while he is in the lawful discharge of his duties; or
B. Any unlawful act, threat or menacing conduct which causes a peace officer while he is in the lawful discharge of his duties to reasonably
believe that he is in danger of receiving an immediate battery. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1B-6: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF CERTAIN WORDS AND INSIGNIA:
It is unlawful to display on any vehicle or sign, without authority of the city, the words "police", "police department", "fire department", or
words or insignia of similar import, whose design or form is such that it appears to be an official vehicle or sign of the fire or police
department of the city; provided, that nothing contained herein shall apply to any state or county vehicle. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1B-7: ESCAPE OF PRISONERS1:
A. Escape From Jail Or Custody: It is unlawful for any person, while a prisoner of the city or otherwise in the custody of or confined by the
city, to escape or attempt to escape or to assist other prisoners to escape or attempt to escape from such custody or confinement.
B. Assisting Escape: It is unlawful for any person to assist, attempt to assist or offer to assist any person in custody of or confined under the
authority of the city to escape from jail, place of confinement or custody. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1B-8: REMOVAL OF BARRICADES:
It is unlawful to remove, destroy or interfere with any barrier, guard or light placed before or in any dangerous place near the streets,
sidewalks or other public ways of the city for the purpose of warning or protecting travelers from injury or danger; provided, that removal
after the danger has ceased and temporary removal to allow the passage of a vehicle with immediate subsequent replacement shall not be
considered unlawful. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1B-9: CONCEALING IDENTITY:
It shall be hereafter unlawful for any person to conceal his identity within the city limits. Concealing identity consists of concealing one's true
name or identity, or disguising oneself with intent to obstruct the due execution of the law or with intent to intimidate, hinder or interrupt any
public officer or any other person in a legal performance of his duty or the exercise of his rights under the laws of the United States, of this
state or the city. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1B-10: ACCESSORY TO OFFENSE:
A person may be charged with and convicted of a violation of a city ordinance as an accessory if he procures, counsels, aids or abets in the
commission of a violation of a city ordinance although he did not directly commit the violation of the city ordinance and although the
principal who directly committed the violation of the city ordinance has not been prosecuted or convicted or has been convicted of a
different violation of a city ordinance or has been acquitted. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1B-11: WARRANTLESS ARREST:
A. Definitions: As used in this section:
LICENSED PREMISES: All public and private rooms, facilities and areas in which alcoholic beverages are sold or served in the
customary operating procedures of establishments licensed to sell or serve alcoholic liquors.
OPERATOR: The owner or the manager of any establishment or premises open to the public.
PROPRIETOR: The owner of the licensed premises or his manager or his designated representative.
B. Shoplifting:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 105/318
1. If any law enforcement officer, special officer or merchant has probable cause for believing that a person has wilfully taken possession
of any merchandise with the intention of converting it without paying for it, or has wilfully concealed merchandise, and that he can
recover the merchandise by detaining the person or taking him into custody, the law enforcement officer, special officer or merchant
may, for the purpose of attempting to effect a recovery of the merchandise, take the person into custody and detain him in a
reasonable manner for a reasonable time. Such taking into custody or detention shall not subject the officer or merchant to any
criminal or civil liability.
2. Any law enforcement officer may arrest without warrant any person he has probable cause for believing has committed the violation of
the city ordinance against shoplifting. Any merchant who causes such an arrest shall not be criminally or civilly liable if he has
probable cause for believing the person so arrested has committed shoplifting.
C. Arrest Without A Warrant:
1. Domestic Disturbance: A law enforcement officer may arrest a person and take that person into custody without a warrant when the
officer is at the scene of a domestic disturbance and has probable cause to believe that the person has committed an assault or a
battery upon a family or household member. As used in this section, "family or household members" means spouses, former spouses
or persons residing with each other.
2. Nonliability Of Law Enforcement Officer: No law enforcement officer shall be held criminally or civilly liable for making an arrest
pursuant to this section, provided he acts in good faith and without malice.
3. Assisting Violation: Whether or not an arrest is made pursuant to this section, a law enforcement officer may remain with the victim
and assist the victim in getting to a shelter or receiving proper medical attention.
D. Falsely Obtaining Services Or Accommodations: Any law enforcement officer may arrest without a warrant any person he has probable
cause for believing has committed a violation of the city ordinance prohibiting falsely obtaining services or accommodations. Any
merchant, owner or proprietor who causes such an arrest shall not be criminally or civilly liable if he has actual knowledge that the
person so arrested has committed the violation of the city ordinance prohibiting falsely obtaining services or accommodations.
E. Assault Or Battery: Any law enforcement officer may arrest without warrant any persons he has probable cause for believing have
committed the violation of city ordinances prohibiting assault or battery or public affray or criminal damage to property. Any proprietor or
operator who causes such an arrest shall not be criminally or civilly liable if he has actual knowledge, communicated truthfully and in
good faith to the law enforcement officer, that the persons so arrested have committed the violations of city ordinances prohibiting
assault or battery or public affray or criminal damage to property. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1B-12: PENALTY:
A person who violates this chapter is guilty of a petty misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided for in section 1-4-1
of this code. (Ord. 1172, 11-13-2007)
ARTICLE C. OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
6-1C-1: TRESPASS1:
It is unlawful to enter or remain on the property of another knowing that consent to enter or remain has been denied or withdrawn by the
owner or occupant thereof. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1C-2: PROWLING:
It is unlawful for any person to loiter or prowl in a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law abiding individuals under circumstances
that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the actor takes flight upon appearance of a peace officer, refuses to identify himself, or
manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the actor or other circumstance makes it impracticable, a peace
officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the actor an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise
be warranted, by requesting him to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under
this section if the peace officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the action
was true and, if believed by the peace officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1C-3: VAGRANCY:
The following acts comprise the crime of vagrancy and their commission is unlawful:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 106/318
A. Waiting In Or Near School: Waiting or remaining within a public, private or parochial school building or upon school grounds, not having
any reason or relationship involving custody of or responsibility for a student, without the written permission of a school official, or in
violation of posted rules or regulations.
B. Begging: Begging from door to door to private houses or commercial business establishments or placing oneself in or upon any public
way or public place to beg. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1C-4: OBSTRUCTING MOVEMENT:
It is unlawful to hinder, annoy or molest persons passing along any street, sidewalk, crosswalk or other public way, or to lie, sit or stand
around the entrance of any church, theater, public building, or other place of public assemblage in any manner so as to unreasonably
obstruct such entrance or to place or erect upon any public way an obstruction of any type except temporary barriers or warning signs
placed for the purpose of safeguarding the public against any hazard. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1C-5: FIREWORKS RESTRICTIONS2:
A. Use Restricted During Drought:
1. This subsection is adopted pursuant to New Mexico Statutes Annotated sections 60-2C-1 through 60-2C-11 and is enforceable only if
the city council issues a proclamation declaring a condition of extreme or severe drought following the procedures established in New
Mexico Statutes Annotated section 60-6C-8.1, and is enforceable only during the period of time in which the proclamation is in force
and effect. Any dissolution or suspension of a proclamation serves to stay enforceability of this subsection and shall not operate to
repeal or suspend this subsection.
2. This subsection is in addition to any ordinance the city council may adopt concerning aerial devices and ground audible devices, in
accordance with New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 6-2C-7, and shall not be construed as a limitation of the terms of any such
ordinance.
3. The use of missile type rockets, helicopters, aerial spinners and stick type rockets, as defined in New Mexico Statutes Annotated
section 60-2C-2, is prohibited within the municipal boundaries of the city.
4. The use of any other permitted fireworks, as defined in New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 60-2C-2, not listed in subsection A3
of this section, is restricted to areas within the municipal boundaries that are paved or barren or that have a readily accessible source
of water for use by the homeowner or general public. (Ord. 998, 6-14-1999; amd. Ord. 1060, 6-10-2002)
6-1C-6: INJURING OR DEFACING PROPERTY3:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully, maliciously or wantonly destroy, injure, remove, tamper with or deface real property or improvements
thereto or personal property, either public or private. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1C-7: LIBRARY PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any person to carry away without authority, misuse, cut, write upon, injure, deface, tear or destroy any book, periodical,
map, newspaper or any other property devoted to public library use. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1C-8: SCATTERING TRASH, RUBBISH:
It is unlawful for any person to throw or permit to be deposited or scattered upon any sidewalk, alley, street or public property or upon the
private property of another, any rubbish, waste, trash or other disposed material of any kind. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1C-9: ADVERTISING MATTER:
A. Distributing On Streets: It is unlawful for any person to distribute any commercial advertising such as showcards, posters, brochures,
circulars or handbills upon any public street or way.
B. Private Property; Owner Consent: It is unlawful for any person to distribute, place or post in or upon any private property, including utility
poles, any showcard, poster, handbill or other announcement or advertisement without the express consent of the owner or occupant of
the property.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 107/318
C. Posting On Public Structures: It is unlawful for any person to post or affix any poster, handbill or other form of advertisement upon the
surface of any public structure or building without the express consent of the public official having charge of said public structure or
property. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1C-10: WRONGFUL USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any person to commit unlawful use of public property by knowingly entering any public property without permission of the
lawful custodian or his representative when the public property is not open to the public, or remaining in or occupying any public property
after having been requested to leave by the lawful custodian, or his representative, who has determined that the public property is being
used or occupied contrary to its intended or customary use or that the public property may be damaged or destroyed by the use. (Ord. 748,
8-12-1985)
6-1C-11: REMOVAL OF EARTH:
It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to move, distribute or take away any earth, stone or other material from any public street, way,
alley, park or public ground. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1C-12: ENTERING HOUSE WITHOUT CONSENT:
It is unlawful for any person to enter any house occupied by another person by breaking or piercing the wall, or without breaking the same,
climb upon any roof, or in any other manner enter any house without the consent of the occupant or owner thereof, or having pierced the
wall could not enter by reason of detection or by reason of any other obstruction. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1C-13: ENTERING PLACES OF AMUSEMENT WITHOUT PERMISSION:
It shall be unlawful for any person without the permission of the owner or lawful custodian thereof to enter through any means of entrance
other than that provided for the public to enter any building, enclosure or other structure constructed or maintained for the purpose of lawful
entertainment, amusement, sport or contest or where the same is or about to be carried on; or with intent to witness or enjoy without paying
therefor for any such entertainment, amusement, sport or contest within an enclosure for which an admission is charged; to climb upon or
occupy any building, fence or other structure; or with like intent to occupy any public road, street or alley with any animals, vehicles,
structures or contrivances of any kind, or, except with the permission of the owner thereof so as to occupy any private property or structure
thereon adjacent to such enclosure by any of which means of view is obtained in such enclosure, while any such entertainment,
amusement, sport or contest is going on within the city limits. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1C-14: GATES:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying any premises or property within the city to construct or use any gate that swings
outward upon a sidewalk within the city. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1C-15: INJURING UNOCCUPIED HOUSE OR CONTENTS:
It is unlawful for any person in any manner to maliciously damage any unoccupied house or break any door or window, or wall or roof or do
any other injury to anything deposited in said house within the city limits. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1C-16: LITTERING SIDEWALKS:
A. Business Section Defined: For the purpose of this section, "business section" shall be defined as all of those areas within the city limits
which have been designated as "commercial or industrial areas" by title 12 of this code.
B. Sweeping Into Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, haul, or cause to be swept or hauled, or otherwise move any dirt,
trash, papers, refuse or any other matter from any sidewalk or building in the business section of the city onto the streets of the business
section of the city.
C. Failure To Remove After Notice: All owners or persons in charge of real estate in the city who shall suffer or permit any sand, dirt,
wastepaper, filth or refuse of any kind to remain in or upon the sidewalks adjoining the premises owned or occupied by them for more
than twenty four (24) hours after having been notified by the code enforcement officer to remove the same, shall be deemed guilty of an
unlawful act. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 108/318
6-1C-17: RIDING ON SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive or lead any animal or to drive any vehicle upon, along or across any cement sidewalk in the
city. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1C-18: FRAUDULENTLY OBTAINING SERVICES OR ACCOMMODATIONS:
Falsely obtaining services or accommodations consists of any person obtaining any service, food, entertainment or accommodations
without paying therefor, and with the intent to cheat or defraud the owner or person supplying such service, food, entertainment or
accommodations. It shall be unlawful for any person to "falsely obtain services or accommodations" as herein defined within the city. (Ord.
748, 8-12-1985)
6-1C-19: LOITERING:
A. Parks; Cemetery:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or remain in, or upon, any public park within the city limits or in or upon the municipal
cemetery known as the Mountainview cemetery, excepting any state, county or city officer engaged in an official capacity, between the
hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
2. It shall be unlawful for anyone having the legal care and custody of any person under eighteen (18) years of age to allow or permit
such person to loiter or remain in and upon any public park within the city limits, or in or upon the municipal cemetery during the hours
set forth in this subsection A. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
B. Public Places:
1. Definition: As used in this section, "loitering" shall mean remaining idly in essentially one location and shall include the concepts of
spending time idly, loafing, or walking about aimlessly, and shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around".
2. Certain Types Of Loitering Prohibited: No person shall loiter in a public place, including public streets, alleys and sidewalks in such
manner as to:
a. Create or cause to be created a danger of breach of the peace;
b. Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person;
c. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles;
d. Obstruct, molest, or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place;
e. Cause any person lawfully in any public place to fear for their safety.
This subsection B2 shall include the making of unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or which are
calculated to annoy or disturb the person to or in whose hearing, they are made.
3. Request To Leave: Whenever the presence of any person in any public place is causing any of the conditions enumerated in
subsection B2 of this section, any police officer may order that person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after
being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation of this subsection B.
4. Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this subsection B shall be penalized in accordance with section 1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 872, 1-10-1994)
6-1C-20: PETTY LARCENY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of larceny by stealing the property of another in the corporate limits of the city, where
the value of the property stolen is four hundred ninety nine dollars ($499.00) or less. (Ord. 1155, 5-30-2007)
6-1C-21: FRAUD:
It is unlawful for any person to commit fraud within the city limits. "Fraud" consists of the intentional misappropriation or taking of anything of
value which belongs to another by means of fraudulent practices or when the value of the thing misappropriated or taken is four hundred
ninety nine dollars ($499.00) or less. (Ord. 1155, 5-30-2007)
6-1C-22: EMBEZZLEMENT:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 109/318
It shall be hereafter unlawful for any person to commit embezzlement within the city limits. "Embezzlement" consists of the embezzling or
converting to his own use of anything of value with which he has been entrusted, with fraudulent intent to deprive the owner when the value
of the thing embezzled or converted is four hundred ninety nine dollars ($499.00) or less. (Ord. 1155, 5-30-2007)
6-1C-23: RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any person to receive any stolen property within the city limits. "Receiving stolen property" means intentionally to receive,
retain or dispose of such property knowing it has been stolen or believing it has been stolen, unless the property is received, retained or
disposed of with intent to restore it to the owner, when the value of the property is four hundred ninety nine dollars ($499.00) or less. (Ord.
1155, 5-30-2007)
6-1C-24: SHOPLIFTING4:
A. Definitions: As used in this chapter:
MERCHANDISE: Chattels of any type or description regardless of the value offered for sale in or about a store.
MERCHANT: Any owner or proprietor of any store, or any agent, servant or employee of the owner or proprietor.
STORE: A place where merchandise is sold or offered to the public for sale at retail. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
B. Prohibited Acts: It is unlawful for any person to commit the offense of shoplifting within the city limits, when the value of the shoplifted
merchandise is four hundred ninety nine dollars ($499.00) or less. Shoplifting shall consist of any one of the following acts:
1. Wilfully taking possession of any merchandise with the intention of converting it without paying for it;
2. Wilfully concealing any merchandise with the intention of converting it without paying for it;
3. Wilfully altering any label, price tag or marking upon any merchandise with the intention of depriving the merchant of all or some part
of the value of it; or
4. Wilfully transferring any merchandise from the container in or on which it is displayed to any other container in or on with the intention
of depriving the merchant of all or some part of the value of it. (Ord. 1155, 5-30-2007)
6-1C-25: CREDIT CARD FRAUD:
It is unlawful for any person within the city limits, other than the issuer, who receives or possesses a credit card that he knows or has reason
to know to have been stolen, lost, mislaid or delivered under a mistake, as to the identity or address of the cardholder, and who retains
possession thereof with the intent to use it or sell it or transfer it to a person other than the issuer or the cardholder. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1C-26: BAD CHECKS5:
A. Insufficient Funds: It is unlawful for any person within the city limits to issue in exchange for anything of value, with intent to defraud, any
check, draft or order for payment of money upon any bank or any other depository, knowing at the time of the issue that the offender has
insufficient funds in or credit with the bank or depository, for the payment of such check, draft or order in full upon its presentation, when
the amount of the check, draft or order or the total amount of the check, draft or order are for more than one dollar ($1.00) but less than
twenty five dollars ($25.00).
B. No Account In Bank: If the maker or drawer of a check, payment of which is refused by the bank or depository upon which it is drawn
because of no account in the name of the maker or drawer in said bank, proof of the fact that the maker or drawer had no account in the
bank or depository upon which the check is drawn shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to defraud and of knowledge of insufficient
funds in or credit with the bank or depository with which to pay said draft.
C. Failure To Pay Check: If the maker or drawer of a check, payment of which is refused by the bank or depository upon which it is drawn
because of insufficient funds or credit in the account of the maker or drawer in the bank or depository, fails, within three (3) days after
notice to him that the check was not honored by the bank or depository, to pay the check in full, together with any protect fees or
handling costs thereon, such failure shall constitute prima facie evidence of a knowledge of the insufficiency of funds in the bank or
depository at the time of the making or drawing of said check and of an intent to defraud.
D. Notice: Notice as used in this section shall consist of either notice given to the person entitled thereto in person or notice given to such
person in writing. The notice in writing is presumed to have been given when deposited as certified matter in the United States mail,
addressed to the person at his address as it appears on the check. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 110/318
6-1C-27: CABLE TELEVISION; UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTION:
A. Payment To Franchise Holder: It is unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically,
acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of any cable television system within the city, for the purpose of transmittal of such
cable system without payment to the holder of the franchise of such system or lessee.
B. Tampering With Or Removal Of Cable: It is unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, to wilfully tamper with, remove, or
injure, any cable, wire, or other equipment used for the distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs, sounds or any
other information or intelligence transmitted over the cable system of any cable television system within the city. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1C-28: GRAFFITI:
Notwithstanding the generality of section 6-1C-6 of this article, the following regulations shall apply specifically to unwanted graffiti:
A. Definitions:
ABATE: To remove graffiti by such means, in such a manner, and to such an extent as the code enforcement officer for the city of
Deming, or any police officer of the city of Deming reasonably determines it necessary to remove the graffiti.
GRAFFITI: Any inscription, word, figure, design, painting, writing, drawing, carving or other markings applied to property through the use
of paint, ink, chalk, dye, or other similar substances, without the prior authorization of the owner of the property.
OWNER: Any entity, person, agent, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in real or personal property.
PROPERTY: Any land, building or structure, and that which is affixed, incidental or appurtenant to any land, building or structure,
including, but not limited to, any wall, fence, sign, furnishings, or any separate part thereof, whether permanent or not.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: An owner, an entity or agent acting on behalf of an owner by agreement, who has authority over the property or
is responsible for the maintenance or management of the property. Irrespective of any arrangement to the contrary with any other party,
each owner shall always be a responsible party for the purposes of this section, and consequently, there may be more than one
responsible party for a specific property.
UNAUTHORIZED: Without the consent of a responsible party.
B. Nuisance: For the purpose of this section, "graffiti" is deemed to be a nuisance.
C. Graffiti Prohibited:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any property without the written consent of the city council.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or command another person to apply graffiti to any property.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to aid and abet or agree to aid and abet another person to plan to apply or apply graffiti to any
property.
4. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property or anyone who occupies such property to permit graffiti to remain on the property.
D. Notice To Remove Graffiti:
1. Whenever the city code enforcement officer, or city police officer, or their designated representative, determines that graffiti exists on
any property, the code enforcement officer or city police officer, or their designated representative shall cause a notice to be issued to
the owner of the subject property requiring that such graffiti be abated. The owner of the property shall have fifteen (15) days after the
date of the notice to remove the graffiti, failing which the city may cause the abatement of the graffiti.
2. The notice to abate graffiti pursuant to this section shall be served upon the owner(s) of the affected property, as such owner's name
and address appears on the last property tax assessment roll of the city of Deming, New Mexico. If there is no known address for the
owner, the notice shall be sent in care of the property address. The notice required by this section may be served in any one of the
following manners:
a. By personal service on the owner, occupant or responsible party;
b. By registered or certified mail to the owner at the last known address of said owner. If this address is unknown, the notice shall be
sent care of the address of the affected property;
c. By physically posting the notice in a conspicuous place on the affected property.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 111/318
3. The notice shall be substantially in the following form:
Notice to Remove Graffiti
Date:
To:(name of owner or responsible party)
(address)
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that are in violation of the Anti Graffiti Ordinance No. 1072 of the City of Deming, New Mexico, and
that you are hereby required to make arrangements, at your own expense, to wash, paint over, or otherwise remove the graffiti located
on the property commonly known as ( address), Deming, New Mexico, within fifteen (15) days of the date of this notice. If you fail to
do so, the City may cause the abatement of the graffiti on the subject property and the cost of such abatement by the City, or private
contractor employed by the City, will be assessed upon your land and such costs shall constitute a lien upon the property until paid, or
the City may collect such costs in any other manner provided by law.
All persons having any objection to, or interest in said matters, are hereby notified to submit any objections to the Code
Enforcement Officer, or his/her designated representative, within ten (10) days of the date of this notice. If no objections are received
by the City, the City, at the conclusion of the fifteen (15) day notification period proceed with the abatement of the graffiti at your
expense without further notice.
E. City Costs Enforceable: Any and all costs incurred by the city in the abatement of any graffiti nuisance shall constitute a debt owed the
city by the property owner or the responsible party, and shall be enforceable as a lien against the property upon which such nuisance
existed, in addition to any other legal remedies available for the collection of debt.
F. Appeal: Within ten (10) days of the date of notice referred to in subsection D of this section, the owner of, or responsible party for, the
affected property may appeal the matter to the Deming city council by delivering to the city code enforcement officer written notice of
such appeal and the reasons for the appeal.
Within fifteen (15) days of receiving the appeal, the Deming city council will set a day and time to hear the appeal. The council may deny
the appeal, or it may allow the appeal in whole or in part, or it may amend the notice with conditions, or it may take any action it deems
appropriate in the circumstances. The decision of city council is final.
G. Abatement By City: Upon failure of the owner or responsible party to comply with notice by the designated date, or such continued date
as may be authorized through the appeal process, the code enforcement officer is authorized to cause the graffiti to be abated by city
forces, or by private contractor, and the city or its contractor is authorized to enter upon the property at reasonable hours to abate the
graffiti. All reasonable steps to minimize damage to the property from such entry and such abatement shall be taken by the city. Neither
the city nor its contractor shall undertake to paint or repair any more extensive an area than the area where the graffiti is actually
located.
H. Civil Liability For Graffiti Vandalism:
1. Pursuant to section 32A-2-27A, New Mexico Statutes Annotated, 1978, any person may recover damages not to exceed four
thousand dollars ($4,000.00) in a civil action in a court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction from the parent, guardian or custodian
having custody and control of a child when the child has maliciously or wilfully injured or damaged, destroyed or deprived use of
property, real or personal, belonging to the person bringing the action.
2. Pursuant to section 32A-2-27B, New Mexico Statutes Annotated, 1978, recovery of damages is limited to the actual damages proved
in the action, not to exceed four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) taxable court costs and, in the discretion of the court, reasonable
attorney fees to be fixed by the court or tribunal.
3. Pursuant to section 32A-2-27C, New Mexico Statutes Annotated, 1978, the court or the tribunal is not limited in its discretion to issue
an order requiring damages or restitution to be paid by the child when the child has been found to be within the provisions of the
delinquency act.
4. This section may be enforced by the city attorney or by any private person whose property has been damaged by graffiti by filing a
civil action in a court or a tribunal of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 1072, 4-14-2003)
6-1C-29: PENALTY:
A person who violates this chapter is guilty of a petty misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided for in section 1-4-1
of this code. (Ord. 1172, 11-13-2007)
ARTICLE D. OFFENSES CONCERNING PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
6-1D-1: BICYCLES:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 112/318
It is unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle along or upon any sidewalk in the city, or upon the streets of the city at night without a bicycle
lamp and rear reflectors while such bicycle is being used1. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1D-2: EXPECTORATING ON SIDEWALKS OR IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS:
It is unlawful for any person to spit or expectorate upon any of the public sidewalks, crosswalks, passes, byways or paths in the city, or upon
the floor or steps of the public building, store, hotel, church, opera house, office room, schoolhouse or any other building in the city in which
persons are in the habit of frequenting, assembling or congregating. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1D-3: THREATENING, HARASSING TELEPHONE CALLS2:
A. Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person within the city limits, with intent to terrify, intimidate, threaten, harass, annoy or offend, to
telephone another and use any obscene, lewd or profane language or suggest any lewd, criminal or lascivious act, or threaten to inflict
injury or physical harm on the person or property of any person. It shall also be unlawful for any person to attempt by telephone to extort
money or other thing of value from any other person, or to otherwise disturb by repeated anonymous telephone calls the peace, quiet or
right of privacy of any other person at the place where the telephone call or calls were received, or to maliciously make a telephone call,
whether or not conversation ensues, with intent to annoy or disturb another, or to disrupt the telecommunications of another.
B. Prima Facie Evidence: The use of obscene, lewd or profane language or the making of a threat or statement as set forth in subsection A
of this section shall be prima facie evidence of intent to terrify, intimidate, threaten, harass, annoy or offend.
C. Place Of Commitment: Any offense committed by use of a telephone as set forth in this section shall be deemed to have been committed
at either the place where the telephone call or calls originated or in the place where the telephone call or calls were received. (Ord. 769,
3-9-1987)
6-1D-4: EXCESSIVE NOISE PROHIBITED3:
(Rep. by Ord. 1174, 11-13-2007)
6-1D-5: PRIZEFIGHTS:
A. Location Restricted: It is unlawful for any person to have or permit any prizefight or boxing contest or sparring match, or training matches
for any such contest, in any saloon or other place where liquor is sold, given away or served, or within one hundred feet (100') of any
saloon or other place where liquor is sold, given away or served in the city.
B. License Fee: Any person conducting, promoting or maintaining or holding any prizefight or boxing contest in any place in the city not
prohibited by subsection A of this section shall be required to pay a license fee in the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) before holding or
conducting such prizefight or boxing contest. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1D-6: WEAPONS; EXPLOSIVES:
A. Weapons: The provisions of New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 30-7-1 are hereby adopted as provisions governing the carrying
and concealing of any deadly weapons and/or any negligent use thereof.
B. Explosives:
1. Negligent Use: It is unlawful for any person to negligently use explosives within the city limits. Negligent use of explosives consists of
negligently exploding, attempting to explode or placing any explosive in such a manner as to result in the injury to another or to
property of another, or in the probability of such injury.
2. Selling Or Transporting: It is unlawful for any person to sell, possess or transport explosives in the city limits. Unlawful sale,
possession or transportation of explosives consists of knowingly selling or possessing any explosive or causing such explosive to be
transported without having plainly marked, in large letters in a conspicuous place on the box or package containing such explosive,
the name and explosive character thereof and the date of manufacture. "Explosives" are defined in New Mexico Statutes Annotated
section 30-7-7. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985; amd. 2001 Code)
C. Switchblades: It is unlawful for any person to possess a switchblade within the city. Unlawful possession of switchblades consists of any
person, either manufacturing, causing to be manufactured, possessing, displaying, offering, selling, lending, giving away or purchasing
any knife which has a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle of the
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 113/318
knife, or any knife having a blade which opens or falls or is ejected into position by the force of gravity or by any outward or centrifugal
thrust or movement. (2001 Code)
6-1D-7: ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS IN PUBLIC PLACES:
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to carry or possess any opened bottles or containers of any alcoholic liquor in or on any public
street, alley, sidewalk, or thoroughfare or park within the city limits, or in any public building, unless there is a permit for the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquors therein. It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic liquor in any place or in any
premises customarily occupied by the public within the city limits except any premises duly licensed for the sale and consumption of
alcoholic liquors. (Ord. 822, 9-10-1990)
6-1D-8: POSSESSION OF MARIJUANA:
A. Definition: "Marijuana" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not, the seed thereof, and every compound,
manufacture, sale, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant or its seeds.
B. Prohibition: It is unlawful for any person intentionally to possess marijuana within the city limits. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1D-9: GLUE, AEROSOL SPRAYS; ABUSE:
A. Statutes Adopted: New Mexico Statutes Annotated sections 30-29-1 (glue; limiting the sales; requiring records; penalty) and 30-29-2
(glue; aerosol spray; abuse or possession for abuse; penalty) are hereby adopted by reference by the city.
B. Penalty: Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 748, 8-12-
1985)
6-1D-10: AEROSOL SPRAY PAINT; SALE PROHIBITED:
A. Sale To Minors; Identification: No person shall sell aerosol spray paint in cans to any person under eighteen (18) years of age. A New
Mexico driver's license, identification card issued to a member of the armed forces or an identity card issued pursuant to New Mexico
Statutes Annotated sections 60-7B-1 through 60-7B-11 shall be prima facie proof of age.
B. Post Restrictive Provisions: Any person who owns, manages or operates a place of business wherein aerosol spray paint in cans is sold
shall conspicuously post a copy of this section in such place of business in letters at least three-eighths (3/8) of an inch high. (Ord. 932,
9-9-1996)
6-1D-11: WINDOW PEEPING:
It is unlawful for any person to enter upon any private property and look, peer or peep into or be found around or within the view of any
window or other means of viewing into any occupied building, other than his own residence. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1D-12: NUISANCE DECLARED, PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain or allow the creation and maintenance of a nuisance. "Nuisance" means any
person committing an act, omitting to perform a duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act, omission,
condition or thing either:
A. Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others;
B. Offends decency;
C. Is offensive to the senses;
D. In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property; or
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 114/318
E. Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.
For purposes of this chapter, "person" shall be construed to mean an individual, whether owner or occupant of the property on which a
nuisance exists; or business or corporation, whether owner or occupant of the property on which a nuisance exists.
A violation of this section upon conviction shall be punishable as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1053, 12-10-2001)
6-1D-13: NUISANCE ENUMERATED:
The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or remain upon any public or private property within the municipal
boundaries of this city any of the following items, condition or actions is declared to be and constitute a nuisance, provided that this
enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be conclusive, limited or restrictive:
A. Noxious weeds or other rank vegetation;
B. Accumulations of rubbish, trash, refuse, litter, junk and other materials, metals, lumber or other things;
C. Any condition which provides refuge for rats, mice, or other rodents, snakes or other vermin and varmints;
D. Any building or other structure which is such a dilapidated condition that it is unfit for human habitation, or kept in such an unsanitary
condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the vicinity where it is located, or presents a fire hazard in the vicinity
where it is located;
E. Any condition that is attractive and dangerous to children such as a vacant accessible building, excavation, dilapidated walls or fences or
barbed wire fences;
F. All unnecessary noises or unauthorized noises and annoying vibrations, including animal noises;
G. All disagreeable or obnoxious odors or stenches, as well as the conditions causing the odors or stenches;
H. The carcasses of dead animals or fowl;
I. The pollution of any public or private water well or body of water by any substance;
J. Any building, structure or other place or location where any activity in violation of local, state or federal law is conducted, performed or
maintained;
K. Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders, in unreasonable quantities;
L. The placement of motor vehicle or other type of tires, cinder blocks or like heavy objects other than roofing material atop trailers or mobile
homes. (Ord. 1053, 12-10-2001)
6-1D-13.1: NUISANCE ABATEMENT:
A. Notice To Abate Nuisance: Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the city limits, the city administrator or his designee shall issue a
notice to abate the nuisance providing a time specified for abatement that is reasonable under a totality of the circumstances or may
issue a citation or file a complaint against the offender in the municipal court. The recipient of the notice to abate nuisance shall have ten
(10) days from the issuance of the notice to file a written request for a hearing before the municipal judge. At said hearing the judge shall
determine, by a preponderance of the evidence, whether the alleged nuisance exists and whether the notice was issued in accordance
with this section. If the municipal judge finds that a nuisance exists, the judge shall determine the method of abatement and require the
offender to be responsible for the costs therefor. If the city administrator or his designee deems the nuisance to be an immediate threat
to the health and welfare of person within the vicinity of the nuisance, the recipient of the notice shall have three (3) days from the
issuance of the notice to file a written request for a hearing before the municipal judge. If the recipient of a notice to abate nuisance
requests a hearing within the time periods prescribed herein, such hearing shall be scheduled as soon as is practicable under a totality
of the circumstances.
B. Contents And Service Of Notice To Abate Nuisance: The notice to abate a nuisance shall contain the following:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 115/318
1. The location of the nuisance;
2. A description of what constitutes the nuisance;
3. A statement of acts necessary to abate the nuisance;
4. An order to abate the nuisance within a specified period of time or to request a hearing before the municipal judge within the time
period allowed by this section;
5. A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as ordered and no request for hearing is made within the prescribed time, the city will
abate the nuisance and assess the cost of such abatement against the offender.
The notice to abate a nuisance shall be served by mailing a certified letter to the last known address of the owner of the property as
determined by the county assessor or treasurer and posting said notice on the property.
C. Abatement By The City: Upon the failure of a person to abate the nuisance as ordered by the city administrator or his designee or upon
the failure to abate the nuisance after a hearing in the municipal court where it is found by the municipal judge that a nuisance exists,
the city administrator or his designee shall abate the nuisance.
D. Costs Of Abatement: Any costs incurred by the city in the abatement of the nuisance, including reasonable attorney fees, shall constitute
a lien against the property upon which the nuisance existed. The lien shall be filed and collected as provided by law. The lien shall be
notice to all persons from the time of its recording, and shall bear interest at the legal rate thereafter until satisfied.
E. Alternative Method Of Abatement: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit or restrict the city from seeking abatement in any
other method prescribed by law. (Ord. 1053, 12-10-2001)
6-1D-14: JUNKED VEHICLES AND PARTS:
A. Definitions: The following words shall have the following meanings:
ANTIQUE AUTO: A passenger car or truck that is at least thirty five (35) years old.
COLLECTOR: The owner of one or more antique or special interest vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires, trades or disposes of
special interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for personal use in order to restore, preserve and maintain an antique or special
interest vehicle for historic interest.
DEMOLISHER: A person whose business it is to convert a motor vehicle into processed scrap metal or to otherwise wreck or dismantle
a motor vehicle.
JUNKED VEHICLE: Every self-propelled mechanical device, in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn upon a public highway, including motor vehicles, commercial motor vehicles, truck-tractors, trailers and semitrailers, agricultural
and motorized construction equipment but excepting devices moved by human power, and which does not have lawfully attached to it an
unexpired license plate, is inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than seventy two (72) consecutive hours, if the vehicle is
on public property, or thirty (30) consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
SPECIAL INTEREST VEHICLE: A motor vehicle of any age that has not been altered or modified from original manufacturer's
specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists.
B. Declared Nuisance:
1. The city council finds that junked vehicles and junked vehicle parts that are located in a place where they are visible from a public
place or public right of way are detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tend to reduce the value of the private
property, invite vandalism, create fire hazards, constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors,
and are detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of
the city and are, therefore, declared to be public nuisances. It is unlawful for any person or persons to cause or maintain such public
nuisances by wrecking, dismantling, rendering inoperable, abandoning or discarding his or their vehicle, vehicles or vehicle parts on
the property of another or to suffer, permit or allow the same to be placed, located, maintained or exist upon his or their own real
property.
2. Covering a junked vehicle with a cover that is custom tailored or custom fitted to the particular model of the vehicle being covered will
abate the nuisance. The vehicle cover shall be made of a canvas or polyester blend that is both water and mildew resistant and shall
be maintained free of any tears or holes. To abate the nuisance, the vehicle shall be completely covered, with the exception of the
vehicle tires, and the cover shall be secured by a tie down device. Tires shall be mounted on the vehicle and shall be properly inflated.
All four (4) tires must be on the ground. It is the vehicle owner's responsibility to ensure that the vehicle remains completely covered.
Placing the junked vehicle behind trees or shrubbery does not abate the public nuisance. The code enforcement department is
authorized to abate such nuisances under the terms and conditions hereinafter provided.
C. Abatement:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 116/318
1. Upon complaint or upon its own initiative, the code enforcement department may initiate appropriate official action to remove and
abate a public nuisance in the nature of a junked vehicle or junked vehicle part. Notice of the existence of a nuisance shall be in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this section.
2. For a public nuisance that exists on private property, the code enforcement department shall notify the last known registered owner of
the junked vehicle or junked vehicle part, any lienholder of record, and the owner or occupant of the private premises on which the
public nuisance exists, that the nuisance exists, that it must be removed and abated within ten (10) days of the receipt of such notice,
or that a request for a hearing must be made by the owner or occupant before the expiration of the ten (10) day time period from the
receipt of the notice. The notice shall be sent by certified mail with a five (5) day return receipt requested. If the post office address of
the last known registered owner of the motor vehicle is unknown, or if said owner cannot be identified, notice may be placed on the
motor vehicle or, if the last known registered owner is physically located, the notice may be hand delivered. If any notice is returned
undelivered by the United States post office, further official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten
(10) days after the date of return.
3. A public hearing shall be held before the municipal court of the city for determination of the existence of a junked vehicle or junked
vehicle part as a public nuisance and for the purpose of entering an order requiring the removal of the same if so determined. Notice
of this hearing shall be sent by certified mail to the last known registered owner of the junked vehicle or junked vehicle part, any
lienholder of record, the owner or occupant of the private premises, or the premises adjacent to the public property or right of way, as
the case may be, not less than ten (10) days before the date of the hearing. If the identity of any such interested person cannot be
confirmed, notice of the hearing shall be published once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks with the last publication at least ten
(10) days before the hearing. The judge of the municipal court shall be the designated official to make such determination and upon
the finding that the vehicle or vehicle part is a junked vehicle and constitutes a public nuisance, he shall enter an order requiring the
removal of the vehicle or a part thereof. The order must include a description of the vehicle or vehicle part and the correct
identification number and license number of the vehicle if the information is available at the site.
4. Before any city employee or any other person is authorized to remove a vehicle or vehicle part from private property at owner's
expense, that is in violation of this section, he shall first obtain from the municipal court, or other appropriate court, an order (writ of
entry) for the removal of the junked vehicle or junked vehicle part, which shall include a description of the vehicle or vehicle part and
the correct identification and license number of the vehicle if the information is available at the site where the vehicle or vehicle part is
located.
5. For a public nuisance that exists on public property or right of way, the code enforcement department shall place a seventy two (72)
hour notice to remove the motor vehicle or, if the last known registered owner is physically located, the notice may be hand delivered.
If not removed in seventy two (72) hours, vehicle may be towed at owner's expense, if requested.
D. Exceptions: This section shall not apply to:
1. A vehicle or vehicle part that is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other
public or private property; or
2. A vehicle or vehicle part that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed
vehicle dealer or junkyard; or
3. An antique or special interest vehicle stored by a collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle and the outdoor storage area are
maintained in a manner so that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a
fence or other appropriate means. Covering a special interest vehicle or antique vehicle wherever located in accordance with
subsection B2 of this section shall also exclude such vehicles from the enforcement of this section.
E. Enforcement Authority:
1. The procedures provided for in this section must be administered by the code enforcement department, except that the removal of a
vehicle or vehicle part from property may be by any duly authorized person.
2. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this section, or whenever the inspector has reasonable
cause to believe that there exists upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such vehicle or vehicle part in
violation of this section, the inspector may enter such premises at all times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon
the inspector by this section; provided, that if the premises are occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry,
and if the premises are unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or
control of the premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the inspector may request the municipal court or other appropriate court
to issue a writ of entry or other remedy authorizing entry onto the premises.
3. When the inspector has obtained a proper writ or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other
persons having charge, care or control of any premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to
promptly permit entry thereon by the inspector for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this section.
F. Enforcement Penalties: If the public nuisance is not removed and abated and no hearing is requested within the ten (10) day period
provided for in subsection C of this section, the building services department may, in addition to the abatement and removal provisions
of this section, file a complaint concerning the violation of this section in municipal court. If a person is found guilty of maintaining a
public nuisance as provided in this section, that person shall be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code, and the court shall
order removal and abatement of the nuisance. (Ord. 1112, 6-13-2005)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 117/318
6-1D-15: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
A. It is unlawful within the city of Deming for a person to use or possess with intent to use drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate,
grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the New Mexico controlled substances
act4. The provisions of this subsection do not apply to a person who is in possession of hypodermic syringes or needles at the time he is
directly and immediately engaged in a harm reduction program, as provided in the New Mexico harm reduction act5.
B. It is unlawful within the city of Deming for a person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver or manufacture with the intent to deliver drug
paraphernalia with knowledge, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the New Mexico
controlled substances act6. The provisions of this subsection do not apply to:
1. Department of health employees or their designees while they are directly and immediately engaged in activities related to the harm
reduction program authorized by the harm reduction act7; or
2. The sale or distribution of hypodermic syringes and needles by pharmacists licensed pursuant to the pharmacy act8;
3. The sale or distribution of hypodermic syringes and needles by healthcare providers licensed pursuant to the controlled substances
act9;
4. Possession of hypodermic needles by patients with a valid prescription for hypodermic syringes and needles. (Ord. 1148, 10-9-2006)
6-1D-16: PENALTY:
A person who violates this chapter is guilty of a petty misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided for in section 1-4-1
of this code. (Ord. 1172, 11-13-2007)
ARTICLE E. OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS
6-1E-1: LOITERING NEAR SALOONS OR POOLROOMS; PROCURING LIQUOR:
A. Loitering Prohibited: It shall be hereafter unlawful for any person to permit minors to loiter within the city limits. "Loitering of minors"
consists of the owner or operator of any saloon permitting a minor under the age of twenty one (21) years to attend, frequent or loiter in
or about such premises without being accompanied by the parent or guardian of such minor; or the owner or operator of any poolroom
permitting a minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to attend, frequent or loiter in or about such premises without being
accompanied by the parent or guardian of such minor.
B. Unlawful Assistance To Minors: It is unlawful to assist minors to buy, procure, obtain, or be served any alcoholic beverages or to induce
any person to sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic beverage to a minor by actual or constructive misrepresentation of any facts calculated
to cause, or by the concealment of any facts which are calculated to cause the person selling, serving or delivering such alcoholic
beverages to sell to a minor or to any person for ultimate delivery to a minor.
C. Failure Of Parental Responsibility: It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor to
knowingly permit such minor to violate the provisions of this section. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1E-2: ABANDONMENT OF DANGEROUS OBJECTS:
A. Refrigerators; Airtight Containers: It is unlawful to abandon, discard or keep in any place accessible to children any refrigerator, icebox,
freezer, airtight container, cabinet or similar container of a capacity of one and one-half (11/2) cubic feet or more which is no longer in
use without sealing or removing the doors or other entrances so as to make it impossible for any child to be imprisoned therein, or being
the owner, lessee or operator of any premises to permit such articles to remain upon such premises in a condition whereby a child may
be imprisoned therein.
B. Plastic Bags: It is unlawful for any person to abandon, expose, leave in any place accessible to children or permit upon premises under
his control any plastic bag without first tearing the same sufficiently to render it no longer dangerous to a child. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1E-3: OFFENSES BY MINORS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 118/318
A. Curfew: It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets,
highways, alleys, parks, playgrounds, other public places or buildings, or vacant lots between the hours of ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M.
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to a minor accompanied by a parent, guardian or other
adult person having the care and custody of such minor or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed
by persons having the care or custody of him.
B. False Statement Or Identification: It is unlawful for any minor to make false statements or to furnish, present or exhibit any fictitious or
false registration card, identification card or other instrument, or to furnish, present or exhibit any document issued to another person, for
the purpose of gaining admission to prohibited places or for the purpose of procuring the sale, gift or delivery of prohibited articles
including, but not limited to, alcoholic beverages.
C. Procuring Unlawful Services: It is unlawful for any minor to engage or authorize the services of any other person to procure for such
minor any article which the minor is prohibited by law to purchase. (Ord. 748, 8-12-1985)
6-1E-4: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
6-1E-4-1: CONTROL BY PARENT OR GUARDIAN:
Parental control includes, but is not limited to, the following:
A. Keeping illegal drugs and illegal firearms out of the home;
B. Forbidding the minor from keeping stolen property or illegally possessing firearms or illegal drugs;
C. Preventing the child from applying unauthorized graffiti as defined in New Mexico Statutes Annotated, 1978, section 30-15-1.1 (1995), as
amended;
D. Preventing the child from violating New Mexico Statutes Annotated, 1978, sections 22-12-1 through 22-12-9 (2007), compulsory school
attendance law;
E. Preventing the child from procuring or attempting to procure tobacco products;
F. Providing reasonable supervision of the child. (Ord. 1181, 12-8-2008)
6-1E-5: PARENTAL DUTIES:
6-1E-5-1: MANDATORY SCHOOL ATTENDANCE:
A. Failing To Attend School: No person under the age of eighteen (18) years and subject to the compulsory school attendance law shall be
upon or about public streets, or public places of amusement and entertainment within the city during the hours when said person is
required by state law to be in attendance at either a public or private school, a homeschool or a state institution.
B. Encouraging Nonattendance: It shall be unlawful for a person to encourage or assist anyone subject to the compulsory school
attendance law to fail or refuse to attend or return to school unless said absence is excused by an appropriate school official or such
absence is excused by this section or otherwise recognized by state law.
C. Parental Responsibility: Parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of schoolchildren who violate this section will be given a warning on the first
violation, a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine on the second violation, and a five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine on each subsequent
violation.
D. Identification Of Offenders: Students who violate this section requiring mandatory school attendance will be identified to the proper
school officials and to the student's parent or legal guardian.
E. State Law Applicable: This section does not amend, modify or replace the "New Mexico compulsory school attendance law", sections 22-
12-1 through 22-12-9 of the New Mexico Statutes Annotated.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 119/318
F. School District Authority: This section does not modify or replace any truancy supervision by the school districts, private schools or any
other school recognized law. (Ord. 1181, 12-8-2008)
6-1E-5-2: DUTY OF PARENTAL CONTROL:
A. A parent has a duty to exercise reasonable parental control to prevent his or her child from engaging in delinquent act(s) or conduct
indicating a need for supervision.
B. A parent commits an offense if he or she fails to provide parental control to prevent his or her child from engaging in delinquent act(s) or
conduct indicating a need for supervision.
C. A parent who violates this section shall be given a warning by the municipal court on the first such conviction, sentenced to pay a one
hundred dollar ($100.00) fine on the second such conviction, sentenced to pay a five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine and up to thirty (30)
days in jail on each subsequent conviction.
D. In addition to, or in lieu of the penalties in subsection C of this section the court may require completion of parenting classes and/or
family counseling, community service including, but not limited to, graffiti elimination and/or restitution limited to a maximum of four
thousand dollars ($4,000.00) per New Mexico Statutes Annotated 32A-2-27 for damages as a result of the parent's failure to supervise
his or her child. (Ord. 1181, 12-8-2008)
6-1E-6: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
A. It is a violation of this section for a minor to buy, attempt to buy, receive, possess or permit himself to be served with alcoholic beverages.
B. It is not a violation of this section, as provided in subsection A of this section, when:
1. A parent, legal guardian or adult spouse of a minor serves alcoholic beverages to that minor on real property, other than licensed
premises, under the control of the parent, legal guardian or adult spouse; or
2. Alcoholic beverages are used in the practice of religious beliefs.
C. As used in this section, the definition of a "minor" for purposes of this section only means a person over the age of eighteen (18) years
and under twenty one (21) years of age.
D. As used in this section, the definition of "licensed premises" is the same definition as in the liquor control act section 60-3A-3M New
Mexico Statutes Annotated, 1978. (Ord. 1149, 10-9-2006)
6-1E-7: PENALTY:
A person who violates this chapter is guilty of a petty misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided for in section 1-4-1
of this code. (Ord. 1172, 11-13-2007)
ARTICLE F. AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING
6-1F-1: SHORT TITLE:
This article shall be known and may be cited as the PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE PROHIBITING AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING. (Ord.
1207, 12-13-2010)
6-1F-2: INTENT:
The city of Deming (hereafter "the city") council finds and states its intent as follows:
It is the intent of the council in enacting this article to improve the quality of life and to protect the safety of the general public against certain
abusive conduct of persons or organizations engaged in panhandling by imposing reasonable manner, time and place restrictions on
panhandling while respecting the constitutional rights for all citizens and entities. (Ord. 1207, 12-13-2010)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 120/318
6-1F-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING: Aggressive panhandling occurs if any of the following occurs:
A. Touches or makes physical contact with the solicited person without the consent of the solicited person;
B. Blocks the path of a person being solicited as that person attempts to walk away from the panhandler;
C. Blocks the entrance to any building or vehicle while panhandling;
D. Immediately continues to solicit while walking behind, ahead or alongside of a person who walks away from the panhandler after
being solicited and verbally declining;
E. Threatens the person solicited with physical harm by word or gesture;
F. Uses language or gestures directed at the person being solicited which are inherently likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction
in a reasonable person.
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE: A device, linked to a financial institution's account records, which is able to carry out cash transactions.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: Any banking corporation, credit union, or foreign exchange office.
PANHANDLER: Any person or organization that engages in an act of panhandling.
PANHANDLING: Any solicitation, begging and any other form of asking for donations made in person, in which a person requests an
immediate donation of money or other gratuity from another person. Panhandling shall not include passive panhandling, to the extent that
they do not interfere with the reasonable expectation of the public to the enjoyment of peace and quiet or pose a safety risk to the public.
PASSIVE PANHANDLING: Sitting or standing with a sign or other nonauditory indication that a donation is being sought.
PUBLIC PLACE: As used in this article, public place shall mean a place to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access,
and includes, but not limited to, any street, highway, sidewalk, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park
playground, and any doorway, entrance, hallway, lobby and other portion of any business establishment.
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE: Any vehicle, including a trailer bus, designed, used or maintained for carrying ten (10) or more
persons, including the driver; or a passenger vehicle designed for carrying fewer than ten (10) persons, including the driver, and used to
carry passengers for hire.
SOLICIT OR SOLICITATION: Any request in person while in a public place, for an immediate grant of money, goods or any other form of
gratuity from another person(s) when the person making the request is not known to the person(s) who are the subject of the request, or
engaging in such activity on private property without permission of owner or occupant. This does not include the acts of "passive
panhandling", as defined in this section. (Ord. 1207, 12-13-2010)
6-1F-4: LIMITATIONS ON PANHANDLING:
A. Time: It shall be unlawful to engage in an act of panhandling in any place within the city at any time after sunset and before sunrise.
B. Manner: It shall be unlawful to engage in an act of "aggressive panhandling", as defined in section 6-1F-3 of this article, at any time of
any day in any place within the city.
C. Specific Places Or Circumstances: It shall be unlawful to engage in an act of panhandling at any time when either the panhandler or the
person being solicited is located at any of the following locations or under any of the following circumstances:
1. In any public transportation vehicle or public transportation facility;
2. From people waiting at any public transportation stop that is identified by signage;
3. From customers at any sidewalk cafe;
4. Within fifty feet (50') in any direction from an automated teller machine, provided that when an automated teller machine is located
within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine
facility;
5. Inside of or within fifty feet (50') in any direction of an entrance or exit of a financial institution during normal business hours;
6. On private property or residential property, without permission from the owner or occupant;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 121/318
7. In circumstances involving any operator or occupant of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on or entering any street, street intersection,
alley, median or other public passageway, while the panhandler is situated on the vehicle traveled portion of the street, street
intersection, alley, median or other public passageway. (Ord. 1207, 12-13-2010)
6-1F-5: SEVERABILITY:
Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions of this article. If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article is held
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such judgment shall in no way affect or impair the validity of the
remaining portions of this article. (Ord. 1207, 12-13-2010)
6-1F-6: ENFORCEMENT:
The Deming police department training protocol shall be submitted to the legal department for its review within ninety (90) days of the
effective date hereof. The police administrative officer shall monitor the training protocol and enforcement for this article. (Ord. 1207, 12-13-
2010)
6-1F-7: PENALTY:
Each act of panhandling declared unlawful by this article shall constitute a separate violation of this article. Each violation shall be
punishable as follows: The first violation of this article shall result in a written warning by a law enforcement officer. The second violation of
this article may result in a fine as specified in subsection 1-4-1A of this code. (Ord. 1207, 12-13-2010)
Chapter 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
6-2-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
It is the sole intent, purpose, and policy of the city to promote the protection of the public health, safety, peace, and general welfare by the
regulation of animals as provided in this chapter. The provisions stated are to be construed liberally, according to the fair import of their
terms, in order to effectuate this policy. The provisions of this chapter and other city ordinances are cumulative law, and this chapter does
not prevent enforcement of any other code provision or city ordinance that regulates any area covered by this chapter. (Ord. 1067, 9-9-
2002)
6-2-2: ANIMAL CONTROL AND A SHELTER FOR DOMESTIC ANIMALS:
Deming-Luna County Humane Society, under an annually negotiated agreement with the city of Deming, assists in both animal control and
the city shelter for dogs, cats, and potbellied pigs. The not for profit organization, at their own expense, is allowed to keep adoptable
animals longer than mandated minimums, operate a pet cemetery for public use, arrange adoptions, and use the shelter office as their
headquarters. (Ord. 1067, 9-9-2002)
6-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, words, and phrases as used in this chapter are hereby defined as follows:
ABANDONMENT: To leave an animal without food, water or shelter for more than twenty four (24) hours on one's premises or to dump or
leave off a domestic animal on property other than one's own without permission.
ANIMAL: Any living vertebrate creature or invertebrate creature. This chapter includes: domestic animals, dogs, cats, and potbellied pigs
and other animals such as livestock, fish, fowl, reptiles, birds, and exotic or endangered species.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: A person given the responsibility of enforcing the provisions of this chapter in regard to animals in violation
of regulations, pick up of dead animals, calls by owners for pick ups, nuisance calls, and twenty four (24) hour a day response to
emergency calls (7 days a week). Enforcement of these chapter provisions shall be provided by either animal shelter employees or city law
or code enforcement officers.
ANIMAL SHELTER: A facility authorized to house, care for, and dispose of animals. The animal shelter must accept all dogs, cats, and
potbellied pigs brought to the shelter. The shelter manager and staff maintains records of each animal that enters, issues licenses, collects
fines, etc.
CURRENT ANIMAL SHELTER FEE SCHEDULE: A schedule of fees recommended by the Deming-Luna Humane Society and adopted by
the Deming city council for purposes of this chapter.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 122/318
DANGEROUS ANIMAL: Any animal which, when unprovoked, engages in behavior that requires defensive action by a person to prevent
bodily injury to a person or other animal when off the property of the owner of the attacking animal; or any animal which, when unprovoked,
injures a person to a minor degree.
FEES, PERMITS, AND ANIMAL LICENSES: All fees, permits, and animal licenses in this chapter are to be paid at the animal shelter.
FINES: Fines assessed will processed through the municipal court system.
GUARD DOGS: A dog that is used to protect a private or commercial property.
HUMANE EUTHANASIA: The only methods of euthanasia used shall be those certified by the Humane Society of the United States as
painless, rapid, and minimizing fear and trauma in the animal.
INTACT ANIMAL: An animal which has not been sterilized.
KEEPER: Any person who owns, keeps or has control or custody of an animal for more than six (6) days; provided that this term shall not
apply to veterinary clinics or professional kennel owners temporarily maintaining on their premises animals owned by others.
KENNEL - RESIDENTIAL: Premises on which dogs, cats, or potbellied pigs or any combination thereof with five (5), but no more than
seven (7) in number, four (4) months or older, are kept without the intention of buying, selling, breeding, or boarding animals.
LICENSES AND PERMITS: Annual licenses for pets. Intact animal permits. Premises inspection for guard dogs and kennels.
LIVESTOCK AND OTHERS: Animals such as bovines, equines, sheep, pigs, goats, rabbits, rodents, reptiles and fowl.
NUISANCE: Includes, but is not limited to, defecation, disturbing the peace by persistently barking, howling or making noise, emitting
noxious or offensive odors or harassment of or endangering area residents, pets or domestic animals.
OWNER: A person who has title to, possession of, custody or control of an animal. Any adult who causes or permits a minor child in his
household to harbor or keep an animal.
OWNER RESPONSIBILITY: On owner's premises, animals must be within a penned area, fenced yard, or within a building. All must have
access to food, water and shelter. For dogs, tether chains must be tangle proof at both ends and at least twelve feet (12') long to allow
exercise and not weigh more than one-eighth (1/8) of the dog's weight.
PET: Any animal kept and maintained by a person for noncommercial purposes.
PREMISES: Any place where animals are kept or sheltered.
QUARANTINE: To detain or isolate an animal suspected of being infected with rabies or other disease which represents a health risk to the
public or other animals.
RABIES INOCULATIONS: By law, all animals are required to have annual rabies inoculations and to wear the tags issued.
RUNNING AT LARGE: An animal shall be deemed to be running at large when it is off the premises of the keeper, and not under direct
control of a competent person.
STRAY: Any animal which is not physically restrained or controlled and has no identifiable keeper.
VACCINATION: A protection against rabies by inoculation with antirabies vaccine to provide protection for a minimum of one year.
VETERINARIAN: A doctor of veterinary medicine licensed by the New Mexico board of veterinary medicine.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal which has bitten, exhibits a tendency to bite, or in any manner attacks, attempts to attack or bite any person
except that any animal that exhibits such behavior when provoked by a person trespassing upon its owner's or custodian's premises shall
not be deemed a vicious animal. Additionally, any animal which kills or maims any other animal when unprovoked shall also be defined as a
vicious animal. (Ord. 1067, 9-9-2002)
6-2-4: ENFORCEMENT:
The staff of the animal shelter and the animal control officer(s) employed by the Deming-Lung County Humane Society and city code and
law enforcement officers shall have the authority to issue citations for violations of this chapter. (Ord. 1067, 9-9-2002)
6-2-5: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICERS AND DUTIES:
Animal control officer(s) will be available during the hours the shelter is open to the public. In addition, animal control will respond at any
time, day or night, to emergency calls from the hospital reporting animal bites and from law enforcement officers reporting injured animals,
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 123/318
dangerous/vicious animals, and situations needing special services from those trained to care for animals. Calls of a nonemergency nature
received outside business hours will be acknowledged as soon as the shelter opens.
A. Competent Personnel: Every effort should be made to appoint competent, reliable persons to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Such
persons shall be trained as to their responsibilities in animal control and in the use of such equipment as shall be deemed necessary to
carry out their duties.
B. Safety Precautions: All persons dealing with animals should have the proper protective gear (heavy gloves, catch loops, etc.) and be
trained in the use of such equipment as shall be deemed necessary to carry out their duties. Self-protection comes first. Protective
devices and equipment should be readily available both in the shelter and all vehicles used in animal control. Second in importance is
concern for and attention to the well being and health of both animals and citizens.
C. Citations: Animal control officers shall be authorized by the city to issue warnings and citations to keepers and other persons in violation
of any provision of this chapter.
1. Complaint: Complaints alleging any violation of this chapter must be filed with the animal control officer or the shelter by a person who
has personal knowledge of such violation and who can identify the keeper of the animal involved or the premises where the animal is
located. The complainant may be required to provide his name and address and affirm the complaint.
2. Complaint Follow Up: The investigating animal control officer will notify the keeper of the animals that a complaint has been filed.
When violations warrant it, a written report with name, address, and details of the offense will be prepared to issue a citation for the
offense or to file a complaint through the courts. A copy will be sent to the offender.
3. Concealment: It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal any animal or otherwise interfere with the animal control officer while
carrying out his/her designated duties.
4. Impoundment: Animal control officers must bring animals for impounding to the shelter. Outside shelter office hours, the animals are
to be put in the drop pens provided. Dead animals for disposal are to be taken directly to the approved site provided by the city.
Officers must submit a report on each animal handled with all information known (i.e., any tags attached, description of the animal,
name of owner if known, location of pick up, etc.).
D. Authorized Entry Of Premises:
1. For the purpose of discharging their duties imposed by this chapter, the animal control officer is hereby authorized and directed to
enter upon any premises after having received a complaint, for the purpose of inspecting to ascertain if any provisions of this chapter
or any laws of the state of New Mexico relating to the care, treatment, control and prevention of cruelty to animals are being violated.
2. An animal control officer who personally views a "violation" may enter a vehicle or premises without a complaint having been
received. A full report will be filed of the circumstances.
3. If, however, the owner or occupant of any dwelling objects to inspection, as above stated, a warrant will be obtained from a court of
qualified jurisdiction prior to inspection.
E. Emergency Measures: Any animal control officer discovering a violation of this chapter which endangers an animal is authorized to take
emergency measures and/or otherwise remove the animal, at the owner's expense, until the violation is corrected or resolved to prevent
further suffering of or cruelty to the animal.
F. Dog Bites: When notified of a biting dog incident, animal control officers interview victims and law officer(s) in charge; attempt to identify
the owner; and remain at the hospital until the investigation is complete. When necessary, the animal(s) is taken into custody for
isolation and quarantine. If taken to the animal shelter a copy of the report should be on file there. (See subsection 6-2-10F of this
chapter.)
G. Emergency Calls: Emergencies include vicious animals in threatening situations, dogfights in progress, dog bites, animals being actively
abused, injured animals whose owner is unknown and when vehicle accidents involve animals that must be taken to the shelter. Dial 911
calls without name, address, phone number and location of the emergency may be ignored.
H. Nonemergency: Nonemergency calls include animal pick ups, strays, nuisance barking, and dead animals that are not obstructing traffic.
When two (2) or more reports of the same violation, such as animals in packs, are received, animal control will set up special patrols to
remedy the problem. Calls without name, address, and phone number will be ignored. Law officers on duty and citizens are asked to
move dead animals off roadways. These calls may be made to the shelter or through central dispatch.
I. Patrol: Animal control is to patrol the streets of Deming on a regular basis with a focus on different areas daily. Neighborhoods that have a
large number of dogs and many complaints are regularly checked. During the longer summer days there is a need for extra patrols in
early morning and later evening. Any time an ACO vehicle is away from the shelter, the driver is considered on patrol and available to
take calls.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 124/318
J. Destruction: The animal control officer may authorize the immediate destruction of any threatening animal that cannot be caught and/or
may be subject to quarantine in the event that it is necessary to protect the life or safety of any person or animal. (Ord. 1067, 9-9-2002)
6-2-6: ANIMAL SHELTER:
A. Facility: The facility owned by the city of Deming for impounding dogs, cats, and potbellied pigs shall be kept open to the general public
forty (40) hours per week as posted at the shelter. The shelter is open to the public from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00)
P.M. except on Tuesday mornings, Saturday afternoons and Sundays. The shelter is required to accept all animals brought to the shelter
by individuals or animal control. It is the only facility for quarantine in Luna County. The shelter shall:
1. Be maintained according to standards set by the American Humane Society for cleanliness and safety;
2. Provide food, water and care for the animals;
3. Make every effort to find the owner of any animal in protection.
B. Competent Personnel: To staff the shelter and assure the employees are properly trained the board of Deming-Luna County Humane
Society employs a manager who interviews and hires additional personnel and schedules their hours to cover seven (7) days a week.
Employees are cross trained in all phases of the operation and given opportunity for continuing education training at seminars, etc.,
available.
C. Agreement: The Deming-Luna County Humane Society, under annually negotiated agreements with the county of Luna and the city of
Deming, manages both the city shelter for dogs, cats, and potbellied pigs and animal control. The not for profit organization uses the
shelter office as their headquarters to dispense educational information on the need for spay/neuter, the proper care needed for animals,
etc. In addition, at their expense, the society is allowed:
1. To keep adoptable animals longer than mandated minimums;
a. Generally: Any person who desires to adopt an dog or cat may file an application for pet ownership. Animals will be available as
soon as the required confinement period ends. Prospective adopters must have proper facilities to care for the animal.
b. Adoption Fee: The adoption fee will include payment for the antirabies vaccine which will be remitted to the veterinarian who
redeems the certificate.
2. To require that all animals adopted at the shelter be spayed or neutered;
a. The adoption fee includes a deposit toward spay and neuter which will be remitted to the veterinarian who affirms the surgery has
been done.
b. If verification of the spay/neuter operation has not been received within sixty (60) days the animal may be repossessed by the
society.
3. To operate a pet cemetery for public use. The cemetery is platted and records are kept of all lots. Spaces may be purchased in
advance of need. Burial plot purchase includes a small name marker;
4. To accept donations of all kinds to offset the expenses above the stipends received for services from the city and county.
D. Records: Shelter management shall maintain, for a reasonable period of time or as required by statute, a record of all animals
impounded. At least the following information shall be included:
1. A complete description of the animal;
2. The manner and date of its acquisition;
3. The date, manner, and place of impoundment;
4. The impoundment number;
5. The date and manner of disposition of said animal.
E. Disposition Of Animals: An animal not adopted or reclaimed at the end of the protective custody period may be transferred to another
facility able to offer extended care, or humanely euthanized.
1. Euthanasia: The only methods of euthanasia used shall be those certified by the Humane Society of the United States as painless,
rapid, and, to the fullest extent possible minimizing fear and trauma in the animal;
2. Disposal: The city will provide space for all dead animals from the shelter and those brought in by animal control.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 125/318
F. Fees, Licenses And Permits: All fees, licenses, permits and deposits shall be made at the animal shelter.
G. Fines: Fines assessed will be processed through the municipal court.
H. Daily Handling Fee: The owner of an animal confined at the shelter shall be charged a handling fee for each day or fraction of a day the
animal is confined. (See current animal shelter fee schedule.)
I. Quarantine Costs: The owner of a dog, cat, or potbellied pig impounded on order of an animal control officer for ten (10) day quarantine at
the shelter shall be liable for double the regular impoundment fee, the daily handling fee for each day or fraction of a day the animal is
confined; and any veterinary expenses necessary for the animal whether or not the owner chooses to reclaim the animal. The owner
must sign a letter releasing the animal to the shelter if it is not to be reclaimed. Daily handling rates will be charged for any days the
animal remains after release from quarantine. Animal control may issue a citation for failure to comply. (See current animal shelter fee
schedule.)
J. Guard Dogs: All sites where guard dogs are used must have an inspection permit allowing periodical inspections by shelter or animal
control personnel to assure that the facilities meet specifications and that animals are properly housed, supplied with ample shelter,
food, and water, and show no signs of cruelty or abuse. The annual fee is payable at the shelter. (See current animal shelter fee
schedule.) Special housing requirements are:
1. In addition to the standard facilities and care requirements for permitted premises set forth elsewhere in this chapter, the area where
the guard dog is housed while not on duty shall be secured in a manner which will prevent the escape of the animal. The off duty
housing area shall be kept locked when not in use.
2. When a dog is on duty outside a building, the premises must be enclosed by a secure fence adequate to enclose the dog and to
which anti-escape devices have been added.
3. The doors, windows and all other openings to the outside of a building where a guard dog is on duty must be secured to prevent its
escape.
4. Guard dog premises shall be posted with warning signs.
5. Vehicles used to transport a guard dog(s) and vehicles being protected by a guard dog(s) shall be secured so the public is protected
from injury, and shall be constructed or modified to ensure that the guard dog is transported in a safe, humane manner. (Ord. 1067, 9-
9-2002)
6-2-7: LICENSES AND PERMITS REQUIRED:
A. Annual License: Any person who shall keep or harbor any dog on his premises shall pay a city license fee per annum for each spayed or
neutered dog, and a different fee per annum for each intact dog so kept or harbored on such premises. Licenses are available
throughout the year but must be renewed on or before January 1 annually. The animal shelter shall issue all licenses and retain fees
collected. (See current animal shelter fee schedule.)
B. Intact Animals: If an additional fee is paid at the time the annual license is issued the shelter will register the animal as breeding stock. If
impounded, said animal will not have to be sterilized before being redeemed. (See current animal shelter fee schedule.)
C. Guard Dogs: All sites where guard dogs are used must have an inspection permit. The fee is payable at the shelter. (See current animal
shelter fee schedule.) (Ord. 1067, 9-9-2002)
6-2-8: IMPOUNDMENT:
A. Grounds For Impoundment: An animal control officer is hereby authorized and directed to impound any of the following animals:
1. Any dog that does not exhibit evidence of vaccination as required by this chapter.
2. Any animal other than a cat that is found to be running at large.
3. Any animal, dog or cat, that is subject to quarantine as provided in this chapter.
4. Any animal found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
B. Redemption/Impoundment: Owners may redeem or impound their animals.
1. Owners requesting impoundment of an animal shall be required to sign a release. Such owner will still have to pay the impounding
fee. (See current animal shelter fee schedule.)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 126/318
2. The owner of any animal impounded at the shelter may reclaim the animal after paying all required fees imposed by the impound
facility.
3. Any expenses incurred by the impoundment of any animal shall be paid by the owner even if the owner does not reclaim the animal
including payment of any and all veterinary expenses incurred for the welfare of the animal.
4. The owner of any impounded dog or cat that has not been vaccinated against rabies as required by this chapter may redeem the
animal by paying for the vaccination plus any other charges at the animal shelter. If such owner fails to procure a vaccination
certificate within four (4) days (96 hours), the paid vaccination fee shall be forfeited and the animal may be impounded again.
5. The New Mexico sterilization act mandates that no animal shall be released from an animal shelter to an adopting person unless a
sterilization agreement has been signed and a sterilization deposit has been paid. The surgery for adult animals will either be done
before the animal is released or at an appointment made for the surgery at adoption. Puppies and kittens by six (6) months of age and
older cats and dogs within thirty (30) days of adoption. The voucher received for the deposit will be accepted by the doctor doing the
surgery as partial payment and reimbursed by the shelter. If verification of spay/neuter is not received within the appointed time the
owner will be given a citation for violating this chapter and the animal may be redeemed by the shelter.
6. Intact animals impounded at the shelter must be spayed ar neutered before they can be reclaimed unless they were registered as
breeding stock when issued a city license. It may be released after impoundment fees are paid plus a sterilization deposit and an
appointment made for the surgery. (See current animal shelter fee schedule.) The voucher received for the deposit will be accepted by
the doctor doing the surgery as partial payment and reimbursed by the shelter. If verification of spay/neuter is not received within the
appointed time the owner will be given a citation for violating this chapter and the animal may be redeemed by the shelter.
7. The day following the required impoundment period the animals become the property of the shelter. (Ord. 1067, 9-9-2002)
6-2-9: IMPOUNDMENT AND QUARANTINE FEES:
In addition to impoundment costs, owners are responsible for all shelter fees accrued and subject to all chapter requirements for ownership.
A. The owner of an animal impounded within the animal shelter shall pay a graduated impoundment fee from the second to fourth
impoundment. An animal that is impounded on more than four (4) occasions in any twelve (12) month period shall not be released to the
owner thereof without the prior written approval of the animal control officer. Any reimpoundment fee for such animal shall be double the
highest fee paid. (See current animal shelter fee schedule.)
B. The owner of a dog, cat, or potbellied pig impounded on order of an animal control officer for ten (10) day quarantine at the shelter
because of aggressive behavior shall be liable for double the regular impoundment fee. If the animal does not have a current rabies
certificate that cost will be added. (Ord. 1067, 9-9-2002)
6-2-10: RABIES CONTROL:
A. Vaccination Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to own any dog or cat over three (3) months of age within the city limits that is
not immunized against rabies. The animal shall receive a booster within the twelve (12) month interval following the initial vaccination.
Every such animal shall be revaccinated within twelve (12) months if a one year vaccine is used or within thirty six (36) months if a three
(3) year vaccine is used as provided in New Mexico department of health regulation 7.4.2.8(A) NMAC. (Ord. 1078, 8-11-2003)
B. Rabies Metal Certificate: Dogs must wear the metal vaccination tag securely attached to a collar or harness.
1. The metal tag described above must contain the following information:
a. The year of vaccination;
b. A certificate number; and
c. The name, address, and phone number of the vaccinating veterinarian or veterinary clinic.
2. In addition the owner must have in his possession a paper certificate validating current inoculation with the following information:
a. The name and address of the owner;
b. The telephone number of the owner;
c. A description of the animal;
d. The date of vaccination;
e. The number of the metal certificate, if any;
f. The kind of vaccine used; and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 127/318
g. The signature of the administering veterinarian.
C. Unlawful Use Of Metal Certificate: It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a metal vaccination certificate or tag which was issued to a
dog to the collar or harness of any other dog.
D. Lost Metal Certificate: In the event that a metal certificate is lost, a duplicate may be obtained upon the presentation of a valid paper
certificate of vaccination and the payment of a replacement fee. (See current animal shelter fee schedule.)
E. Animal Quarantine: It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal subject to quarantine under this section to fail to immediately
surrender possession of such animal to any animal control officer upon request for purposes of supervised quarantine. Unless more
stringent regulations have been promulgated by the New Mexico department of health, the following provisions shall apply:
1. Reason For Quarantine: Any dog or cat that has bitten, scratched, or otherwise attacked a person or animal without provocation shall:
a. Either be impounded at an animal shelter or a veterinary hospital or an approved kennel within five (5) miles of the city limits and
observed for a period of ten (10) days from the date of the bite; or
b. If the animal has a current vaccination for rabies and the area involved is not quarantined for rabies, the animal control officer may
permit quarantine of such animal at the keeper's home after inspecting the premises.
2. Owner's Duties If Home Quarantine Is Allowed: It shall be unlawful for the owner to fail to immediately confine said animal in such a
manner that absolutely prevents the escape of such animal and to fail to prevent said animal from contacting any other person or
animal. The owner of said animal shall further be required to obtain the same veterinary supervision of the animal and otherwise
comply with the same conditions of release from quarantine as would be required in a veterinary hospital or at the animal shelter.
3. Observance: If observance of the animal by animal control is denied or prevented, the animal shall immediately be confined at the
animal shelter for the remainder of the quarantine period.
4. Report Changes Or Escape: It shall be unlawful for the owner allowed home quarantine to fail to immediately report and otherwise
notify the animal control division of the city should the animal escape and report any changes in such animal's condition.
F. Quarantine Report: Report of animal control officer for quarantine shall specify each of the following:
1. The name and address of any victim;
2. The name and address of the owner of the animal;
3. The reason for the confinement of such animal;
4. A description of the animal; and
5. Place where such animal is confined and any other data which may aid animal control or the shelter.
G. Rabies Occurrence:
1. If, as determined by the veterinarian, a dog or cat proves to be rabid during the period of confinement, animal control and/or the
shelter shall have it humanely destroyed at the owner's expense and properly dispose of the body.
2. The head of any animal suspected of having died of rabies shall be immediately sent to a laboratory designated by the state board of
public health under such procedure as specified by the state board of public health.
3. If any dog or cat is bitten by an animal proved to be rabid, the owner or keeper shall have it humanely destroyed and properly dispose
of the body; unless the bitten dog or cat has been vaccinated at least three (3) weeks before being bitten then the animal shall be
confined for ninety (90) days. At the end of the confinement period, the dog or cat shall be released if declared free of rabies by a
licensed veterinarian.
H. Declaration Of Quarantine: The city council may declare a quarantine against rabies within the city when, in its judgment, rabies exists to
the extent that it is a danger to public health. Upon such declaration, all dogs and cats within the county shall be confined on the
premises of the keeper, in a veterinary hospital, in a commercial kennel, or in the animal shelter. After reasonable effort is made to
apprehend any dog or cat found running at large, it may be humanely destroyed by any animal control officer who shall also properly
dispose of the remains. A quarantine shall not be removed except on order of the city council. (Ord. 1067, 9-9-2002)
6-2-11: OWNER RESPONSIBILITY:
A. Limits: No more than four (4) animals (any combination of dogs, cats and potbellied pigs) may be kept at one residence.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 128/318
B. Kennel - Residential: Owners with five (5) but not more than seven (7) cats or dogs or potbellied pigs or any combination thereof shall be
considered as a private residential kennel. Such owner may qualify by paying an annual registration fee at the shelter and permit access
to property for periodic inspections by shelter or animal control to ensure that such owner complies with the provisions of this chapter.
1. Permits may be revoked for serious or repeated violations of the requirements of this chapter.
2. There is no provision for more than seven (7) animals to be kept at any private residence. Veterinary clinics, pet shops, and city
licensed businesses who deal in animals are excluded.
C. Mating Season: Keepers of female dogs or cats in heat must confine the animal(s) within a building or enclosure in such a way as to
prevent attack by male dogs or cats and so as not to constitute a nuisance by attracting male animals.
D. Restraint Of Animals: A person owning or having charge, custody, care, or control over a dog or cat shall keep the animal upon his own
premises by either a secure dog run or kennel, an enclosure surrounding the perimeter of his property, or (for a dog only) on a chain not
less than twelve feet (12') in length anchored with a swivel device and a second swivel device attaching the chain to the animal's
nonabrasive collar or harness. Area must be clear of obstacles which many entangle animal and chain. No chain or tether shall weigh
more than one-eighth (1/8) of the dog or puppy weight.
E. Off Premises: When off the premises, dogs must be restrained by a leash not exceeding six feet (6') in length. An exception is when the
owner or keeper physically carries or holds said animal in his hands. Nothing in this section shall be construed as allowing any animal
under physical restraint to commit any act defined as unlawful in this chapter.
F. Pet Shops: City licensed pet shops and animal related businesses may carry animals and birds providing the stock does not include
species not allowed in the City (i.e., wild animals, reptiles, roosters, ratites, and crossbreeds with wild animals). Pet shops and animal
related businesses shall be subject to ordinance compliance inspections.
G. Animal Disposal: Within twenty four (24) hours of death of an animal, the owner shall dispose of the carcass by burial at least three feet
(3') underground in a suitable location, or by other means approved by the animal control unit. There will be a fee if animal control is
called to pick up the dead animal for disposal. (See current animal shelter fee schedule.) (Ord. 1067, 9-9-2002)
6-2-12: COMMERCIAL KENNELS AND BOARDING:
Commercial kennels and boarding facilities are unlawful within the City limits. (Ord. 1067, 9-9-2002)
6-2-13: IMPOUNDMENT RESTRICTIONS:
The City has no facilities for impounding such animals as livestock, horses, sheep, pigs, goats, birds, reptiles, wild animals or fowl. The
shelter or animal control will assist in finding a local person who might help or recommend a State or Federal agency to contact.
A. Livestock: It shall be unlawful for four-legged hoofed animals to remain on a premises within the City limits for more than twenty four (24)
hours, unless specifically permitted by City of Deming zoning designation in section 12-4E-3 of this Code.
B. Livestock Exception: In addition to locations that the zoning designation allows keeping of livestock, animals for school sponsored
vocational, agricultural or activities such as Future Farmers of America may be kept at one location for the purpose of raising, showing
and selling them at agricultural fairs and exhibits. Up to three (3) lambs or one calf are allowed. The keeping of such animals shall
comply with the following minimum standards:
1. Shelter and confinement area shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30') from the living quarters of any adjacent landowner;
2. The standards in section 6-2-14, "Animal Care And Protection", of this chapter are followed;
3. The animals are attended daily with periodic inspection by the vocational agricultural instructor and the County Extension Agent; and
4. Lambs shall be contained in pens within a five foot (5') high enclosure. (Ord. 1268, 12-11-2017)
C. Other Pets: Caged birds are allowed. No wild birds are to be taken from their nests or harmed.
1. No more than four (4) rabbits, guinea pigs, chinchillas, white rats or mice, squirrels or others similar may be maintained at a residence
or business except a pet store.
D. Fowl Restrictions: It is unlawful to keep a ratite (emu, etc.) on private property. Chickens are allowed as follows:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 129/318
1. A maximum of ten (10) hens for the personal consumption of the occupants of the property;
2. Roosters are prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any number of roosters;
3. Chicks shall be allowed only as a one on one replacement for adult hens;
4. It shall be unlawful for any person to breed fowl or to slaughter any fowl for the purpose of sale; and
5. If hens and chicks are not raised as itemized in subsections D1 through D3 of this section, any combination of up to six (6) small
animals such as rabbits and fowls such as chickens and ducks may be housed outside a residence so long as they are properly
contained, not raised for commercial purposes and do not become a nuisance. (Ord. 1067, 9-9-2002)
6-2-14: ANIMAL CARE AND PROTECTION:
A. Conditions: The animal must have easy access to adequate shade, shelter from the weather, food, potable water, and proper veterinary
care when needed.
1. The area where the animal is confined must be kept free of garbage and other debris that might endanger the animal's health or
safety. Feces will be cleaned once every twenty four (24) hours.
2. The area where the animal is confined must be kept free of insect infestation, such as ant hills, wasps nests, fleas, ticks and maggots.
Reasonable efforts should be made to prevent the attraction and breeding of flies, mosquitos, or other noxious insects.
B. Cruelty To Animals: No animal shall be wilfully, maliciously or cruelly beaten, except that such force as may be needed can be used to
drive off vicious or trespassing animals.
C. Extreme Cruelty: Extreme cruelty to animals consists of a person who:
1. Intentionally or maliciously tortures, mutilates, injures or poisons an animal; or
2. Maliciously kills an animal. (Ord. 1067, 9-9-2002)
6-2-15: OFFENSES AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Animal Nuisance: It is unlawful for a keeper to allow any animal to persistently bark, howl or make noise, to be kept or maintained in such
a manner to disturb by emitting noxious or offensive odors or to otherwise be a nuisance, as defined, to the inhabitants of the area,
specifically including defecation upon other private property.
B. Abandonment Of Animals: It is unlawful to abandon any animal. To leave an animal without food, water or shelter for more than twenty
four (24) hours on one's premises or to dump or leave off a domestic animal on property other than one's own without permission is
considered abandonment.
C. Dangerous And Vicious Animals: Special provisions for dangerous and vicious are as follows:
1. It is unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any vicious animal. When an animal control officer has probable cause to believe that
an animal is vicious, the officer may impound the animal into protective custody awaiting appropriate court proceedings. Following
judicial determination that an animal is vicious, the court having jurisdiction over the enforcement of this chapter, shall, in addition to
any fine or imprisonment imposed for violation of this section, order the owner or keeper of such vicious animal to have it humanely
destroyed.
2. Dangerous animals with the potential to become vicious, whether through breeding or training (such as guard dogs) must be
contained and restrained with additional safeguards for the public. When in public, such restraint may include a muzzle attached to its
mouth of sufficient construction to prevent said dog from harming any person or animal.
3. Should any dangerous animal be found abandoned, running at large, or violating any other part of this chapter, the shelter or animal
control will determine if the animal is a hazard to the public and whether or not it may be redeemed from the shelter. Vicious animals
found abandoned or running at large shall be destroyed.
D. Harboring Unvaccinated Animals: It is unlawful for any person to keep a dog or cat that has not been vaccinated against rabies as
provided in this chapter.
E. Cruelty To Animals: It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously kill, maim, disfigure, torture, beat with a stick, chain, club or
other object, mutilate, burn or scald with any substance, overdrive or otherwise cruelly set upon any animal except that reasonable force
may be employed to drive off or otherwise control vicious or trespassing animals.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 130/318
F. Wild Animals: It is unlawful to own or harbor a wild animal within the city limits.
G. Animal Care And Protection: It is unlawful for a keeper to fail to provide any animal with proper food, water available at all times, shade,
shelter, and veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering.
H. Poisoning And Trapping: The following provisions apply to the use of poison and the trapping:
1. It is unlawful to set traps to capture dogs or cats other than noninjurious, cage type enclosures.
2. It is unlawful for any person to prepare, dispense, set out, or otherwise administer any poisonous material with the intent of harming or
killing any animal.
3. It is unlawful to set traps intended to kill or maim dogs or cats. This section does not prohibit the eradication of vermin which are a
threat to public health.
I. Animal Fights: It is unlawful to cause, instigate, promote or attend any fight in which two (2) or more animals or fowls are engaged for the
purpose of injuring, maiming or destroying themselves or another animal.
J. Exclusion Of Service Dogs From Places Of Business: It is unlawful for any person owning, operating or maintaining any public place of
business or conveyance into which the general public is invited for any business purpose to exclude therefrom any dog that has been
trained to assist the blind or deaf, or mobility impaired, provided that such dog is in the company of the person whom it was trained to
assist.
K. Unlawful Quarantine Release: It is unlawful to remove an animal from quarantine without a signed release from animal control or the
shelter.
L. Possession Of Poisonous Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person or business to keep any venomous or poisonous snakes, lizards or
reptiles within the city. (Ord. 1067, 9-9-2002)
6-2-16: PENALTIES:
A. Repeat Offenses: Three (3) or more violations of any one or any combination of section 6-2-14 of this chapter shall constitute an act of
cruelty to animals. A repeat offender shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.00) and/or imprisonment for a period not exceeding six (6) months.
1. In cases of repeat offenses under section 6-2-14 of this chapter, an animal control officer shall have the authority to impound any
animal subjected to cruelty, neglect or abandonment. The animal may not be returned to its owner before a hearing in the appropriate
court, if in the opinion of the animal control officer, the harm to the animal is severe and likely to recur.
2. In addition to the above penalties, any person found violating the terms of this chapter or any similar statute or ordinance within or
without the state of New Mexico may, as a condition of probation, lose his/her right to own or keep an animal for a period as follows:
ninety (90) days for a first offense; one year for a second offense; and five (5) years for a third offense.
3. Notwithstanding the above, the court may permanently ban an individual from owning or possessing any animals for a period of time
deemed reasonable by said court, if that person has been convicted of any offense involving cruelty to animals.
B. Suspensions, Revocations Of Permits: When a permitted premises is in violation of this chapter a notice will be given to the permit holder
of the specific violation, a time limit to correct it, and the warning that failure to comply may result in immediate suspension or revocation
of the permit. A person whose permit has been suspended may apply for an inspection of the premises for the purpose of reinstating the
permit. The suspension may be lifted when the inspection determines the violations have been corrected. The reinstated permit shall
expire on the date of expiration of the previously suspended permit.
C. Appeal Procedures For Permit Denial, Suspension Or Revocation: When a permit is revoked or renewal is refused, the person may
submit a written request for a hearing. The written request must be received within ten (10) days after the permit holder is notified of the
revocation or renewal is refused. The applicant shall be afforded a fair hearing within a reasonable time which provides the basic
safeguards of due process hearing shall be conducted.
1. The opportunity to examine before the hearing, and, at the expense of the applicant, to copy all documents, records and regulations
of the animal control department that are relevant to the hearing. Any document not made available by the animal control department
after a written request by the applicant may not be relied upon by the animal control department at the hearing.
2. The right to present evidence and arguments in support of his appeal to controvert evidence relied on by the department, and to
confront and cross examine all witnesses on whose testimony or information the department relies.
3. The hearing officer shall prepare a written report of his findings and decision based solely and exclusively upon the facts presented at
the hearing within ten (10) days and provide copies to the parties.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 131/318
4. An appeal from a notice or inspection finding will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed at the shelter within five (5) days
of receipt of the notice.
D. Misdemeanor: Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter may be charged with a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, may be punished by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety
(90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense.
E. Cruelty To Animals: Whoever commits cruelty to animals is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be sentenced pursuant to the provisions of
section 31-19-1 New Mexico Statutes Annotated, 1978. Upon a fourth or subsequent conviction for committing cruelty to animals, the
offender is guilty of a fourth degree felony and shall be sentenced pursuant to the provisions of section 31-18 New Mexico Statutes
Annotated, 1978.
F. Extreme Cruelty: Whoever commits extreme cruelty to animals is guilty of a fourth degree felony and shall be sentenced pursuant to the
provisions of section 31-18-15 New Mexico Statutes Annotated, 1978.
G. Penalty For Poisoning: Any person who distributes or sets out poison for animals other than for the eradication of vermin within the
boundaries of the city of Deming, New Mexico, shall pay a fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) and be imprisoned in the
Luna County jail for not less than thirty (30) days nor more than ninety (90) days. (Ord. 1067, 9-9-2002)
6-2-17: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, word or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable by any court
of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this chapter. The city council hereby
declares that it would have passed this chapter and each division, section, paragraph, sentence, clause, word or phrase thereof irrespective
of any provision being declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid. (Ord. 1067, 9-9-2002)
Chapter 3
ANTI-GANG RECRUITMENT
6-3-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter may be cited as the ANTI-GANG RECRUITMENT ORDINANCE. (Ord. 937, 12-9-1996)
6-3-2: INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to empower police officers with legal authority to cite persons who are found to be recruiting juveniles to
participate in criminal gang activities. (Ord. 937, 12-9-1996)
6-3-3: DEFINITIONS:
CRIMINAL STREET GANG: Any ongoing organization, association in fact, or group of three (3) or more persons, whether formally or
informally organized, or any subgroup or affiliated group thereof, having as one of its primary activities the commission of one or more
criminal acts or illegal acts, which has an identifying sign or symbol, and whose members individually or collectively engage in or have
engaged in a pattern of criminal gang activity for a one year period.
PATTERN OF CRIMINAL GANG ACTIVITY: The commission, attempt to commit, conspiracy to commit, or solicitation of two (2) or more
predicate gang crimes, provided the criminal acts were committed on separate dates or by two (2) or more persons who are members of, or
belong to, the same criminal street gang within a one year period.
PREDICATE GANG CRIME: A. A state or federal offense:
1. Involving a controlled substance (as defined in New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 30-31-2, as amended, and/or section 102
of the controlled substances act (21 USC 802);
2. That is a felony crime of violence that has as an element, the use or attempted use of physical force against the person of another;
or
B. Any federal or state felony offense that by its nature involves a substantial risk that physical force against the person of another may
be used in the course of commencing the offense, including, but not limited to:
1. Assault with a deadly weapon;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 132/318
2. Aggravated battery;
3. Intimidation;
4. Compelling organizational membership;
5. Homicide or manslaughter;
6. Shooting at an occupied dwelling or motor vehicle;
7. Kidnapping;
8. Carjacking;
9. Robbery;
10. Residential burglary;
11. Drive-by shooting;
12. Unlawful use or possession of weapons;
13. Bribery;
14. Tampering with evidence or harassment of or retaliation against a witness, victim, informant or juror;
15. Rape;
16. Torture; and
17. Arson; or
C. Any federal or state offense involving:
1. Money laundering;
2. Felony vandalism;
3. Unlawful sale of a firearm; or
4. Obstruction of justice. (Ord. 937, 12-9-1996)
6-3-4: PROHIBITION:
A person who performs any of the following acts commits a violation of this chapter:
A. Solicits, recruits, entices or intimidates a minor to join a criminal street gang;
B. Conspires to solicit, recruit, entice or intimidate a minor to join a criminal street gang;
C. Solicits, recruits, entices or intimidates a minor to join a criminal street gang or conspires to do so repeatedly from the same location;
D. Expressly or impliedly threatens to do bodily harm to a minor or to that minor's family or use any other criminally unlawful means to deter
any person from leaving a criminal street gang. (Ord. 937, 12-9-1996)
6-3-5: FORFEITURE:
A. Penalty: Any vehicle or weapon used for the purpose of recruiting or conspiring to recruit a minor to join a criminal street gang is declared
a public nuisance and subject to forfeiture pursuant to the following procedures:
B. Proceeding:
1. Motor vehicles subject to forfeiture under this section may be seized by any police officer of the city upon an order issued by the
district court.
2. Seizure without such an order may be made if seizure is incident to an arrest of the driver of the vehicle for criminal gang recruitment.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 133/318
3. A vehicle taken or retained under this section shall not be subject to replevin, but is deemed to be in the custody of the police
department, and seizure of it is subject only to the orders and decrees of the district court. The police officer may take custody of the
vehicle and remove it to an appropriate and official location within the district court's jurisdiction for disposition in accordance with this
section.
4. In the event of seizure pursuant to subsection B2 of this section, proceedings for an order for forfeiture shall be instituted promptly
and not later than thirty (30) days after seizure. Any person who, pursuant to the records of the motor vehicle division of the state
taxation and revenue department, has an ownership or security interest in the subject motor vehicle shall be served with notice of the
forfeiture proceedings.
5. When property is forfeited pursuant to this section, the Deming police department shall sell the motor vehicle and the proceeds shall
revert to the general fund of the city. (Ord. 937, 12-9-1996)
6-3-6: OFFICER TRAINING:
All sworn officers of the Deming police department will undergo appropriate training on identification of gang members and criminal street
gangs. (Ord. 937, 12-9-1996)
6-3-7: CRIMINAL PENALTIES:
Any person convicted of violating this chapter shall, upon conviction, be sentenced as follows:
A. A first conviction under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not
exceeding ninety (90) days, or both.
B. A second conviction under this chapter shall be punished by a mandatory fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) but not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by mandatory imprisonment for not less than ten (10) days but not exceeding ninety (90)
days, or both.
C. A third or subsequent conviction under this chapter shall be punished by a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) but not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by mandatory imprisonment for not less than twenty five (25) days but not
exceeding ninety (90) days, or both.
Each separate violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 937, 12-9-1996)
Title 7
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
TRAFFIC CODE
7-1-1: UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE1:
A. Adoption: The 2014 compilation of the New Mexico uniform traffic ordinance, comprising sections 12-1-1 through 12-13-6 inclusive, and
all changes through July 1, 2014, are herewith adopted by reference, pursuant to section 3-17-6 New Mexico Statutes Annotated, 1978.
B. Copies On File: The uniform traffic code, 2014 compilation, and amendments thereto, is available for inspection during the normal and
regular business hours of the municipal court, 309 South Gold Avenue, Deming, New Mexico. (Ord. 1250, 9-8-2014)
7-1-2: VEHICLE WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS:
A. Driving On Certain Streets Prohibited: It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to drive, tow, pull or carry any vehicle or vehicles,
including, but not limited to, any kind of trailer or farm equipment, on Pear Street between Eighth Street and State Highway 11, and on
Pearl Street between Spruce Street and Highway 11 within the city limits in any case where the combined weight of such vehicle or
vehicles exceeds five (5) tons.
B. Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 768, 3-9-1987)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 134/318
7-1-3: EXCESSIVE VEHICLE NOISE:
A. Definitions:
ENGINE RETARDING BRAKE: A device used primarily on trucks for the conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to
an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any vehicle defined as such by the traffic code of the state of New Mexico.
B. Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge the exhaust or permit the discharge of the exhaust from any motor vehicle
except through a muffler that effectively prevents abnormal or excessive noise.
C. Excessive Noise From Engine Braking Or Engine Retarders: It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to engine brake or
use an engine retarding brake on any public highway, street, parking lot or alley within the city, which causes unreasonable, loud, or
excessive noise.
D. Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1170, 11-
13-2007)
7-1-4: BICYCLES, SKATES AND SKATEBOARDS:
A. Riding On Sidewalks:
1. Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall be given the meanings as ascribed to them in this subsection:
BICYCLE: Means and includes a vehicle with one or more wheels, whether in tandem or otherwise, of which one or more wheels is
more than twenty inches (20") in diameter, with solid or pneumatic tires, having a steering bar or wheel and propelled wholly or in part
by human power.
ROLLER SKATE: A shoe or boot with two (2) or four (4) wheels or casters attached to its sole for skating on hard surfaces.
ROLLERBLADE: A trademark used for a brand of in-line skate, which is defined as a roller skate whose wheels are arranged in a
straight line.
SKATEBOARD: Means and includes a device where riding upon usually while standing, consisting of an oblong piece of wood
mounted on skate wheels used on a smooth surface and requiring better balance of the rider than the ordinary roller skate does.
2. Business District: It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle, roller skates, rollerblades or skateboard, as hereinabove
defined, on the sidewalks of the business district within the city limits. Any person violating the provisions hereof shall, upon
conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 575, 9-8-1976; amd. 2001 Code)
B. Reflectors Required2: For the safety and protection of the rider of the bicycle, it shall be the duty of every owner of a bicycle that is ridden
after sundown on the streets and highways of the city to have in good operating condition required lights and reflectors. (Ord. 205, 3-5-
1945; amd. 2001 Code)
7-1-5: CASUAL SALES OF MOTOR VEHICLES:
A. Place Of Sale: No person, other than a dealer duly licensed by the state of New Mexico and the city, making a casual sale of his own
motor vehicle shall sell the vehicle or offer or display the motor vehicle for sale at any location other than his current residence, place of
employment or at any other site where the seller of the motor vehicle has obtained prior written permission from the landowner. No
person shall offer or display a motor vehicle for sale on any property owned by the city or any public right of way, other than the right of
way adjacent to the seller's residence. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished pursuant to the provisions of
section 1-4-1 of this code.
B. Warning Of Violation; Removal Of Vehicle:
1. A municipal law enforcement officer or the city administrator or his designee is authorized to place a warning notice on any motor
vehicle displayed at a location in violation of subsection A of this section to provide for removal of the vehicle if it is at the same
location twenty four (24) hours after the warning notice is placed on the motor vehicle.
2. The warning notice shall contain the following information:
a. The date and time the warning notice was placed on the motor vehicle;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 135/318
b. A statement that pursuant to this violation, if the motor vehicle is not removed within twenty four (24) hours after the warning notice
is affixed, the motor vehicle shall be towed away and stored at the owner's expense, and if the motor vehicle is moved to another
unlawful location, it will be subject to immediate removal without warning; and
c. The location and telephone number where the motor vehicle has been towed.
3. If a motor vehicle on which a warning notice has once been issued and affixed is found in another unlawful location, the municipal law
enforcement officer or the city administrator or his designee may immediately, without warning, provide that the motor vehicle be
towed away and stored at the owner's expense.
4. Within forty eight (48) hours after a motor vehicle is towed and stored pursuant to this section, the towing and storage facility
designated by the municipal law enforcement officer or the city administrator or his designee shall give written notice by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the registered owner of the motor vehicle, if known, that the motor vehicle has been towed and shall give
the address of the storage facility where the motor vehicle is stored. (Ord. 1041, 3-12-2001)
7-1-6: SMALL MOTORIZED VEHICLES:
A. Scope: This section is applicable to the use and operation of small, motorized vehicles on the streets, sidewalks, city parks, and alleys
within the city of Deming. The proliferation and operation of such small motorized vehicles has created safety concerns for operators,
pedestrians and drivers of other larger vehicles within the city.
B. Definitions: As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply:
SMALL MOTORIZED VEHICLE: Any vehicle with one or more wheels, whether in tandem or otherwise, upon which one or more
persons can stand, sit or otherwise position himself or herself, and which is powered by a gasoline motor (49 cubic centimeter
displacement or less) or electric motor which cannot exceed a speed of thirty five (35) miles per hour. This specifically includes, but is
not limited to, small vehicles commonly known as scooters.
C. Prohibition: It is unlawful for any person:
1. To operate any small motorized vehicle in or on the streets or alleys without a current driver's license and without a headlight and
taillight; and
2. To operate any small motorized vehicle on the sidewalks of any business district within the city limits.
3. To operate any small motorized vehicle within a city park, unless designated, permitted by the city of Deming, or any handicap
assistance vehicle, operating under subsection D of this section.
D. Exception: The provisions of this section shall not apply to handicap assistance vehicles operated by disabled persons on streets that do
not have Americans with disabilities act compliant sidewalks.
E. Safety Requirements: Any person under the age of eighteen (18) must wear an approved safety helmet for motorized vehicles when
operating a small motorized vehicle as described herein. No person shall carry any passenger under the age of eighteen (18) on any
small motorized vehicle unless the passenger is wearing an approved safety helmet. Any handicap assistance vehicle, operating under
subsection D of this section, must have an elevated safety flag attached.
F. Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1184, 2-9-
2009)
Chapter 2
PARKING REGULATIONS
7-2-1: DOWNTOWN PARKING AREA DESIGNATED:
The following thoroughfares are hereby designated as the downtown parking area in the city:
The east and west sides of Silver Avenue from the north line of the intersection of Hemlock Street and Silver Avenue to a line three hundred
feet (300') north of the north line of the intersection of Pine Street and Silver Avenue; the east and west sides of Gold Avenue from the north
line of the intersection of Hemlock Street and Gold Avenue to the south line of the intersection of Cedar Street and Gold Avenue; the north
and south sides of Pine Street from the west line of the intersection of Silver Avenue and Pine Street to the east line of the intersection of
Pine Street and Copper Street; the north and south sides of Spruce Street from the west line of the intersection of Platinum Avenue and
Spruce Street to the east line of the intersection of Spruce Street and the first alley west of Copper Street; parking on Spruce Street shall be
parallel and on all other streets shall be on an angle as marked. There shall be no parking in the police and fire zones as may be hereafter
designated by proper signs and red painted curbs. (Ord. 402, 3-7-1966)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 136/318
7-2-2: PARKING TIME LIMITS:
A. Time And Area: No person shall hereafter park any motor vehicle, bicycle or motorcycle in any parking space of the downtown parking
areas as herein defined for a period of longer than two (2) hours at any time between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to six o'clock
(6:00) P.M. of any day except Sunday and public holidays, except that parking on the north and south sides of Spruce Street from
Copper Street to the first alley west of Copper Street shall be limited to a period of ten (10) minutes so as to accommodate patrons of
the United States post office during the days and times aforesaid. (Ord. 403, 4-6-1966)
B. Tow Away Illegally Parked Vehicle: In addition to the penalty referred to in section 7-2-7 of this chapter, the police department shall be
authorized to cause any vehicle parked in violation of this section to be towed by a licensed tow operator at the expense of the owner of
the vehicle. (Ord. 970, 4-13-1998)
7-2-3: RESTRICTED PARKING:
A. Silver Avenue:
1. West Side: It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a motor vehicle to park said motor vehicle on the west side of Silver
Avenue from Spruce Street to Railroad Avenue from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. until seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., on Tuesday, Thursday
and Saturday of each and every week.
2. East Side: It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a motor vehicle to park said motor vehicle on the east side of Silver
Avenue from Spruce Street to Railroad Avenue from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. until seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., on Monday, Wednesday
and Friday of each and every week. (Ord. 312, 6-6-1960)
B. Trucks And Trailers, Buses, House Trailers Or Other Vehicles:
1. Parking On Pine Street: It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of any vehicle commonly known as a tractor trailer, semitrailer,
any bus or house trailer, whether attached to any other motor vehicle or not, to park in or along or on any part of that street known as
Pine Street within the city limits.
2. Parking On City Property: It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of any vehicle commonly known as a tractor trailer, semitrailer,
any bus, or house trailer, whether attached to any other motor vehicle or not, to park on any city right of way, including all streets and
alleys or on property owned by the city within the city limits; provided, however, that these restrictions shall not apply to designated off
loading or permanent loading zones. It is further provided that the city administrator and chief of police, acting together, may designate
certain areas for parking use by the above described vehicles and trailers, including the time and duration of such designated parking
areas. All such areas shall be identified by appropriate signage.
3. Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this subsection B shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than fifty dollars
($50.00), or by imprisonment of not more than ten (10) days in a detention center, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1093,
8-26-2004)
C. Maple Street: It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle on the north side of Maple Street between the intersection of
Maple Street and Copper Street easterly a distance of one hundred fifty feet (150') from Mondays through Fridays between the hours of
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight of each day thereof. (Ord. 396, 11-1-1965)
D. Buckeye Street: It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and
four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on the north side of Buckeye Street, between the corner of Nickel and Buckeye Streets, and the corner of
Granite and Buckeye Streets and on the west side of Nickel Street, from the corner of Nickel and Buckeye Streets, to the tennis courts
of the Deming public schools. (Ord. 569, 9-13-1976)
E. Vehicles Prohibited On Public Or Private Property:
1. It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit the parking of a motor vehicle known as a tractor trailer, a semitractor and/or a
semitrailer, whether connected or not, on public property in any residential zone within the city, except for the purpose of loading or
unloading freight, merchandise, or other objects, and such vehicle shall be attended during loading or unloading. On private property,
it is unlawful for any person to cause or permit the parking of a vehicle known as a semitrailer, whether connected or not, in any
residential zone within the city. As used in this subsection, "residential zone" is defined as an A single-family district, A-1 single-family
district, A-3 single-family district, A-4 single-family district, A-5 single-family district, B multiple dwelling district, B-1 dwelling district, B-
2 dwelling district, B-3 dwelling district, C commercial district with mobile home park use, T use district, and T-2 use district as defined
in title 12 of this code. (Ord. 1163, 8-13-2007)
2. It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection E if any resident living within one hundred feet (100') of such parked
vehicle complains to the city police or code enforcement officer.
3. The chief of police, any city police officer designated by the chief, or city code enforcement officer is hereby authorized to remove or
have removed any motor vehicle, as described in subsection E1 of this section which reasonably appears to be in violation of this
subsection E.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 137/318
4. The chief of police, any city police designated by the chief or city code enforcement officer may grant a temporary permit to an
applicant for a variance to the provisions of this subsection E. The issuance of such temporary permit is at the sole discretion of the
above authorized persons and shall be for a period of time not to exceed ten (10) consecutive calendar days. Only three (3) temporary
permits shall be issued to the applicant in any given calendar year.
An application for a temporary permit shall be made in writing to the chief of police or city code enforcement officer at least within
twenty four (24) hours of the violation. The application shall state the reason(s) for the requested variance.
F. Vehicles Prohibited On Public Property:
1. It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit a motor vehicle to be parked on public property in any residential zone within the city,
where such motor vehicle is greater than twenty two feet (22') in length, or where such motor vehicle is greater than ninety eight
inches (98") in width. As used in this subsection "motor vehicle" is defined as any vehicle that is designed to be self-propelled and is
designed to travel along the ground, and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, trucks, tractors, sport utility vehicles,
campers and recreational vehicles. Regardless of size, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit a camper or recreational
vehicle to be parked on public property in any residential zone within the city. As used in this subsection, "residential zone" is defined
as an A single-family district, A-1 single-family district, A-3 single-family district, A-4 single-family district, A-5 single-family district, B
multiple dwelling district, B-1 dwelling district, B-2 dwelling district, B-3 dwelling district, T use district, and T-2 use district as defined in
title 12 of this code.
2. It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit the parking of any type of trailer hitched or unhitched on any public property in any
"residential zone" as defined in subsection F1 of this section. As used in this subsection "trailer" is defined as any vehicle without
motive power of its own, designed to be drawn or towed by another vehicle.
3. It shall be prima facie evidence of violation of this subsection F if any resident living within one hundred feet (100') of such a parked
vehicle complains to city police or code enforcement.
4. The chief of police, any city police officer designated by the chief, or city code enforcement officer is hereby authorized to remove or
have removed any motor vehicle, as described in subsections F1 and F2 of this section which reasonably appears to be in violation of
this subsection F.
5. The chief of police, any city police designated by the chief or city code enforcement officer may grant a temporary permit to an
applicant for a variance to the provisions of this subsection F. The issuance of such temporary permit is at the sole discretion of the
above authorized persons and shall be for a period of time not to exceed ten (10) consecutive calendar days. Only three (3) temporary
permits shall be issued to the applicant in any given calendar year.
An application for a temporary permit shall be made in writing to the chief of police or code enforcement at least within twenty four (24)
hours of the violation. The application shall state the reason(s) for the requested variance. (Ord. 1068, 10-14-2002)
7-2-4: HANDICAPPED PARKING:
A. Definition: For the purpose of this section, the term "designated handicapped zone" is defined to mean any zone reserved for the parking
of a passenger vehicle which is used by a disabled person and which displays registration plates or placards indicating disability in
accordance with New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 66-3-16.
B. Zone Established: There is hereby established a designated handicapped zone which shall be established and designated by the city
administrator, which zone shall be reserved solely for the parking of a motor vehicle which is used by a handicapped person and which
displays registration plates or placards indicating disability in accordance with New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 66-3-16.
C. Zone Symbol: Such zones, when established, shall be designated by blue striping on the pavement and posting a sign bearing the
symbol of a white wheelchair on blue background.
D. Restricted Parking: It shall be hereafter unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in a parking place reserved as a designated
handicapped zone on any public thoroughfare within the city without the registration plates or placards as hereinabove provided.
E. Violation, Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be fined in the sum of five dollars ($5.00) for
the first violation thereof, and ten dollars ($10.00) for any subsequent violation thereof. (Ord. 714, 1-10-1983)
7-2-5: LOADING AND CURB ZONES:
A. Curb Loading Zones Designated: Upon the basis of a traffic engineering study, the city council or its designated representative is hereby
authorized to determine the location of passenger, freight and special curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs
indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 138/318
B. Permits For Curb Loading Zones: The city council or its designated representative shall not hereafter designate or sign any curb loading
zone upon special request of any person unless such person makes application for a permit for such zone. After the city council or its
designated representative has granted a permit and before installing such signs and markings as may be necessary, the applicant shall
pay to the city treasurer a service fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per twenty two foot (22') stall, then at the rate of twenty five cents
($0.25) per foot for additional space per year or fraction thereof. The city council or its designated representative may impose conditions
and general regulations for the use of such signs and for reimbursements of the city for the value thereof in the event of their loss or
damage, and their return in the event of misuse or upon expiration of permit. Every such permit shall expire at the end of each calendar
year. (Ord. 309, 3-21-1960)
7-2-6: VEHICLES OCCUPIED OVERNIGHT ON STREETS:
A. Restriction: It shall be hereafter unlawful for any person to occupy any vehicle or to allow the same to be occupied, including any motor
vehicle, trailer or mobile home overnight on the streets, alleys or other public property of the city, except those mobile homes or RV units
that have self-contained sanitary facilities.
B. Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 840, 10-28-
1991)
7-2-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a penalty assessment misdemeanor pursuant to subsection 1-11-8C of this code, with
the exception of a violation of subsection 7-2-3B of this chapter. In addition to such penalty, the Deming police department is authorized to
cause any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter to be towed by a licensed tow operator at the expense of the owner of the vehicle.
(Ord. 1059, 6-10-2002)
Chapter 3
STOP AND YIELD STREETS
7-3-1: THROUGH STREETS DESIGNATED:
The city council or their designated representatives, upon traffic engineering study and investigation, may designate which streets in the city
should be through streets. There shall be prepared a schedule of such streets, with copies furnished to the police department, city clerk,
municipal judge and city attorney:
A. Nickel Street hereby designated as a through street at the intersection of Nickel Street and Buckeye Street, that Buckeye Street at the
intersection of Buckeye Street and Tin Street is hereby designated as a through street. (Ord. 289, 2-16-1959)
B. Birch Street, Maple Street and Hemlock Street prior to entering Iron Street.
C. Elm Street and Hemlock Street, prior to entering Zinc Street.
D. Birch Street, Maple Street and Hemlock Street prior to entering Tin Street.
E. Elm Street and Hemlock Street prior to entering Nickel Street.
F. Zinc Street prior to entering Birch Street.
G. Iron Street and Tin Street prior to entering Elm Street.
H. Zinc Street and Nickel Street prior to entering Maple Street. (Ord. 260, 12-4-1956)
I. Ash Street from the city limits on the west side of Pearl Street on the east side is hereby designated as a through street; provided,
however, that Eighth Street, Gold Avenue, Platinum Street and Pearl Street shall be through streets insofar as the intersection with Ash
Street is concerned. (Ord. 273, 11-5-1957)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 139/318
J. Gold Avenue is hereby designated as a through street and all vehicles traveling thereon shall have right of way over all vehicles coming
onto or crossing said Gold Avenue from intersection excepting that Spruce Street on which is located map 169-A shall continue to
remain a through street. (Ord. 177, 10-18-1933)
K. Spruce Street from the eastern limits of the city west to and including West Eighth Street is hereby declared to constitute a through
street. (Ord. 159, 7-2-1928)
L. All persons operating motor vehicles on Buckeye Street shall stop at the intersection of Nickel Street prior to entering Nickel Street at all
intersections and shall yield the right of way to all traffic on Nickel Street; all persons operating motor vehicles on Tin Street shall stop at
the intersection of Tin Street and Buckeye Street prior to entering Buckeye Street and shall yield the right of way to all traffic on Buckeye
Street. (Ord. 289, 2-16-1959)
7-3-2: STOP STREETS DESIGNATED:
There are hereby created in the city the streets and parts of streets hereinafter described and designated as through streets for the purpose
of this chapter. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall stop at every intersection before entering any of the
following:
A. Lead Street prior to entering Elm Street.
B. Maple Street prior to entering Lead Street. (Ord. 331, 8-7-1961)
C. Copper Street prior to entering Maple Street.
D. Elm Street prior to entering Copper Street. (Ord. 320, 2-6-1961)
E. The intersection at Ash Street and Nickel Street is hereby designated as a four-way stop intersection.
F. All persons operating motor vehicles shall stop at the intersection of Ash Street at Nickel Street prior to entering said intersection and
shall yield the right of way to all prior traffic. (Ord. 289, 2-16-1959)
G. All persons operating motor vehicles shall stop at the intersection of Ash Street prior to entering Ash Street at all intersections and shall
yield the right of way to all traffic on Ash Street with the exception of the said intersections at Eighth Street, Gold Avenue, Platinum
Street and Pearl Street. (Ord. 273, 11-5-1957)
When stop signs are erected as herein provided for, at or near the entrance to any intersection herein designated, every driver of a vehicle
shall stop such vehicle at such street or clearly marked stop sign before entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a
police officer or traffic-control signal. (Ord. 331, 8-7-1961)
7-3-3: YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY STREETS DESIGNATED:
There are hereby created in the city the streets and parts of streets hereinafter described and designated as through streets for the purpose
of this chapter, and when signs are erected giving notice thereof to drivers of vehicles, they shall yield the right of way at every intersection
before entering any of the following:
A. Birch Street prior to entering Lead Street.
B. Birch Street prior to entering Copper Street. (Ord. 331, 8-7-1961)
C. Birch Street prior to entering Nickel Street. (Ord. 260, 12-4-1956)
When yield signs are erected as herein provided for, at or near the entrance to any intersection herein designated, every driver of a vehicle
shall yield the right of way at such street or clearly marked yield sign before entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a
police officer or traffic-control signal. (Ord. 331, 8-7-1961)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 140/318
Chapter 4
MOTOR VEHICLE DIVISION
7-4-1: DECLARATION:
The city operates and manages the state of New Mexico motor vehicle division Deming field office (MVD) on behalf of the New Mexico
taxation and revenue department. (Ord. 1199, 6-14-2010)
7-4-2: MVD ADMINISTRATION FEES:
The city of Deming shall cause to be collected an administrative fee of five dollars ($5.00) from each person requesting a service in
connection with every transaction processed for the MVD by the city of Deming as an agent of MVD. (Ord. 1249, 6-9-2014)
Title 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
8-1-1: EXCAVATIONS:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to tunnel under or to make any excavation in any street, alley or other public place in
the city without having obtained a permit as is herein required, or without complying with the provisions of this chapter or in violation of
or variance from the terms of any such permit.
B. Application For Permit: Applications for such permits shall be made to the city clerk upon the forms provided by the city, and all permits
issued shall be in the form provided by the city. (Ord. 459, 10-5-1970)
8-1-2: SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE:
A. Unsafe Sidewalks: No person or entity owning or controlling any lot or property within the city shall permit any footway or sidewalk
contiguous thereto or running along the street line thereof to be out of repair, loose or to be unsafe to pedestrians. To determine whether
a sidewalk is out of repair, city officials shall evaluate the sidewalk using the following criteria:
1. Sunken Or Lifted: Sunken or lifted refers to those sections of sidewalk where there exists a differential settlement or lifting between
two (2) sections of sidewalk; it can occur at joints or cracks in the concrete. A differential of one-half inch (1/2") or more shall be prima
facie evidence that the sidewalk is out of repair and unsafe to pedestrians.
2. Cracked: Cracked sidewalk refers to breaks in the concrete itself. A crack of more than one-half inch (1/2") in width shall be prima
facie evidence that the sidewalk is out of repair and unsafe to pedestrians.
3. Spalled/Scaled: Spalling and scaling refers to the disintegration of the surface of the concrete. Spalling or scaling of more than ten
percent (10%) of the sidewalk shall be prima facie evidence that the sidewalk is out of repair and unsafe to pedestrians.
B. Completion Of Repairs: The person or entity owning or controlling a lot or property within the city where there exists a footway or
sidewalk contiguous thereto or running along the street line thereof which is out of repair or is in a condition unsafe to pedestrians, shall,
upon notice by the city, effectuate repairs within fifteen (15) days. The code enforcement department shall be authorized to grant an
extension of this fifteen (15) day period if it is determined that an extension is required to effectuate said repairs.
C. Maintenance And Repair Specifications: Each sidewalk shall be maintained and repaired to the specifications and requirements
contained in section 8-1-3 of this chapter.
D. Violation: The failure to make or commence repairs within fifteen (15) days, unless an extension has been granted, or the failure to make
repairs consistent with section 8-1-3 of this chapter shall be a violation of this section.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 141/318
E. Other Remedies: Nothing in this section shall be construed to deprive the city of the remedies set forth in New Mexico Statutes
Annotated section 3-49-4. (Ord. 1031, 9-11-2000)
8-1-3: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION:
A. Permit Required: All persons desiring to build cement sidewalks abutting any lot within the city limits shall first obtain a written permit
therefor from the engineer, which permit shall be issued at a fee of ten dollars ($10.00). (Ord. 15, 4-8-1908; amd. 2001 Code)
B. Cement Sidewalks: All sidewalks hereafter constructed within the city shall be built of cement and according to the specifications
prescribed in subsection D of this section.
C. Building Supervision: The building of all cement sidewalks shall be under the direction and control of the city engineer. (Ord. 15, 4-8-
1908)
D. Specifications:
1. Width: All cement sidewalks hereafter built shall be five feet (5') in width, except on Gold and Silver Avenues, between Railroad
Avenue and Hemlock Street, and on Pine Street, between Gold and Silver Avenues, which shall be of a width of ten feet (10'), and on
Spruce Street between Gold and Silver Avenues, which shall be of a width of eight feet (8'). (Ord. 43, 2-1-1909)
2. Specifications: Such sidewalks shall be built in accordance to the following specifications:
a. Stakes shall be set by the direction of the engineer to define the line of one edge of the walk with a grade mark thereon to indicate
the top of the walk at said lines. The transverse slope of the walks shall be one-eighth of an inch (1/8") per foot and shall be
determined by such means as said engineer shall direct.
b. The sidewalk shall be graded to a width designated by said engineer for the entire length, including all wings and curbings, on a
well-packed subgrade, which shall be satisfactory to said engineer and must first be inspected and accepted by him.
c. Upon this subgrade a pavement of the following description shall be placed: a layer of portland cement concrete not less than four
inches (4") deep, well rammed and compacted, and a wearing surface of portland cement mortar one inch (1") thick.
d. All materials shall be of good quality and must be approved by the engineer. The gravel used for the concrete shall not exceed one
and one-half inches (11/2"), and shall be of the best quality, sharp and clean and free from dust, loam and other foreign matter.
e. The cement used shall be portland cement of a good quality.
f. The water used shall be fresh and free from earth, dirt or sewage.
g. The concrete shall consist of one part in volume of portland cement, three (3) parts sand and four (4) parts gravel.
h. The cement and sand in the specified proportions shall be thoroughly mixed dry in a tight box or on a platform with shovels or hoes
until no streaks are visible; water shall then be added in sufficient quantity to produce a mortar of the desired consistency, and the
whole thoroughly mixed until a homogeneous mass is produced.
i. The mortar, prepared as hereinafter specified, shall be spread upon a platform, the proper quantity of gravel, after having been
thoroughly wetted, shall then be spread over the mortar and the mass thoroughly turned over not less than three (3) times and until
every piece of gravel is completely coated with mortar. Water shall be added by sprinkling during the process of mixing, if required
to secure a better consistency.
j. All surfaces on or against which concrete is laid shall be cleaned and dampened by sprinkling with water just previous to placing the
concrete.
k. The concrete shall be evenly spread upon the foundation, as soon as mixed, in a layer in such depth that after having been
thoroughly compacted with rammers, it shall not be in any place less than four inches (4") thick, and the upper surface of it shall be
parallel with the proposed surface of the completed pavement.
l. The slab or flag divisions shall be formed by cutting the concrete clear through as soon as laid, and the space made by the cutting
tool shall be immediately filled with dry sand and well rammed.
m. Concrete shall not be mixed in larger quantities than is required for immediate use and no batch shall be larger than can be made
of one barrel of cement with the proper proportions of sand and gravel.
n. The wearing surface shall be composed of one part in volume of cement to two (2) parts of sand.
o. The cement and sand in specified proportions shall be mixed dry on a platform or in a tight box until no streaks are visible. Water
shall then be added in sufficient quantities to produce a mortar of the desired consistency, and all being turned and mixed until a
homogeneous mass is produced.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 142/318
p. The mortar, while fresh, shall be spread over the concrete base, before the latter has reached its first set, in such quantities that
after being thoroughly manipulated and spread over the concrete it will make a layer one inch (1") thick conforming to the required
grade and cross section. It shall be smooth and present a neatly finished surface.
q. The surface shall then be cut in flags, the markings to be made directly over the joints in the concrete and cut clear through the
wearing surface, with edges nicely turned, so, also, the edges at each side of walk shall be nicely turned.
r. The pavements shall be kept moist and protected from the elements and travel until thoroughly set. Mortar or concrete that fails to
show a proper bond or fails to set after, in the opinion of the engineer, it has been allowed sufficient time, shall be removed and
material of proper quality put in its place. Wood frames or molds must be left in place until the cement sets perfectly and to the
satisfaction of the engineer. (Ord. 15, 4-8-1908)
8-1-4: STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Provisional Order: Whenever the city council shall, by a majority vote, decide that the interest of the city requires that any street or alley,
or any part thereof, within the limits of the city, be graded, graveled, paved, macadamized or in any manner improved, the city council
shall make a provisional order to the effect that such street or alley or part thereof shall be so graded, graveled, paved, macadamized or
in any manner improved, and shall order the engineer, or some other competent engineer, to cross section said street or alley or part
thereof and to make an estimate of the total cost thereof, and an estimate of the number of cubic yards of material necessary to be used
in the grading thereof, or to be excavated therefrom.
B. Notice Of Hearing: Upon the filing of the report of such engineer, the city council shall set a time and place at which the owners of
property abutting on said street or alley or part thereof so to be improved, or any such other persons interested therein, may appear
before the city council and be heard as to the propriety and advisability of making such improvements, and as to the costs thereof, and
as to the manner of payment therefor, and as to the amount thereof to be assessed against the property abutting thereon. Five (5) days'
notice in writing of such time and place shall be given to such property owners, which shall be served by delivering a copy thereof to
each of such property owners, if such owners can be found within the city, otherwise by delivering a copy thereof to some person
residing on such property, or by posting a copy thereof on such abutting property. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall also
be given by publication in some newspaper of general circulation in the city; at least three (3) weeks prior to the time thereof; and the
officer serving such notices shall make return of the manner of making the same, which shall be filed with the city clerk.
C. Hearing: At the time and place so fixed as aforesaid, any owner of such abutting property, or any person interested, may appear before
the city council and be heard as to the propriety and advisability of making such improvements, and as to the cost thereof, and manner
of payment therefor, and as to the amount thereof to be assessed against the abutting property.
D. Advertising For Bids: After such hearing, the city council shall determine as to the advisability of so grading, graveling, macadamizing or
otherwise improving such streets or alleys or parts thereof, and shall determine the kind and character of such improvements so to be
made, and shall proceed to advertise for bids for the doing of the work therefor, and shall enter into a contract for the doing of such work
and the furnishing of all necessary materials to the lowest bidder.
E. Assessments: After the making of such contract, the city council shall determine what portion of such work shall be paid by such abutting
property, and the owners thereof, and shall assess to each lot or parcel of land abutting upon such street or alley or part thereof so to be
improved its proportionate share of such total amount.
F. Lien:
1. Lien Imposed: The amount so assessed shall be a lien upon such lot or parcel of land from the time of such assessment, and if such
amount be not paid within thirty (30) days from and after the completion and acceptance of such work, it shall be the duty of the city
clerk to make, sign, attest with the seal of the city and filed for record, a claim or lien therefor; and all subsequent purchasers,
mortgagees or encumbrancers of such lot or parcel of land, shall take the same subject to such lien.
2. Foreclosure Of Lien: Such liens shall bear interest at the rate of eight percent (8%) per annum from the date of filing thereof until paid,
and after such recording, may be sold and assigned to any person for its face value with interest and may be foreclosed at any time
after such recording in the same manner now provided for the foreclosing of mortgages of real estate.
G. Destruction Of Building: In case any proposed improvement shall involve the destruction of any building or other structure, no action
shall be taken until the same has been approved, by the appropriate official, on notice to the owners interested; and compensation shall
be made to the owners of the property destroyed, and the amount thereof to be fixed by agreement or proceedings similar to
condemnation proceedings by railroad companies. (Ord. 16, 4-8-1908)
8-1-5: CURB CONSTRUCTION:
A. Specifications: Hereafter whenever any curb shall be built by any person in the residence streets or sections of the city, the same shall
be constructed of cement concrete not less than six inches (6") below the grade and six inches (6") thick and of a cement wearing
surface one inch (1") thick, consisting of the materials specified in subsection 8-1-3D of this chapter, and the outer edge of said curb
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 143/318
shall be twelve feet (12') from the lot line. All curbs shall be constructed under the direction of the city council. Any curb hereafter
constructed in the city in violation of this section shall be considered an obstruction to the street wherein the same is located and be
subject to removal by order of the city council.
B. Violation: Any person who shall refuse to remove any curb built in violation of this section, after having been ordered to do so by the city
council, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each day that any curb is allowed to remain in violation of this section shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 51, 8-2-1909)
8-1-6: OBSTRUCTION OR CLOSURE OF STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, maintain, place or leave any structure, fence, post or other object upon any public way
or to obstruct traffic on any public way without a permit first obtained from the city clerk or his designee.
The city clerk, or his designee, may issue permits for the temporary closure of streets and other public ways upon application for such
permit. Such permit shall be granted when:
A. The proposed use of the public way will not unreasonably interfere with the public's right to use the public way;
B. The proposed use of the public way is not anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct;
C. The proposed activity will not cause the city of Deming to incur unusual expenses;
D. The public way is suitable for the proposed activity;
E. The permit applicant shows evidence of valid and current liability insurance coverage for the proposed use of the public way in an
amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) with the city of Deming named as an additional insured; and
F. The applicant has paid a permit fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
The city clerk or his designee may condition the issuance of a permit on the payment of a reasonable deposit to assure the cleanup of
the public way after its use by the applicant.
The city clerk or his designee may revoke a permit upon good cause being shown, including, without limitation, the applicant's use of
false information to obtain a permit.
Appeal from the denial or revocation of a permit shall be made to the city council and shall be in writing, filed with the city clerk within
five (5) days of the denial or revocation. (Ord. 1051, 11-14-2001)
8-1-7: ACCESS PERMITS:
A. General: All construction of crossings under this section shall be done in a manner and with such materials as are prescribed by the New
Mexico department of transportation unless noted in this section. Prior to any construction of crossings specified in this section, an
access permit is required. Application for an access permit can be obtained from the building inspector. The building inspector, city
engineer, or designee shall approve the access permit.
B. Required: The owner of any land desiring to construct a crossing of any sidewalk or public right of way for use by trucks, tractors, trailers,
buses, automobiles or any other vehicles so as to enter any private or other alley or way on such premises or so as to give access to
any entrance or exit to any such premises shall first obtain a permit from the building inspector. Such construction or future maintenance
of the crossing is the responsibility of the owner in accordance with the following requirements. Such construction or future maintenance
is the financial responsibility of the owner. The construction is subject to approval by the building inspector or city engineer.
C. Application Submission: Application and construction documents shall be submitted for each application for permit. The construction
documents shall be prepared by a design professional. The city engineer, building inspector, or designee is authorized to waive the
submission of documents prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that an
in depth review is not necessary. Where special conditions exist, additional documents or data, including, but not limited to, traffic
studies, may be required for approval of the permit.
D. Light Traffic Commercial/Industrial Areas: In all light traffic commercial/industrial areas, which shall include all office buildings or other
commercial buildings not more than two (2) stories in height, the width of curb cuts or driveways shall be a minimum of twelve feet (12')
and a maximum of twenty five feet (25'). No curb cuts or driveways shall be closer than thirty feet (30') from side property lines. All other
requirements shall be the same as in residential areas.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 144/318
E. Heavy Traffic Commercial/Industrial Areas: In all heavy traffic commercial/industrial areas, which include, but are not limited to, all drivein
type establishments, no curb cut or driveway shall be closer than thirty feet (30') from side property lines. The width of curb cuts or
driveways shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') and a maximum of thirty five feet (35'), provided that the city engineer approves a curb
cut or driveway over thirty five feet (35') in width when justified after a complete study of the following factors:
1. Traffic volume.
2. Pedestrian volume.
3. One-way streets.
4. Type of business making the request.
5. All other requirements shall be the same as in residential areas.
F. Residential Areas: In all residential areas, which shall include all dwelling units, single-family, apartments or otherwise, the following shall
apply:
1. The minimum width of curb cuts shall be twelve feet (12') and the maximum width shall be twenty two feet (22').
2. No curb cut or driveway shall be closer than five feet (5') from interior side property lines.
3. A minimum of twenty two feet (22') of the standing curb must remain between any two (2) curb cuts on the same lot or single parcel of
land. If more than one lot or parcel of land is being put to a single land use, this requirement shall apply to that land use.
4. No double or circle drives shall be installed unless the property has a minimum of sixty feet (60') of frontage on the street affected
thereby.
5. Corner property curb cuts shall be no closer to the intersecting street than fifteen feet (15') from the property line of the intersecting
street, but the driveway shall not encroach on the corner curb return of intersections. No driveway shall be allowed on the one-way
turning roadways of channelized intersections. Where traffic volumes are heavy or where the intersection is signalized, the corner
clearance shall be at least twice the stated minimum value on the stopping side of the intersection.
G. Exceptions: The city engineer may issue a waiver for any single curb cut, driveway or circle drive in cases where frontage is not
adequate to meet the requirement and where based on unique property characteristics that prohibit compliance as long as public safety
is not compromised.
H. Abandoned And Nonconforming Curb Cuts Or Driveways: If any vehicular or other sidewalk crossing is clearly abandoned as a crossing
or no longer used for its intended purpose, any permit granted for the use of the crossing as such shall be subject to revocation by the
city of Deming only after thirty (30) days' written notice of such proposed revocation has been given to the owner of the property to
which the crossing is appurtenant. The owner's name and address will be ascertained from the county tax rolls. It shall be sufficient
notice under this section to make delivery of the notices by certified mail with return receipt requested.
I. Consideration, Approval: After examination and consideration of the application for a permit required by the city of Deming and the plan
and examination of the premises if deemed necessary, the building inspector or designee is authorized and directed to approve a permit
for the construction if the use of the right of way or crossing will not unreasonably interfere with the proper and safe use of the sidewalk
or right of way to be crossed or the proper and safe use of the street or other public way to which ingress and egress is made from
private premises. No construction shall be made until such permit has been granted.
J. Access Permit Fees Established: An application fee of 0.05 percent of the proposed construction value or a minimum of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) will be assessed by the building inspector if not in conjunction with a concurrent building permit. (Ord. 1216, 9-13-2011)
Chapter 2
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
8-2-1: CLOSING HOURS:
A. Purpose And Scope: The purpose of this section is to limit the time of the use and occupancy of the parks and recreation areas of the
city. This section shall apply in all parks and recreation areas under the jurisdiction of the city unless expressly exempted.
B. Closing Hours Established; Permit: It shall be unlawful for any person, except officers and employees of the city, to enter upon or remain
in any park or recreation area of the city between the hours of ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of any day,
unless such person shall have been granted a temporary permit issued by the city council to use or occupy the same during said hours.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 145/318
C. Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided by section 1-4-1 of
this code. (Ord. 762, 9-8-1986)
Chapter 3
TREES AND SHRUBBERY
8-3-1: APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER:
It shall be the duty of any owner of any real property within the city limits to maintain and trim trees and shrubbery on property owned or
occupied by him in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1032, 10-9-2000)
8-3-2: OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED:
A. Obstructions To Public Ways:
1. Trees: It shall be the duty of the owner of any property which abuts or is adjacent to any public way to trim all trees located on such
property to a minimum height of twelve feet (12') above any driving lane and alleyway, and eight feet (8') above any parkway, sidewalk
or other public footway, or to such other minimum height below eight feet (8') deemed to be safe for pedestrians by city officials under
circumstances including, but not limited to, the age and condition of the tree and walkway. For purposes of this chapter, a "driving
lane" is defined as that area of a public street extending twelve feet (12') beyond the center line or median to the curb; a "parkway" is
defined as that area along the curbside customarily used for the parking of vehicles.
2. Shrubs: It shall be the duty of the owner of any property which abuts or is adjacent to any public way to trim and maintain all
shrubbery on the property so that it does not encroach over or obstruct passage upon the adjacent street or sidewalk. It shall further
be the duty of the owner or occupant of any property receiving utility service from the city to trim and maintain shrubbery around utility
meters so the utility meters are readily accessible to city officials.
B. Obstructions To Intersections And Entrances/Exits To Parking Lots: It shall be the duty of the owner to maintain any corner property free
of any obstacles, tree limbs or shrubbery, between three feet (3') and eight feet (8') above street level or to such other minimum height
below eight feet (8') deemed to be safe for pedestrians by city officials under circumstances including, but not limited to, the age and
condition of the tree and walkway. It shall further be the duty of the owner of a corner property or a property not at an intersection but
used for entrance and/or exit for multiple parking areas to maintain a clear sight triangle. A clear sight triangle is an area of unobstructed
vision permitting a vehicle driver to see approaching vehicles to the left or right with all traffic signs unobstructed from view. (Ord. 1032,
10-9-2000)
8-3-3: MAINTENANCE OF TREES:
A. Hazardous Conditions: It shall be the duty of the owner of any property within the city limits to maintain trees on the property in such a
condition as to not constitute a hazard. A "hazard tree" is a tree with structural defects likely to cause failure of all or part of the tree. To
determine whether a tree is a hazard due to a structural defect, city officials will evaluate the tree using the following criteria:
1. Dead Tree Or Branches: Dead tree or branches, including broken branches or tree tops;
2. Cracks: Deep split or splits through the bark, extending into the wood of the tree;
3. Weak Branch Unions: Places where branches are not strongly attached to the tree;
4. Decay: Wood that is soft or crumbly, or a cavity where wood is missing or evidence of fungal activity such as mushrooms;
5. Cankers: A localized area on the trunk or branch of a tree where the bark is sunken or missing;
6. Root Problems: Root problems, including roots that have been severed or paved over;
7. Poor Tree Architecture: Poor tree architecture consisting of a growth pattern that indicates weakness or structural imbalance;
8. Other Conditions: Any other condition not specifically enumerated above deemed to be a hazard by city officials.
B. Completion Of Maintenance: The owner of the property upon which a tree with a structural defect or defects is located, shall, upon
written notice from the city, effectuate such maintenance as is required to correct the defect or defects within fifteen (15) days. The code
enforcement department is authorized to grant an extension for good cause shown.
C. Violation: The failure to make or commence maintenance within fifteen (15) days of the notice, unless an extension has been granted,
shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1032, 10-9-2000)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 146/318
8-3-4: INJURY TO TREES OR SHRUBS:
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to wilfully injure, deface, disfigure or destroy any tree or shrub, or to injure, destroy, cut
or pick any plant or flower located either on public or private property without lawful authority to do so. (Ord. 1032, 10-9-2000)
Chapter 4
MOUNTAIN VIEW CEMETERY
8-4-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY OF RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. Purpose:
1. Certain rules and regulations are necessary for the protection of lessees, and to give them assurance that nothing of an unsightly or
objectionable nature can ever be placed on plots adjacent to their own.
2. These rules and regulations are designed for the protection of lessees of interment rights as a group. Their enforcement will help
protect the cemetery and create and preserve its beauty. The following rules and regulations are hereby adopted by the city as the
rules and regulations of the Mountain View Cemetery, hereinafter referred to as the "cemetery", and all lessees of lots, all visitors and
those performing work within the cemetery, shall be subject to said rules and regulations, amendments or alterations as shall be
adopted from time to time.
B. Applicability: All lots leased shall be subject to the rules and regulations of said cemetery now or hereafter adopted. (Ord. 1200, 6-14-
2010)
8-4-2: VISITOR INFORMATION:
A. Hours: Cemetery hours shall be posted at the cemetery and set at the discretion of the city council.
B. Obey Rules: All persons entering the cemetery shall obey all rules and regulations adopted by the cemetery.
C. Public Gates: No person shall be permitted to enter or leave the cemetery except by the public gates, which will be open during such
hours as are specified by the city. (Ord. 1200, 6-14-2010)
8-4-3: CITY LIABILITY:
A. City Right To Correct Errors: The city reserves, and shall have, the right to correct any errors that may be made by it either in making
interments, disinterments or relocations. In the event such error shall involve the interment of the remains of any person in such lot, the
city reserves and shall have the right to relocate and transfer such remains so interred to such other lot of equal value and similar
location as may be substituted and conveyed in lieu thereof according to law in such case made and provided. It shall also have the right
to correct any errors made by an improper inscription, description, incorrect name or date on the head marker.
B. Theft Or Damage To Property: The city of Deming will not be responsible for the theft or damage to anything placed on graves, inclusive
of cremains enclosed within the monument or columbaria. (Ord. 1233, 12-10-2012)
C. Nonliability For Certain Acts: The city will not be liable for any act of lessees, visitors, licensees or trespassers within the cemetery or for
any damage to person or property within the Mountain View Cemetery. Mountain View Cemetery or the city shall not be liable for
damage caused by the elements, an act of God, common enemy, thieves, vandals, strikers, malicious mischief makers, explosions,
unavoidable accidents, invasion, insurrections, riots, or order of any military or civil authority, whether the damage be direct or collateral,
other than as herein provided. (Ord. 1200, 6-14-2010)
8-4-4: REGULATIONS FOR SERVICES:
A. Lots: Lots in Mountain View Cemetery shall be used for no other purpose than the burial of the human dead.
B. Application For Grave Opening Or Closing: Applications for the opening and closing of all graves and for disinterments must be
presented at the designated office of the city during business hours of the day preceding the one upon which the lot is to be used.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 147/318
C. Fees: The schedule of fees are approved by city council and are subject to change. (Ord. 1200, 6-14-2010)
D. Opening And Closing Fees: All fees for the lot, setup and opening and closing of the grave must be paid in full when a request is made
to open a grave space. Reservations for a cemetery lot must be paid in full when reserving such space(s). The opening and closing
charge can be paid at the time of need, and any other charges that may apply as listed in the schedule of fees. Prepayment of burial
fees are not subject to increase for a period of twenty (20) years. Interments will not be allowed in any lot where the lease remains
unsettled. (Ord. 1233, 12-10-2012)
E. Notice Before Funeral: Written notice of twenty four (24) hours preceding the one upon which the lot is to be used, must be presented at
the designated office of the city of Deming during business hours. Sunday funerals will not be permitted. Exceptions to this rule will be
made only in cases of death from contagious disease or when so ordered by the authorized employees of the cemetery.
F. Hours: Interments will be allowed only between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. Monday through
Saturday, unless in the case of special order of a health officer or as otherwise directed by the city of Deming. An additional fee will be
required for Saturday burials. (Ord. 1200, 6-14-2010)
G. Number Of Interments Limited: Not more than one interment and one cremation vessel in a ten foot by five foot (10' x 5') lot, or two (2)
cremations in a five foot by four foot (5' x 4') lot will be allowed except in case of mother and infant or two (2) infants to be interred at the
same time, under the age of three (3) years. (Ord. 1233, 12-10-2012)
H. Direction Of Funerals: Funerals, after entering the gates, shall be subject to the direction of the authorized employees of the city. (Ord.
1200, 6-14-2010)
I. Relocation Permit: Any person desiring to relocate a body from the grave space of another must present an executed legal document for
such relocation, and also himself sign a request to have such relocation made. These shall remain on file in the city of Deming offices.
Relocation of a dead body from a burial space within the cemetery will be permitted only upon application made and approval of the city
of Deming in accordance with law in such case made and provided.
1. Only lessee or authorizing agent designated by a will can make allowable changes. Any disputes that cannot be resolved by
ordinance will be subject to the hearing fee listed in subsection C of this section or an administrative release may be granted by
decision of a minimum of three (3) department heads.
2. Transfer of lot location can be made by paying the difference of the lot at the current rate. Transfer of lot lease between individuals is
not allowed. Transfer of lots back to the city will be refunded at the paid amount, less twenty five dollar ($25.00) administration fee per
lot. (Ord. 1233, 12-10-2012)
J. Interment Restriction: Interments will not be allowed in any lot where the lease remains unsettled. (Ord. 1200, 6-14-2010)
8-4-5: LANDSCAPING AND GRAVE MAINTENANCE:
A. Funeral designs and floral pieces shall be removed as soon as they become withered or unsightly and an employee at the cemetery may
remove them when, in his judgment, it is for the best interest of the cemetery.
B. Containers for flowers should not be made of glass or ceramic and such containers or other decorations will be removed as soon as the
flowers fade and wither and the right is reserved to make such removal. Also, winter wreathes and artificial flowers will be removed at
such times as are specified by the sexton of the city. Containers for flowers shall not exceed the height of the monument.
C. Use of rocks or metal to hold flowers are not permitted as they can damage equipment and injure personnel. The digging of holes for any
purpose whatsoever is strictly prohibited.
D. A small American flag may be displayed on those days and occasions when it is customary to do so. At the expiration of three (3) days,
cemetery personnel may remove such flags without liability for their safekeeping.
E. In the event the city shall determine to be offensive any memorial, structure, marker, monument or inscription placed or to be placed
within the cemetery, the city expressly reserves to itself the right to enter such lot or plot and remove, change or correct the same, after
expiration of reasonable notice in writing given to the party or parties in interest therein. (Ord. 1200, 6-14-2010)
F. The city will have the authority to enter upon any lot and to remove any objectionable thing or any erection that may have been placed
there contrary to the regulations. Any objects removed by city personnel shall be without liability for their safekeeping. (Ord. 1233, 12-
10-2012)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 148/318
G. The city expressly reserves the right to do all landscaping and planting of any nature whatsoever and no cutting or trimming by any lot
lessee will be permitted.
H. No person other than the proper employees of the cemetery shall be allowed to perform any work within the cemetery. (Ord. 1200, 6-14-
2010)
I. No visitor shall pluck or remove any plant or flower, either wild, cultivated, or artificial from any part of the cemetery.
J. If any tree, shrub or plant standing upon any lot by means of its roots, branches, or otherwise, be or become detrimental to adjacent lots,
avenues, irrigation or if for any other reason its removal is deemed necessary, the city shall have the right and it shall be its duty, to
remove such tree, shrub or plant, or any part thereof, or otherwise correct the condition existing as in its judgment seems best. (Ord.
1233, 12-10-2012)
K. The lessee of any lot, section or block shall not plant, cut or trim any herbage of any kind, or place or erect any monument or memorial
stone, or any structure of any kind, or build or construct any foundation therefor, or form, grade, dig up, or deposit any material of any
kind upon any burial lot or other portion of Mountain View Cemetery.
L. No enclosure of any kind, such as a fence, coping, hedge or ditch shall be permitted around any grave or lot. Grave mounds will not be
allowed and no lot shall be raised above the established grade. (Ord. 1200, 6-14-2010)
M. No concrete, wooden, wrought iron or cast iron bench or chair, or any wooden, wrought iron or wire trellis, shall be permitted to be or be
brought upon the grounds. Approved stone benches may be placed along edges of road by cemetery personnel. (Ord. 1233, 12-10-
2012)
N. Trees may be planted only with permission and direction of the city in common areas only. No trees, shrubs or plants of any kind shall be
allowed in gravesite areas.
O. The authorized city personnel shall direct generally all improvements within the grounds and upon all lots and graves, before as well as
after interments have been made therein. They shall have charge of the planting, sodding, surveying and improvements generally.
P. All graves will be sodded level by the city employees and no mounding or planting will be allowed on any grave. (Ord. 1200, 6-14-2010)
Q. The right to enlarge, reduce, replat or change the boundaries or grading of the cemetery or of a section or sections, from time to time,
including the right to modify or change the location of, or any part thereof, or remove or regrade roads, drives and walks, is hereby
expressly reserved. The right to lay, maintain and operate, or alter or change pipelines or gutters for sprinkling systems, drainage, etc.,
is also expressly reserved, as well as is the right to use cemetery property, not sold to an individual lessee, for cemetery purposes,
thereto, a perpetual right to ingress and egress over lots for the purpose of passage to and from other lots.
1. All markers and monuments and objects of beautification shall be set by the cemetery employees only, unless, because of the size of
the memorial, it is in the best interest of both parties to allow the monument dealer to set such. In such case, the monument setting
personnel may approach the gravesite with their equipment and area to use due care not to disturb or damage any adjacent
gravesites or memorials. All markers and monuments shall be constructed of granite, bronze or marble. Glass and hollow concrete is
strictly prohibited.
2. Markers and monuments shall not be decorated, trimmed or adorned with any material except as permitted in these regulations.
3. Single markers or monuments shall not exceed forty eight inches (48") in width and sixteen inches (16") in depth and double markers
or monuments shall not exceed one hundred two inches (102") in width and sixteen inches (16") in depth. There is a five foot (5')
height limit on all markers and monuments. If an entire block is purchased as a family plot and the purchaser wishes to have a
distinctive family monument, an exception to the height may be made by the city by prior approval.
4. All markers and monuments are to be set in line by the red dots and within two inches (2") of the property line at head of space. Each
marker or monument will have a four inch (4") footing with, at least, a three inch (3") border on all four (4) sides. If the marker or
monument has accompanying vases, the end borders will vary according to size of vases used. Vases must be securely and
permanently fastened to the end borders of the foundation. The aforesaid footings will be formed, troweled and edged.
5. In all sections having four foot by ten foot (4' x 10') spaces, graves will be opened using a line four inches (4") from foot of space and
continue toward head of space as to size of opening required. All foot markers should be installed level with the ground except where
existing foot markers can be matched.
6. In the memorial section of the cemetery, a single granite marker is included in the purchase. The markers are all identical and include
name and dates only. No verses or designs are included. The marker is ordered by the city after the interment has been made and
signed request is received from the family (only city provided markers are allowed). Should the party leasing such cemetery property
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 149/318
make the purchase prior to need and wish the marker be placed prior to the interment, it is the responsibility of the lessee to pay for
adding the final date.
7. Columbaria niches will only be opened during regular business hours should the need arise.
8. Columbaria cover plates will be limited to name, full dates and dedication line (limited to 17 letters), which will be provided by the city.
(Ord. 1233, 12-10-2012)
R. These rules and regulations are subject to any provision of applicable laws of New Mexico.
S. Exclusive right is expressly reserved to the Deming city council to adopt additional or supplemental rules and regulations, to alter,
amend, repeal or otherwise change any rule, regulation, clause or provision of the foregoing rules and regulations, at any time, with or
without notice to lessees of burial lots or plots. (Ord. 1200, 6-14-2010)
T. Rules and regulations are referenced in the cemetery brochure. (Ord. 1233, 12-10-2012)
Chapter 5
FRANCHISE ORDINANCES
8-5-1: FRANCHISE ORDINANCE REQUIREMENT:
A. Granting Franchise: Under chapter 3, article 42 of the New Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978 a municipality may grant, by ordinance, a
franchise to any person, firm, or corporation for the construction and operation of any public utility.
B. Requirement: It shall be unlawful for any public utility to operate within the city limits without a current franchise ordinance in place. (Ord.
1077, 7-14-2003)
8-5-2: PENALTY:
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be in accordance with subsection 1-4-1A of this code. Separate violations will accrue on a per
day basis. (Ord. 1077, 7-14-2003)
Title 9
UTILITIES
Chapter 1
SOLID WASTE/GARBAGE SERVICE/LANDFILL
9-1-1: SOLID WASTE/GARBAGE DEFINED:
The words "solid waste" and "garbage" are synonymous as used in this chapter and shall include, but not be limited to, any garbage, offal,
swill, carrion, ashes, dirt, slop, trash, rubbish, any and all rejected or waste food, wastepaper, solid waste and waste or unwholesome
materials of every kind and character excepting, sewage and recognizable industrial byproducts. (Ord. 1260, 9-29-2016)
9-1-2: SOLID WASTE/GARBAGE CONTAINERS:
A. General:
1. Duty To Deposit Garbage: It shall be the duty of every person owning, leasing, renting, or controlling any house, residence, shop,
establishment, hotel, restaurant, market, apartment house, or any other place of business or habitation to deposit all garbage coming
from said premises in designated containers or designated sites as applicable.
2. Compliance With Regulations: All residential and commercial users shall comply with the rules and regulations established by the city
for the use, care and location of solid waste containers and shall keep the lids and covers furnished for such containers closed at all
times except when they are being filled, emptied or cleaned. Containers shall be only loaded with bagged garbage and in such a
manner as they will self-empty when inverted.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 150/318
3. Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to deposit, or cause to be deposited, any solid waste in any container that the resident is not
entitled to use. To do so shall result in fines and penalties and may be prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law.
4. Unlawful Deposit Of Solid Waste; City Collection: It is unlawful for any person to deposit, or cause to be deposited, any solid waste
adjacent to any solid waste container, in any street, alley, public ROW, park, or curbside. When solid waste of any kind is found to be
deposited in any street, alley, public ROW, or curbside, the property owners, persons controlling the property, tenants, or lessees will
receive written notice to remove said solid waste within ten (10) days of notice given. After ten (10) days, if the waste has not been
removed, the city will collect the waste and may bill the cost of collection on applicable utility bills.
5. Unauthorized Removal Of Solid Waste: No person shall remove solid waste from any solid waste container or facility or in any
manner disturb the contents of solid waste containers within the service area.
6. Bagging Required; Large Items: "Solid waste" as defined in section 9-1-1 of this chapter shall be bagged and tied prior to depositing
in any dumpster or poly cart. Bagged and tied items include, but are not limited to, the following: yard waste, such as grass, trees,
bushes, leaves, etc., trash of all kinds and varieties, rubbish food waste, cardboard, etc. Items too large or heavy to bag, such as
furniture, mattresses, and appliances shall be delivered to the Deming/Luna County transfer station or Butterfield Trail regional landfill
as applicable. Special pick ups for large or heavy items are available by request and billed according to rates established by
ordinance. Any person found depositing large items in the alleys, without requesting special pick up, will be prosecuted to the fullest
extent of the law as per section 1-4-1 of this code.
7. Fees: The garbage collection fees set out in this chapter shall be included within the monthly water, sewer, or gas utility bill to each
water, sewer, solid waste or gas user, and the city shall only accept payment of the water, sewer or gas utility bill if the appropriate
garbage fee is paid therewith. Owners or occupants of premises which do not use city water, city sewer, and/or city gas shall be billed
monthly by separate billing for the appropriate garbage fee for their premises. Commercial owners or owners of high volume
residences or occupants of any of these premises which do not use city water and/or city gas shall be billed monthly by separate
billing for the appropriate garbage fees for their premises. In the event solid waste fees are not paid in full, garbage service will be
stopped, container will be removed, and a fee of thirty five dollars ($35.00) will be charged to reinstate services and return solid waste
container to said premises.
8. Appliances, Automotive Waste:
a. No person shall deposit in any alley, dumpster, poly cart, public street, or ROW, any refrigerators, freezers, washing machines,
clothes dryers or other appliances, mattresses, agricultural crop residues, live or dead animals, animal manures, mining waste, fuel
extraction waste, forestry waste, ash from industrial boilers, furnaces and incinerators, appliances, bricks, concrete, lumber, hot
ashes, dirt, plaster, sand, gravel, large chunks of metal, such as automobile frames, and other heavy materials, tires, automotive
batteries or any waste which cannot be deposited in the city's solid waste facility under NMED regulations.
b. Items described in this subsection A8 shall be taken by the responsible party to the Deming/Luna County transfer station or as
directed by the public works department. City personnel will inspect and determine if the item is acceptable for disposition in the city
landfill. Special pick ups for large or heavy items are available by request and billed according to rates established by ordinance.
Any person found depositing large items in the alleys, without requesting special pick up, will be prosecuted to the fullest extent of
the law as per section 1-4-1 of this code.
9. Penalty: Any person violating the requirements, stipulations, and provisions within this subsection shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code, which can be obtained at www.cityofdeming.org or 309 S. Gold Avenue.
B. Garbage Dumpsters:
1. Furnished By City: The city shall furnish solid waste containers to those residential or commercial users for dumping their garbage. If
the public works director decides the existing dumpster capacity is insufficient, such as consistently overfilled dumpsters with lids not
fully closed, the public works director reserves the right to determine the need, size, and number of additional dumpsters and/or
additional scheduled pick ups, make said changes and increase the bill as per standard ordinance fees. The user will receive written
notice prior to any mandated changes in dumpster size, location, or number of pick ups. Upon placement of the dumpster, and written
notice to the intended user, at a location on the residential or commercial property suitable for pick up by the city garbage truck, said
intended user shall thereafter exclusively use said solid waste containers. Scheduled pick ups are in operation from Monday to Friday.
Pick up schedule may be amended at any time by the public works director based on holidays, increased demand, or emergencies.
2. Delivery Of Items To Transfer Station: No items, bagged, bundled or otherwise, may be placed for pick up outside, adjacent to, or on
top of the dumpster. Said items shall be delivered to the Deming/Luna County transfer station or an additional pick up can be
requested and billed according to rates established by ordinance.
3. Prohibited Items In Dumpster: The following items are not allowed to be deposited in dumpster(s):
a. Any item that is not bagged,
b. Appliances, mattresses, boxes, furniture or auto parts,
c. Concrete, remodeling debris, or demolition material,
d. Hot ashes, oil, gas, grease, paint, or any form of hazardous or special waste,
e. Tree trimmings that exceed two feet (2') in length or three inches (3") in width.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 151/318
4. Area Needing Large Solid Waste Container; Notice; Protest: If the city shall determine, pursuant to its police powers, that any
particular area of the city would be better served by use of a large solid waste container for garbage collection, the public works
director may so designate such an area. If such an area is designated, the public works director shall give written notice, certified mail,
return receipt requested, to each property owner within the designated area. Each property owner shall have ten (10) days thereafter
to protest the designation. A final determination shall be rendered by the solid waste review committee. Thereafter, the property
owners shall pay a pro rata share of the cost and the monthly charge for such solid waste containers.
5. Dumpsters At City Parks And Facilities: Dumpsters provided at city parks are intended solely for park users. Dumpsters provided for
city facilities are intended solely for city personnel conducting official city business. No person shall deposit any solid waste into any
solid waste container provided by the city and located at city parks or facilities without prior express written approval.
6. Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this subsection shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-4-1
of this code. (Ord. 1260, 9-29-2016)
9-1-3: SOLID WASTE/GARBAGE COLLECTION:
A. The city and its duly authorized agents or employees shall have the exclusive right within the service area to collect or gather solid
waste, with the exception of nonresidential recyclables, commercially compacted items, hazardous wastes and other such materials
which the city is prohibited by law from collecting or disposing.
B. No person or organization may sell within the service area any services for the systematic and routine collection, transportation or
disposal of garbage, trash or solid waste except for special wastes as defined by NMED solid waste bureau (SWB), residential
recyclables, commercially compacted items, hazardous wastes and other such materials which the city is prohibited by law from
collecting or disposing as per NMED solid waste bureau. Authorization to provide these services within the city limits requires prior
written approval and contract through the public works department. The city reserves the right to negotiate a fee structure, if needed, for
any of these services.
C. The city shall provide sufficient employees and equipment for the collection and disposal of all garbage and the same shall be collected
as frequently as may be necessary in accordance with good sanitary practices. (Ord. 1260, 9-29-2016)
9-1-4: SOLID WASTE/GARBAGE COLLECTION FEES; DUMPSTERS:
Garbage collection fees per household for residences, commercial businesses, multi-family units, or high volume users shall be in
accordance with the payment schedules set out in the tables below.
A. Residential: The following residential fee applies to residential users who share a dumpster with others. The dumpsters are picked up
once per week as per the table below:
Solid Waste Category Fee
Residential $19.54 per month; minimum per residence for dumpster use
B. Commercial Businesses, Multi-Family, High Volume Users:
Times Per
Week Pick Up
1.5 Cubic
Yard Dumpster
3 Cubic
Yard Dumpster
1 $ 62.54 $ 85.99
2 99.02 138.11
3 138.11 192.30
4 174.59 250.16
5 208.46 304.87
1. Minimum Monthly Fees: Commercial businesses that share a dumpster with other businesses, shall pay a minimum monthly fee in
accordance with the payment schedule set out in the table below. The dumpsters are picked up once per week.
Solid Waste Category Fee
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 152/318
Shared dumpster $26.07
2. Dumpster Additional Pick Up Fee: Businesses, multi-family, or residences shall be charged fees for additional dumpster pick up in
accordance with the table below. "Additional pick up" is defined as an additional trip to empty dumpster(s) if the dumpster is
inaccessible during the regular collection schedule, overfull such that the lids do not shut correctly, or is not in the correct location for
pick up as determined by dumpster regulations under this section and section 9-1-5 of this chapter. Additional pick up fees will be
charged to the relevant address regardless if the request to pick up was issued by city staff or by resident request:
Solid Waste Category Fee
Additional pick up fees - commercial $18.00 per each dumpster
(Ord. 1260, 9-29-2016)
3. Commercial Dumpster Lid Locking Devices: Lid locking devices help provide an additional level of control with apparent dumpster
abuse. Lid locking devices prevent easy access to dumpsters as the lock arm keeps the dumpster lids from being easily raised.
Dumpsters will self-empty, via collection trucks, without removing the user furnished padlock. Devices are available for commercial
use only. Lid locking devices are available upon commercial user request, subsequent to city review, approval, and availability.
Devices will be mounted on the dumpster by city staff. Commercial users furnish the required padlock for each lid locking device and
the padlock(s) remains the responsibility of the commercial user to maintain. There is no cost associated with installation, nor
continued use, of lid locking devices. City staff reserves the right to install lid locking devices in commercial areas with consistently
overfull dumpsters or areas that dumpsters appear to be used as a general solid waste dumping site, not related to solid waste
generated by the commercial account holder. In that event, commercial users will be required to furnish and maintain padlocks for
each lid locking device installed. (Res. 17-10, 2-13-2017)
9-1-5: SOLID WASTE/GARBAGE COLLECTION FEES; CURBSIDE COLLECTION OF POLY CART CONTAINERS:
A. Residential/Commercial:
1. General:
a. Continuation Or Implementation Of Collection: Curbside collection shall continue where poly carts are currently in use or will be
implemented for any future subdivisions designed with no alleys or where the majority of residents agree to such services or where
the director of public works determines such poly cart containers to be necessary and appropriate. All shall be subject to ordinance
requirements as written or amended.
b. Optional Curbside Collection: Individual residents, owners, lessees, tenants, etc., not subject to subsection A1a of this section, may
volunteer for curbside collection with poly carts where applicable and reasonable as determined by the public works department.
Once a residential property has moved to curbside collection with individual poly carts, the residence, regardless of change of
ownership, will be bound to curbside collection and all applicable requirements.
c. Residential Customers: City shall provide one 96-gallon cart to each applicable account holder in the order determined by the public
works director except in circumstances determined by the public works director that a residence will be better served with a
dumpster. Poly carts are provided at the current adopted rate per month in accordance with the ordinance.
d. Commercial Customers: Upon request by small commercial/businesses and with city approval, the city shall provide one 96-gallon
poly cart or size appropriate poly cart(s) as determined by the public works director. Poly carts are provided at the current adopted
rate per month in accordance with the ordinance.
e. Poly Cart Implementation: Poly cart implementation and scheduling shall be established by the public works department as
applicable to this chapter. Solid waste department shall issue an anticipated schedule prior to implementation.
f. Poly Cart Provision, Construction: Poly carts shall be provided by the city to applicable account holders and shall be made of metal
or plastic with tightfitting covers. Solid waste shall not exceed the container capacity, and the container lid must be securely closed
when not in use. No person shall remove for their own use, someone else's container.
g. Poly Cart Return Upon Vacation Of Property: When owners, tenants, lessees, etc., vacate a property, the poly cart must be
available for pick up by the solid waste department. Property owners are responsible for the cost of replacement poly carts if not
made available or returned as scheduled.
h. Bagging Trash: All trash shall be bagged to prevent spilling when the poly cart is emptied into the collection truck.
2. Fees:
a. Where individual poly cart containers are in use or where the majority of residents agree to such services or where the director of
public works determines such poly cart containers to be necessary and appropriate, the fee shall be in accordance with the table
below. Poly carts are picked up a minimum of once per week.
b. The account holder shall be charged at the current adopted rate per month for each scheduled curbside collection pick up per poly
cart. Fees shall be in accordance with the payment schedule set out in the table below:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 153/318
POLY CART FEES
Number Of Pick Ups Per
Week
Residential
Each
Poly Cart
Residential Each Additional Poly
Cart
Commercial
Each
Poly Cart
Commercial Each Additional Poly
Cart
1 $19.54 $15.00 $19.54 $15.00
2 39.08 30.00 39.08 30.00
B. Precollection/Collection Practices:
1. All residential and commercial users shall comply with the rules and regulations established by the city for the use, care and location
of poly cart containers and shall keep the lids and covers, furnished for such containers, closed at all times except when they are
being filled, emptied or cleaned. All garbage and solid waste containers provided by the city shall be kept in neat and sanitary
condition at all times. Containers shall be only loaded with bagged garbage and in such a manner as they will self-empty when
inverted. All garbage must fit inside the cart with the lid completely closed. Overfilled poly carts (with lids not completely closed) will
not be emptied during the regular route schedule. Additional pick up fees will apply if the city is requested to return prior to the next
regularly scheduled pick up day or if the poly cart was skipped due to an overfilled or inaccessible poly cart.
2. The front of the cart should face the street with the cart's handle facing the residence. Place cart(s) curbside no later than six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. on the designated collection day, unless otherwise directed by the public works department.
3. Poly carts shall be located in an accessible location within the street ROW, including, but not limited to, one or more of the following:
a) five feet (5') from the curb between the curb and center of the street, b) five feet (5') from the edge of asphalt between the edge of
asphalt and the center of the street. Exceptions to the five foot (5') clearance rule such as dirt roads or narrow streets will be
determined by the public works department.
4. Carts must also be placed five feet (5') from any obstacle, including, but not limited to, parked vehicles, gas or electric meters, fences,
cable boxes, street signs, lampposts, trees, mailboxes, structures, etc.
5. The owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee of each individual property shall store the poly cart on their property for the purpose of and in
such a manner to keep the containers from being overturned or upset and the contents scattered.
6. No items, bagged, bundled or otherwise, may be placed for pick up outside, adjacent to, or on top of the poly cart. Scattered solid
waste or trash is the responsibility of the owner, occupant, tenant, lessee, etc. If said solid waste is not picked up or removed within
twenty four (24) hours of first notice by a city employee or resident message to city office, then city staff will schedule an additional
pick up and the applicable resident will be charged for said additional pick up at the current rate established by ordinance.
7. It is unlawful to maliciously damage any solid waste container owned by the city. Any person that damages any container provided for
residential or commercial users shall be liable to the city for the cost of repair, replacement, or loss of such container at the current
market rate including freight for such containers. All residential and commercial poly cart users shall be responsible for lost,
vandalized, damaged, stolen, or burnt poly carts and any, or all costs associated with replacement. The city shall be entitled to seek
restitution for all poly cart maintenance repairs or loss. If the public works director determines that damage was due to normal wear
and tear, repair of such items will be covered by the city.
8. Poly carts are to be placed at the designated pick up area on assigned pick up day only. It is the responsibility of the account holder to
notify the utility department when vacating premises so that assigned poly cart will be removed by the public works department.
Failure to do so could result in a replacement charge to the account holder.
9. The following items are not allowed to be deposited in poly cart(s):
a. Any item that is not bagged,
b. Appliances, mattresses, boxes, furniture or auto parts,
c. Concrete, remodeling debris, or demolition material,
d. Hot ashes, oil, gas, grease, paint, or any form of hazardous or special waste,
e. Tree trimmings that exceed two feet (2') in length or three inches (3") in width.
Solid Waste Category Fee
Residential/commercial 96 gallon replacement poly cart Current market value plus applicable freight
C. Collection Day:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 154/318
1. On the day curbside collection is scheduled for any premises, poly cart may be placed according to the setbacks noted under
subsection B, "Precollection/Collection Practices", of this section or unless otherwise specified by the public works director. City staff
recommends that residents place the poly cart at the designated location no earlier than twelve (12) to sixteen (16) hours prior to the
scheduled collection day. When there is more than one poly cart at a residence, poly carts must be separated a minimum of sixteen
inches (16") for ease of operation. Poly carts stacked side by side will not be picked up and an additional pick up charge will be
applicable. Poly cart(s), when placed at the designated location, shall not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Place cart(s)
curbside no later than six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the designated collection day. It shall be the responsibility of the resident to deliver
the poly carts to such point for collection and return the empty containers from such points to the usual place of storage, within twenty
four (24) hours of collecting. No items, bagged, bundled or otherwise, may be placed for pick up outside, adjacent to, or on top of the
poly cart.
2. All collections made by the city for other than qualified physically disabled residents (see exempt service collection), shall be made at
curbside from the streets, except where special circumstances warrant otherwise and are approved by the public works director. (Ord.
1260, 9-29-2016)
9-1-6: SPECIAL SERVICES:
A. Special Services: Upon request a special pick up will be provided for items that cannot be placed in poly carts or dumpsters such as
trash overflow, discarded furniture, appliances, mattresses, yard waste, trees, tree and shrubbery trimmings, etc. Customers must call
city hall and make an appointment for removal of such items. On the agreed appointment date and time customers will have items
placed at the location specified by the public works department and deemed acceptable and safely accessible for the city to remove
such items. Items must be within city ROW prior to collection by the city. For collection of special request solid waste, the cost shall be
as shown in the table below. All costs and fees associated with this special service shall be automatically applied to customer's monthly
bill.
SPECIAL GARBAGE PICK UP FEES
Special pick ups, if applicable and upon request $25.00 per 1/2 hour (30 minutes) to include 2 employees and 1 collection truck
The city highly encourages residents to deliver solid waste that is not allowed or does not fit in a poly cart or dumpster, to the Deming/Luna
County transfer station, Butterfield Trail regional landfill (as applicable), or obtain the services of a licensed general contractor or licensed
yard cleaning service to transport and properly dispose of said solid waste.
B. Out Of Town Commercial Users: A two hundred dollar ($200.00) refundable deposit is required for each commercial user that intends to
set up an account to deposit solid waste at Butterfield Trail regional landfill. Deposit is refundable upon full payment of accrued costs for
solid waste fees together with any or all late fees. (Ord. 1260, 9-29-2016)
9-1-7: SOLID WASTE/GARBAGE DEPOSITS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
A. Unlawful Solid Waste Deposits:
1. Prohibited: No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises within the city limits shall deposit or allow to be
deposited on such premises any solid waste except in a proper container designated to that location. Any such person who fails to
properly dispose of said solid waste or fails to remove such solid waste or special waste within ten (10) days after the same is
deposited on said premises shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. No such person shall
deposit or allow the deposit of any material in such solid waste containers or facilities if New Mexico environmental department
regulations prohibit the deposit of such material in the city's solid waste facility or when the solid waste container contains labeling
prohibiting the deposit of such material. Contact the public works department to assist with identifying NMED prohibited materials.
2. Unauthorized Deposit Of Solid Waste: No person shall deposit any solid waste into any solid waste container on private property or
into any solid waste container provided by the city (such as dumpsters located at city parks, city facilities, or approved special events),
for the use of the persons owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises without written permission from the city or the
person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of such premises.
3. Notice: Prior to collection of unauthorized or prohibited waste by the city or designated agent, the owner of the property where the
waste is located will be given written notice to remove the waste. After ten (10) days, the city will schedule a time to collect the waste
and subsequently bill the owner for actual costs plus ten percent (10%).
4. Removal Of Solid Waste By City: Any qualified agency hereafter designated by the public works director shall be authorized to
remove any solid waste from any premises on which such solid waste exists, after the expiration of said ten (10) day period.
5. Assessment Of Removal Costs: After the removal of such solid waste by or on behalf of the city, the city shall be entitled to make an
assessment against the premises for the costs of such removal and in event of the failure of the owner, lessee or other person
occupying said premises to pay the same, file an applicable lien against said premises pursuant to New Mexico Statutes Annotated
sections 3-48-5 and 3-48-7.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 155/318
6. Construction Sites: Building permittees shall be responsible for containment or removal on a daily basis of all solid waste and debris
generated from a construction site. Disposal of such waste and debris shall be to disposal sites in accordance with this chapter.
7. Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this subsection shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-4-1
of this code. (Ord. 1260, 9-29-2016)
9-1-8: LANDFILL REGULATIONS:
A. Site Designation: The city has or shall hereafter designate a site or sites for the receiving of garbage and solid waste. Any person who
removes any garbage or solid waste from within the city limits shall only dispose of it in such designated site or sites. Current designated
sites are Deming/Luna County transfer station and Butterfield Trail regional landfill.
B. Manner And Hours Of Disposal:
1. All garbage and solid waste deposited under the provisions of this chapter shall only be transported, received and deposited in
accordance with the regulations of the city and NMED solid waste bureau regulations now or hereafter promulgated.
2. Any and all waste deposited under the terms of this section shall be the sole property of the city, which may use, dispose of, recycle
or otherwise treat as it may see fit. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge or remove any garbage or solid waste from the site
or sites after the same has been deposited, unless allowed by the solid waste department.
3. Hours for which said site or sites shall be open shall be designated by the city and the hours for which the same shall be open shall
be posted in and upon said site or sites. It shall be unlawful for anyone to enter upon or deposit any waste at any time when the site or
sites are not open to the public.
C. User Fees: The city shall hereafter establish a schedule of fees for deposit of special wastes at the site or sites designated. The term
"special wastes" shall include:
1. Hauler Waste Which Increases Cost: Wastes from private or commercial haulers whose quantity or type of waste increases the cost
of disposal.
2. Hauler Waste Originating Outside Of Luna County: Wastes from private or commercial haulers whose garbage or solid waste
originates outside of Luna County.
3. Other Waste: Any other special waste charges as hereafter established by the city.
4. Permit Required To Deposit Special Waste: It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any special waste on any site or sites of the
city without first having paid the required fee and obtaining a permit, if required, for the disposal of such special waste.
5. Fees Established: Special waste fees shall be in accordance with the payment schedule set out in the table below:
Minimum Fees
Effective TBD
Special waste fees:
Noncommercial passenger car tires - 4 or less No fee
Noncommercial passenger car tires - 5 or more $ 2.20 per tire
Commercial generated car tires 2.20 per tire
Truck and other equipment tires 11.31 per tire
Large animals (accepted at BTRL only) 25.13 per animal
Transfer station fees:
Residential inside Luna County limits No charge for covered load
Residential inside Luna County limits $5.00 fine per uncovered load
Residential outside Luna County limits $55.85 per ton
Small commercial maximum 1 ton per load 46.02 per ton
Butterfield Trail regional landfill:
Residential None accepted
Commercial deliveries $32.88 per ton
Other waste requiring special handling as determined by the public works department 46.02 per ton
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 156/318
D. Negotiation Of Fees: The city of Deming may, for local government entities or projects benefiting the city, negotiate landfill fees and enter
into written contracts establishing said fees. Negotiation of fees will be determined by the review committee identified under section 9-1-
9 of this chapter.
E. Adjustment Of Fees: Hereafter, the adjustment of rates and fees to be charged by the city for collection and disposal of solid waste,
including landfill charges, shall be pursuant to an appropriate ordinance and/or resolution adopted by the city council at a lawfully
conducted meeting with prior notice regarding any proposed adjustments. Excluded items are listed under subsection D, "Negotiation Of
Fees", of this section.
F. Prevention Of Litter: Waste loads entering the landfill or solid waste transfer station shall be secured with an appropriate device such as a
tarp or cover, capable of containing loose solid waste in transport and prevent solid waste from blowing off in transport. Waste loads
shall also be secured or contained sufficiently that the contents do not shift during transport and fall out. If the waste load is unsecured
or the cover deemed ineffective, the hauler will be assessed a fine of five dollars ($5.00) and a receipt given. If the hauler does not pay
or contests the charge, a no traffic citation with notice to appear in municipal court will be issued by the designated solid waste
personnel.
G. Enforcement: The city reserves the right to provide full time enforcement specific to this title with this chapter as the primary focus for
enforcement. Solid waste personnel so designated by the solid waste code enforcement officer or public works director are granted
limited code enforcement powers pertaining to this chapter. The city reserves the right to refuse service to any individual, or group of
individuals, that are documented repeat offenders of the rules, regulations, stipulations or provisions of this chapter.
H. Deming/Luna County Transfer Station: The city reserves the right to impose, implement and collect tipping fees at the Deming/Luna
County transfer station, pursuant to an amendment to this chapter by reference of resolution.
I. Penalty: Any person violating the rules, stipulations, and/or provisions of this section shall be, upon conviction, punished as provided by
section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1260, 9-29-2016)
9-1-9: SOLID WASTE REVIEW COMMITTEE:
A six (6) person committee will review solid waste questions related to this chapter. Committee members may review questions, items of
concern, negotiate fees for government entities, negotiate fees for projects benefiting the city, provide guidance or clarification of language
as it relates to this chapter and assess alleys for mandated curbside collection transition. Disputes regarding solid waste provisions and
regulations outlined in this chapter will be resolved by majority vote of the committee. Committee members will be comprised of the mayor
pro tem, city administrator, public works director, solid waste foreman and two (2) members of the general public appointed by the mayor.
The solid waste foreman will attend as a nonvoting member in an advisory position only. Said committee will meet as needed or as directed
by the mayor. (Ord. 1260, 9-29-2016)
Chapter 2
NATURAL GAS SERVICE RATES AND REGULATIONS
9-2-1: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE:
Any person desiring to be furnished with gas by the city gas system shall make a written application therefor upon the form provided for that
purpose by the city and shall agree and comply with all the rules and conditions therein contained. (Ord. 187, 12-16-1935)
9-2-2: GAS RATES:
The monthly rates for natural gas furnished to consumers shall be the city's costs of transportation and operations necessary for the
delivery of natural gas, including provisions for reserves, plus the actual cost to purchase the gas. The costs for transportation, operations
and reserves shall be established by the city council. The monthly rates to consumers shall be adjusted by the city administrator or
designee to reflect changes in the actual cost to purchase natural gas. This change goes into effect on the next full billing cycle after
publication.
A. Gas Use Rates:
Residential:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 157/318
Base (no usage) $ 10.00 per month
Incremental usage 1.10/MMBtu
Commercial And Industrial:
Base 1 (no usage) Users up to 4,000 units per year 18.00 per month
Base 2 (no usage) Users 4,001 units to 20,000 units per year 60.00 per month
Base 3 (no usage) Users over 20,000 units per year 300.00 per month
Incremental usage Up to 1,000 units per month 1.20/MMBtu
Incremental usage Greater than 1,000 units per month 1.10/MMBtu
Per year usage will be calculated on previous calendar year and adjusted for the January billing cycle. New midyear hookups for
commercial base rates will be established by the public works director.
The city of Deming may, for large users of natural gas, negotiate the price of gas and enter into written contracts establishing gas rates for
up to thirteen (13) months at a time. Natural gas users purchasing two hundred thousand (200,000) cubic feet or more per month shall be
considered "large users" for the purpose of this section.
B. Gas Meter Fees:
275 cfh meter $ 400.00
400 cfh meter 600.00
750 cfh meter 1,000.00
1,000 cfh meter 1,500.00
3,000 cfh meter or greater 6,000.00
The city installation fees for the two hundred seventy five (275) cfh gas meters will be one-half (1/2) the above listed fees if the service taps
and lines have been installed by others.
C. Gas Line Extension Charges:
1. Schedule Of Charges: The cost of installation of utility lines for gas shall be based on the actual costs of pipe, appurtenances, labor,
equipment and other applicable costs.
2. Maintenance Of Schedule: A schedule of costs will be periodically updated by the director of public works. Pipe and appurtenance
charges will reflect current costs of material in stock as purchased and actual costs will be charged for other charges. Pipe,
appurtenance, and other charges on the schedule shall be changed administratively. As labor and equipment costs are updated, they
will be presented to city council for ratification.
3. City Option: The city of Deming will have the option to allow developers to install all or some portion of utilities in their respective
development that for technical or scheduling reasons city crews cannot perform.
4. City Specifications And Ownership: All utilities installed by others that are incorporated into the city system shall be constructed to city
specifications and shall, upon acceptance by the city, be owned, operated, and maintained by the city.
5. Provisions For Future Connections: If another utility user obtains a connection to a utility main line extension paid for under the
provisions of this chapter, within five (5) years of the date of payment of the original extension charges, the city will charge the new
user and refund to the original payee, one-half (1/2) the original per foot rate paid, times the number of frontage feet of the property for
which the new connection is obtained. If a new utility main extension is made off of an existing utility main extension, within five (5)
years of the date of payment of the original extension charges paid for under the provisions of this chapter, the city will charge the new
utility extension user and refund to the original payee, one-third (1/3) of the original extension charges paid or one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), whichever is less. Refunds are not to exceed cost to the utility user.
6. Other Provisions: Utility extensions shall be to the middle of the subject property. A gas flow integrity model is to be done prior to utility
extensions to ensure proper line sizing for pressure, capacity, etc. (Ord. 1154, 4-9-2007)
9-2-3: INSTALLATION OR RELOCATION OF GAS METERS:
A. Placement In Alleyways: All gas meters hereafter initially installed by the city or all existing gas meters hereafter relocated for any reason
whatsoever by the city shall be installed in the alleyways of the city and each gas user or consumer shall be required to extend gas
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 158/318
service from such meters into such user's or consumer's property. All such service lines, beginning at the outlet of the meter and either
installed by the city or user, shall be the property of the user.
B. Relocation: Should the city require the removal of any existing gas meter from the property of any user or consumer, the city may, at its
option, relocate such meter to an alleyway adjacent to the property of such user or consumer, but at the expense of the city; provided,
that nothing herein contained shall require the city to connect or reconnect any gas line for such user or consumer.
C. Meter Installation Fees: All charges and fees heretofore imposed for the installation of any gas meter shall be reviewed periodically by
the city and adjustments made as deemed necessary. (Ord. 1190, 7-13-2009)
9-2-4: DISCONTINUANCE OF USE:
A. Gas User: Any user of gas may discontinue the use thereof, by giving a written notice to that effect to the billing department of the gas
system, and by a payment of all sums due for said service, including the month in which the notice was given.
B. City: The city shall have the right, at any time, to discontinue the delivery of gas to any user, on account of any emergent need or for the
purpose of making necessary alterations and repairs, for such time as may be reasonable and unavoidable, and without notice in case
of emergency. (Ord. 1190, 7-13-2009)
Chapter 3
WATER AND SEWER RATES AND CHARGES
9-3-1: RATES, FEES AND CHARGES:
The following rates are hereby established and shall be collected by the public works department for water/sewer furnished by the city
effective on the next full billing cycle after publication: (Ord. 1152, 2-12-2007)
A. Water Rates, Fees And Charges:
1. General: Water use rates payable to the city as established and identified in subsection A2 of this section shall be phased in over a
three (3) year period. The specific rates are identified in the table that appears in subsection A2 of this section. The water use rates for
the first year shall be effective on the effective date hereof and the first year fee shall be calculated for the first full billing cycle
immediately following the effective date hereof. The second and third year fees shall be effective on the annual anniversary date of
the first full billing cycle following the effective date hereof.
Starting with the first year of the phase in of the new water use rates, the quantity of water included in the base rates shall be four
hundred (400) cubic feet. In the second year of the phase in of the new water use rates, the quantity of water included in the base
rates shall be two hundred (200) cubic feet. In the third year of the phase in of the new water use rates, the quantity of water included
in the base rates shall be zero cubic feet. (Ord. 1185, 4-16-2009)
2. Water User Rates: Water user rates shall be in accordance with the time period schedule and the payment schedule set out in the
table below:
Time Period
Rates
(Base Rate Includes 0 Gallons Of Water)
Base Rate
Incremental Rate Per
100 Gallons (1 Unit)
May 15 to October 14:
Residential $ 3.00 $0.197845
Commercial 10.00 0.263348
Bulk rate (meter deposit
required)
- $5.76 per 1,000 gallons
Effluent from wastewater
treatment plant
Fee is 50% of water rates charged to residential users, inside the city or outside the city, as
applicable and as seasonally adjusted
October 15 to May 14:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 159/318
Residential $ 3.00 $0.164425
Commercial 10.00 0.219234
Bulk rate (meter deposit
required)
- $4.80 per 1,000 gallons
Effluent from wastewater
treatment plant
Fee is 50% of water rates charged to residential users, inside the city or outside the city, as
applicable and as seasonably adjusted
(Ord. 1252, 6-8-2015)
3. Water User Billings: Water user rates for residential and commercial users and bulk rate both inside city limits and outside city limits
shall be billed on a monthly basis, along with gas, sewer and garbage collection fees where applicable and the city shall not accept
payment of the garbage, sewer or the gas utility bill unless the appropriate water fee is paid therewith. Water users who do not use
city garbage collection or city sewers or city gas shall be billed monthly by separate billing for the appropriate water fees for their
premises. (Ord. 1185, 4-16-2009)
4. Time Periods: The May 15 and October 15 dates referenced in the table in subsection A2 of this section refer to billing cycle dates.
(Ord. 1210, 4-22-2011)
B. Water And Sewer Main Line Extensions:
1. Schedule Of Charges: The cost of installation of utility lines for sewer and water shall be based on the actual costs of pipe,
appurtenances, labor, equipment and other applicable costs.
2. Maintenance Of Schedule: A schedule of costs will be periodically updated by the director of public works. Pipe and appurtenance
charges will reflect current costs of material in stock as purchased and actual costs will be charged for other charges. Pipe,
appurtenance, and other charges on the schedule shall be changed administratively. As labor and equipment costs are updated, they
will be presented to city council for ratification.
3. City Option: The city of Deming will have the option to allow developers to install all or some portion of utilities in their respective
development that for technical or scheduling reasons city crews cannot perform.
4. City Specifications And Ownership: All utilities installed by others that are incorporated into the city system shall be constructed to city
specifications and shall upon acceptance by the city, be owned, operated, and maintained by the city.
5. Provisions For Future Connections: If another utility user obtains a connection to a utility main line extension paid for under the
provisions of this chapter, within five (5) years of the date of payment of the original extension charges, the city will charge the new
user and refund to the original payee, one-half (1/2) the original per foot rate paid, times the number of frontage feet of the property for
which the new connection is obtained. If a new utility main extension is made off of an existing utility main extension, within five (5)
years of the date of payment of the original extension charges paid for under the provisions of this chapter, the city will charge the new
utility extension user and refund to the original payee, one-third (1/3) of the original extension charges paid or one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), whichever is less. Refunds not to exceed costs to utility user.
6. Other Provisions: Utility extensions shall be to the middle of the subject property. A hydraulic model is to be done prior to utility
extensions to ensure proper line sizing for pressure, capacity, fire flow, etc. (Ord. 1152, 2-12-2007)
C. Installation Of Meter Fees:
1. Water service:
Meter Size
<8"
Diameter Main 8" - 12" Main
3/4 inch $ 400.00 $ 800.00
1 inch 600.00 1,000.00
11/2 inch 800.00 1,200.00
2 inch 1,200.00 1,600.00
3 inch 1,800.00 2,200.00
4 inch 2,200.00 2,600.00
2. Fire line tap: Three hundred dollars ($300.00) per diameter inch.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 160/318
3. Sewer tap:
Tap Size
<10"
Diameter Main 10" - 18" Main
4 inch PVC $400.00 $ 800.00
6 inch PVC 800.00 1,200.00
(Ord. 1231, 11-13-2012)
Chapter 4
WATER SERVICE REGULATIONS
9-4-1: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE:
Before water shall be supplied to any person or for any premises from the city mains, the owner or occupant of the property shall make
written application for such service upon a form provided by the public works department for that purpose at said offices. Said application
shall contain the following:
A. The name and phone number of the applicant;
B. The billing address of the applicant;
C. Name of street on which property fronts and the official house number assigned to the premises for which water is desired;
D. The applicant's relation to the property, as owner, occupant or lessee;
E. A contract, on the part of the applicant, including, but not limited to, the following: to pay the stipulated rates at the time and in the
manner provided for in this chapter; to change rates and to temporarily discontinue the service at any time without notice to the
consumer; and further to provide that the public works department or the public works director shall not be responsible for any damages,
by water or otherwise, resulting from defective plumbing, broken or faulty service, or water mains, or resulting from any condition of the
water itself, or any substance that may be mixed with, or be in the water, as delivered to the consumer. (Ord. 139, 2-7-1921; amd. 2001
Code)
9-4-2: WATER METERS:
A. Property Of City: All water meters installed by the public works department shall remain at all times the property of the city, and shall be
maintained and repaired when rendered unserviceable through fair wear and tear, and renewed by the public works department;
provided, that where repair or adjustment of any meter is rendered necessary by the act, neglect or carelessness of the owner or
occupant of the premises, any expense caused to the department thereby shall be charged against and collected from the owner of the
premises.
B. Removal For Nonpayment; Reinstallation Fee: In the event that any water meter of the city is removed for nonpayment or delinquent
water charges, the owner or occupant of the premises shall pay for the reinstallation of the water meter a minimum charge of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) prior to the installation thereof.
C. Properties Under Separate Ownership: No one service shall provide water to properties under separate ownership.
D. Bypass Restricted: No bypass or connection between the meter and the main shall be made, maintained or permitted.
E. Examination And Testing:
1. Customer Request Test; Deposit: Any customer shall have the right to request that the meter through which water is being furnished
be examined and tested by the public works department with the following amounts charged for the various sizes:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 161/318
a. For testing a five-eighths inch (5/8") meter, ten dollars ($10.00).
b. For testing a one inch (1") meter, twenty dollars ($20.00).
2. Registering Overage: If on such an examination and test the meter shall be found to register over three percent (3%) more water than
actually passes through it, another meter will be substituted therefor, and the fee charged in the application for a test shall be repaid to
the person making the application.
F. Failure To Register Correctly: Wherever a meter gets out of order and fails to register correctly, the consumer shall be charged with an
average daily consumption as shown by the meter when in good working order and registering correctly.
G. City Replacement Of Meters: The city of Deming retains unto itself the right to replace any water meter, at any time, for any reason, at its
sole discretion. (Ord. 1190, 7-13-2009)
9-4-3: WATER USER PROVISIONS:
A. Approved Shutoff: Consumers shall install an approved shutoff inside the property line, at a location accessible in case of emergency.
B. Check Valve: If in the judgment of the public works director, the placing of an approved check valve on the property side of a water meter
of any consumer is considered necessary for the safety of the water system, such approved check valve shall be immediately installed,
at the expense of the consumer, after due notice in writing shall have been given to the consumer by the public works director.
C. Cross Connections: Water hookups to properties with private wells or other potential hazardous cross connections will not be allowed
until the city plumbing inspector has certified that there exists a physical separation between the city water system and the hazard.
D. Authority To Turn Water On Or Off: It shall be unlawful for any person or entity, other than the authorized agents or employees of the
public works department, to turn on or turn off water service. Water turned off by the city for delinquent bills, leaks or other reasons
cannot be turned back on until the reason for turn off has been corrected and the turn on authorized by the public works department. If
an unauthorized turn on is made, the meter and/or service will be removed and all applicable penalties will be charged against the user.
E. Water Turn Off For Repairs: The public works director may at any time order the water cut off from any premises connected with the
waterworks system, without notice, for repairs, extensions or other necessary purposes.
F. Plumber Requirements: Whenever plumbers or other persons connecting service pipe to the property side of a meter may use the water
for testing the pipes, they shall at all times shut off the water from unoccupied premises before leaving same, and leave meter box
properly installed to full depth in the ground or sidewalk, with cover securely fastened to top of and square with top of box.
G. Consumer Supplying Water To Others: It shall be unlawful for any consumer to supply water to any person other than to the occupant of
the premises of said consumer, or to knowingly permit leaks or wastage of water, or for any person to tap, open or connect with any
water main or pipe which forms a part of the waterworks system of the city. (Ord. 1190, 7-13-2009)
9-4-4: FIRE HYDRANTS:
A. Use By City Officials: Fire hydrants are provided for the sole purpose of extinguishing fires and are to be opened and used only by the
public works and fire departments or such persons as may be specially authorized by the public works director. For any unauthorized
connections, all applicable penalties will be charged against the user.
B. Proper Opening Of Hydrants: To ensure the safety of the fire hydrants for fire protection, any person authorized to open fire hydrants will
be required to use only an approved spanner wrench, and to replace the caps on the outlets when the same are not in use. Failure to do
so will be sufficient cause to prohibit further use of the hydrants and the refusal to grant subsequent permits for the use of fire hydrants.
C. Permit For Opening: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or carry away any water from any fire hydrant without a written permit,
and all such water will be accounted for by means designated by the public works director.
D. Accessibility: It shall be unlawful for any person to place upon or about any fire hydrant, gate valve, manhole, stopcock, meter or meter
box, or any object, material, debris, vehicle or structure of any kind so as to prevent free access to the same at all times. (Ord. 1190, 7-
13-2009)
9-4-5: PIPES PROPERTY OF CITY:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 162/318
A. City Ownership: All water pipes laid in the streets, alleys, or public thoroughfares shall be and become the property of the city.
B. Construction Plans And Specifications: All water systems laid within the corporate limits and connected with or supplying water from the
water mains of the city shall be constructed under the supervision and in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the
public works director.
C. Sale Of Water: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell water for domestic purposes within the corporate limits without having first
received permission so to do from the city council by application, approved by the public works director.
D. Street, Utility Or Other Construction Work, Notice: All contractors, persons or corporations who open, grade, regrade, fill, excavate or
work a street, alley or public right of way, shall give ten (10) days' written notice to the public works director for the removal or
displacement of any water mains, pipes, fittings, meters or other works or waterworks material that may interfere with such work, and
failure to so furnish notice, or any damage resultant from such failure will be charged against the person responsible. (Ord. 1190, 7-13-
2009)
9-4-6: SERVICES OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
A. Contracts: The city administrator is hereby authorized on behalf of the city to enter into contracts for the sale of surplus water with
property owners whose lands are located outside the city limits, and which property owners desire to receive city water.
B. Application For Service:
1. It shall be the duty of the public works director to confer with property owners whose lands are located outside of the city limits and
who wish to make application for usage of surplus water under the terms of contracts herein provided for.
2. The public works director shall determine if it is feasible to furnish such persons with surplus water, and if so, he shall receive their
applications for water and shall convey such applications to the city council along with his recommendations as to the availability of
surplus water and as to the feasibility of such surplus water, if any be available, to the persons making application.
C. Deposit Required: A deposit equal to twice the estimated monthly bill shall be made by any person desiring to enter into any contract as
herein provided. Such deposit shall be payable to the city before any contract herein provided for shall be valid.
D. Charges For Service1: The landowners who shall enter into the above contract with the city shall be required to pay fifty percent (50%)
over the rates and/or charges of water users for commensurate service when furnished within the city limits for all necessary labor,
material, appurtenances, water meters, water usage, water taps and any permits which are necessary under the above contract and the
provisions of this chapter. The payments which may be due hereunder shall be made to the city prior to the time of installation or the
commencing of such work.
E. Discontinuance For Nonpayment Of Bills: All nonresident users who may enter into contracts herein provided for shall comply with all
provisions of this chapter and regulations for the payment of bills submitted under any such provisions or regulations, but in no event
shall the payment be deferred for a period to exceed ten (10) days, and if such bills are not paid within the ten (10) day period after
submission, the city clerk shall discontinue service to the lands of any nonresident owner not complying herewith.
F. Water Emergency: At such times as there may be a water emergency, as set out in subsection 9-4-7H of this chapter, the city council
may further increase the water rates, if necessary, to discourage excessive use of water and implement incremental steps to discourage
excessive use of water as listed in subsection 9-4-7H of this chapter. (Ord. 1190, 7-13-2009)
9-4-7: OUTDOOR WATER CONSERVATION:
A. Definition: For purposes of this section "irrigation" means the watering of turf, trees, shrubs, flowers, ornamental grasses, plants, native
plant material or other vegetation through overhead spray heads, handheld hose, bubblers, drip emitters or other similar devices for
delivering water.
The definitions contained in section 12-2-1 of this code are incorporated into this section by reference.
B. Water Conservation Compliance: No person who uses water from the city of Deming water supply system shall make, cause, use or
permit the use of water received from the city water supply system for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, institutional,
governmental or any other purposes in a manner contrary to any of the provisions of this section.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 163/318
C. Turf And Landscape Irrigation: The following mandatory water conservation measures shall apply to all customers of, or persons that use
or receive water from the city water supply system:
1. All outdoor irrigation of turf, trees, shrubs, flowers, ornamental grasses, plants, native plant material or other vegetation on residential,
industrial and commercial property with even numbered addresses may irrigate on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays; and for odd
numbered addresses, such vegetation may be irrigated only on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays; and on Sundays, properties
with either odd or even addresses may irrigate. Provisions of this subsection shall apply during the entire calendar year.
2. From April 1 through September 30 of each calendar year all outdoor irrigation of turf and other vegetation is prohibited between the
hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
3. The city planning and zoning commission shall have the authority to review variance requests upon written application of any person
and shall make a recommendation to the city council who shall make the final decision.
D. Nonessential Water Use Restrictions: The following restrictions shall apply to all customers of, or persons who use or receive water from
the city of Deming water supply system:
1. The washing of houses, or automobiles, trucks, trailers, recreational vehicles, boats, airplanes or any other type of mobile equipment
shall be done only with a handheld bucket or pail, or a handheld hose equipped with a shutoff nozzle that completely shuts off the flow
of water. This restriction does not apply to commercial car washes or a commercial service station. When used in this section,
"bucket" or "pail" means a container holding five (5) gallons or less.
2. After the effective date hereof, no building permit for a commercial car wash or service station shall be issued until the applicant for
such permit provides to the city building inspector a certification that the car wash will use no more than fifty (50) gallons of water per
vehicle washed or integrate a water reclamation system. Existing commercial car wash establishments that upgrade their facilities
shall upgrade to the extent that the car wash will use no more than fifty (50) gallons of water per vehicle washed or an integrated
water reclamation system.
E. Wasting Water Prohibited: The following uses of water are considered wasting water and are prohibited:
1. Irrigating any vegetation, or otherwise using water from the city of Deming water supply system to permit or cause water to pond, or to
flow, spray or otherwise move or be discharged from the premises of any person who receives water from the city of Deming to or
upon any street, alley, gutter, ditch, drain or other public right of way.
2. Failing to repair a leak in a system that delivers or discharges water within ten (10) working days of discovering or being informed of
such leak.
3. Washing of sidewalks, streets, driveways, parking lots, service station aprons, exteriors of homes or apartments, commercial or
industrial buildings, government or institutional buildings, or any other impervious outdoor surface with a hose, or a pressure washer
except in emergencies, or in construction preparation, or where such cleaning is mandated by federal, state or local law.
4. In this section a "swimming pool" means any portable or permanent structure containing water twenty four inches (24") in depth and
containing one thousand one hundred twenty two (1,122) gallons of water and intended for recreational purposes. All swimming pools
constructed after the effective date hereof must be equipped with filtration, pumping and recirculation systems. It is unlawful to drain
swimming pools into the street, alley, gutter, ditch, drain or any other public right of way. Swimming pools may be drained into the
sanitary sewer system.
5. The serving of drinking water in restaurants except upon request of the customer.
F. Variances And Permits: The following procedure shall apply for those persons seeking a variance from the provisions of this section:
1. The planning and zoning commission shall review hardship or special cases of persons, groups, organizations or corporations who
cannot fully comply with the provisions of this section. The planning and zoning commission shall review written applications from
persons, groups, organizations and corporations who claim some hardship or special circumstances. The planning and zoning
commission shall recommend approval to the city council of an application only for reasons of economic hardship or medical hardship,
or if there is a legitimate public health or safety concern. An "economic hardship" is defined as a threat to an individual's or business'
primary source of income. A "medical hardship" is defined as a situation where it is determined that a person's ill health or medical
condition requires a dependency upon others to irrigate or water. Under no circumstances shall inconvenience or the potential for
damages to landscaping be considered an economic hardship, which justifies a variance. The decision of the city council is final and
binding. The prescribed fee for such variance applications shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) or as otherwise prescribed by the city
council.
2. A variance or permit granted by the city council expires under its own terms and conditions, but in no case shall a variance be granted
or a permit issued for a period greater than three (3) years. Any person issued a variance or permit shall provide proof of such
variance or permit upon demand of any person authorized to enforce this section.
G. Exceptions To Enforcement: The following shall constitute exceptions from compliance with the provisions of this section:
1. The water is the result of natural events such as rain or snow.
2. The flow of water is the result of temporary failures or malfunctions of the water system.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 164/318
3. The flow of water is the result of water used for firefighting purposes including the inspection and pressure testing of fire hydrants or
the use of water for firefighting training activities.
4. The use of water is required for the control of dust or the compaction of soil as may be required by law.
5. The water is used to wash down areas where flammable or otherwise hazardous substances have been spilled and creates a
dangerous situation.
6. The water is used to prevent or abate public health, safety or accident hazards when alternate methods are not available.
7. The water is used for routine inspection or maintenance of the water supply system.
8. The water is used to facilitate construction within public rights of way in accordance with the requirements of the city and good
construction practices.
9. The use of water is permitted under the terms of a variance or permit granted by the city council.
10. The water is used for street sweeping, sewer maintenance or other established utility and public works practices.
11. Watering contrary to the provisions of subsection C of this section may be permissible for one day only where application of
chemicals requires immediate watering to preserve an existing lawn. In cases of commercial application, a receipt from a commercial
lawn treatment company indicating the date of treatment, the address of the property treated, the name and address of the
commercial contractor and the chemical treatment required shall constitute evidence that the owner or person responsible for the
property is entitled to this exception. Where treatment with a noncommercial application of chemicals requires immediate watering to
preserve an existing lawn, the owner or person responsible for the property must contact the city code enforcement officer prior to
application of the chemicals and provide evidence satisfactory to the code enforcement officer for approval of this exception.
12. Outdoor irrigation necessary for the establishment of newly seeded or sodded turf grass and landscaping in new residential and
nonresidential developments.
H. Water Emergency, Restriction Of Water Use: The city council, on the advice of the city administrator and the director of public works,
may declare a water emergency in case of severe drought, any condition that interrupts the ability of the city to supply water such as
loss of a major water transmission line, loss of or damage to the water treatment facility, or extended periods of high consumer demand,
or where restriction on the use of water is necessary because of natural disaster, or war, or to protect the public health, safety and
welfare, or to preserve the water supply. Where a water emergency is declared, the city council may restrict or prohibit, by resolution,
any or all of the following uses, or any uses not specified, of water from the city water system:
1. Irrigation of lawns, trees, shrubs, or any other outdoor vegetation.
2. The washing of all motor vehicles and other equipment, except in commercial car wash facilities.
3. The filling or refilling of, or addition of water to swimming pools.
4. The issuance or granting of any variances to the provisions of this section.
5. The operation of any ornamental fountain or other similar structure.
6. Any other use deemed appropriate by the city council in the circumstances.
I. Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1190, 7-13-2009)
Chapter 5
SEWER USE REGULATIONS
9-5-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the SEWER USE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 699, 6-14-1982)
9-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
BOD (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (5') outside the inner face of the
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 165/318
building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
COD (Denoting Chemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the chemical oxidation of organic and inorganic matter under
standard laboratory procedure by the dichromate reflux method expressed in milligrams per liter.
CITY: The city of Deming, New Mexico.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
DIRECTOR: The director of public works of the city or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage,
and sale of produce.
HEALTH OFFICER: Any person or his authorized representative so appointed by the city or any New Mexico environmental improvement
agency representative charged with approval or inspection of public or private wastewater facilities.
INDUSTRIAL LIQUID WASTES: All waterborne solids, liquids or gaseous wastes resulting from any industrial manufacturing or food
processing operation or process, or from the development of any natural resource or any mixture of these with water or domestic sewage
as distinct from normal domestic sewage. Industrial manufacturing processes shall include, but are not limited to: ordnance and
accessories; food and allied products; tobacco manufacturers; textile mill products; apparel and other finished products made from fabrics
and similar materials; lumber and wood products, except furniture; furniture and fixtures; printing, publishing, and allied industries;
chemicals and allied products; petroleum refining and related industries; rubber and miscellaneous plastics products; leather and leather
products; stone, clay, glass and concrete products; primary metal industries; fabricated metal products; except ordnance, machinery and
transportation equipment; professional, scientific and controlling instruments; photographic and optical goods; watches and clocks;
miscellaneous manufacturing industries.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.
NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: Waterborne wastes normally discharging from the sanitary convenience of buildings (including
apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories and institutions, free from storm surface water and industrial wastes. Normal
domestic wastewater shall mean "normal" for the city of Deming, New Mexico.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group.
pH: The logarithm to the base ten (10) of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than
one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties shall have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER: The public sewer portion of a wastewater facility which transports wastewater and to which storm, surface and ground
water are not intentionally admitted.
SETTLEABLE SOLIDS: Those solids which settle during a preselected period of time as expressed in milliters per liter of sample.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SHALL/MAY: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SLUG: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for
any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour concentration or flows
during normal operation.
STANDARD METHOD: The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of standard methods for the
examination of water and wastewater, as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American public health association and the
American water works association and the water pollution control federation.
STORM SEWER: A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes wastewater and polluted industrial wastes.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
TRAP: A device for retaining sand, silt, grit mineral material, petroleum solvent, grease or oil by gravity-differential separation from
wastewater and of a design and capacity approved by the city.
UNPOLLUTED PROCESS WATER: Any water or waste containing none of the following: free of emulsified grease or oil; acid or alkali,
phenols, or other substances imparting taste and odor to receiving water; toxic substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; and
noxious or odorous gases.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 166/318
WASTEWATER: The used water of a community. Such used water may be a combination of the liquid and waterborne wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment and processes required to collect, transport and treat domestic industrial wastes
and dispose of the effluent.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITIES: An arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge.
Sometimes used as synonymous with waste treatment plant or wastewater treatment plant.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. (Ord. 699, 6-14-1982; amd. 2001 Code)
9-5-3: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
A. Sewage Prohibited From Natural Outlets: It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this chapter.
B. Privies Or Septic Tanks Prohibited; Exception: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy
vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
C. Connection Required; Conditions: The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation
or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right of way in which there is now located or may in the
future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to
connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within ninety (90) days after
date of official notice to do so; provided, that said public sewer is within one hundred feet (100') of the property line.
D. Outside City Limits: Residential, commercial and industrial properties situated outside the city limits may be connected via building
sewers to available sewers or future sewers upon application and agreement to abide by sections 9-5-5 and 9-5-6 of this chapter. (Ord.
699, 6-14-1982)
9-5-4: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
A. Compliance With Section: Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of subsection 9-5-3C of this chapter, the
building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. (Ord. 699, 6-14-
1982)
B. Permit Required; Fees: Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written
permit signed by the public works director, the plumbing inspector and the New Mexico environmental improvement department. The
application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the public works director. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to
the city at the time the application is filed. (Ord. 699, 6-14-1982; amd. 2001 Code)
C. Inspections: A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the
satisfaction of the public works director. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the
applicant for the permit shall notify the public works director when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground
portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within seventy two (72) hours of the receipt of notice by the public works director.
D. Compliance With State Regulations: The type, capacities, locations, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all
recommendations of the environmental improvement agency of the state. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to
any natural outlet.
E. Connect To Public Sewer When Available: At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage
disposal system, as provided in subsection D of this section, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with
this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with clean
bankrun gravel or dirt.
F. Operation In Sanitary Manner: The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all
times at no expense to the city.
G. Additional Requirements: No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that
may be imposed by the appropriate health officer. (Ord. 699, 6-14-1982)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 167/318
9-5-5: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
A. Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public
sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the public works director.
B. Permit Classifications; Fees: There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: 1) for residential and commercial service; and 2)
for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent
in the judgment of the public works director. A permit and inspection fee for a residential or commercial building sewer permit shall be
paid to the city at the time the application is filed.
C. Owner Responsibilities: All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the
owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer.
D. Extending Building Sewer To Additional Building: A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except
where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear
building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear
building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
E. Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and
test by the public works director, to meet all requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 699, 6-14-1982)
F. Separation Of Property With Common Sewer: Upon the sale of one of two (2) or more buildings that are connected to a common sewer
line, the owners will be required to install a new and separate sanitary sewer system, including separation connections to the sewer
main. (2001 Code)
G. Construction Specifications: The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in
excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building and
plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city and state.
H. Elevation: Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all
buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain
shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
I. Surface Runoff: No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of
surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary
sewer.
J. Connection Of Building Sewer To Public Sewer: The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF manual of practice no. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and
watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the public works director before
installation.
K. Applicant Notify City For Inspection: The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the public works director when the building
sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the public
works director or his representative.
L. Excavations Guarded: All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to
protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be
restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. (Ord. 699, 6-14-1982)
9-5-6: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
A. Storm Water Prohibited From Public Sewer: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
B. Use Of Storm Sewers: Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated
as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the public works director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 168/318
be discharged on approval of the public works director to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
C. Prohibited Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described liquids or wastes to any
public sewers:
1. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquids, solid or gas.
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, to injure or interfere with any wastewater facility, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment works, including, but not limited to, cyanides in excess of two
milligrams per liter (2 mg/l) as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
3. Any herbicides and pesticides.
4. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and five-tenths (5.5) or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater facility.
5. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference
with the proper operation of the wastewater facility such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, fat, grease, shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage including food, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings,
entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
6. Any amount of the following heavy metals:
Antimony Chromium (tri) Nickel
Arsenic Cobalt Rhenium
Barium Copper Selenium
Beryllium Iron Silver
Bismuth Lead Strontium
Boron Manganese Tellurium
Cadmium Mercury Tin
Chromium (hex) Molybdenum Uranyl ion
Zinc
Dilution of toxic materials and heavy metals in lieu of removal is not acceptable.
D. Harmful Substances Or Materials: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the sewer collection system or the
wastewater treatment plant the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the public
works director that such wastes can harm the water facility or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can
otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
public works director will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the
sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature and capacity of the wastes in the wastewater treatment works and other
pertinent factors. The substances which must be considered include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F).
2. Any water or waste containing fats, grease, foodstuffs, wax or oils.
3. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder larger than those normally
manufactured and sold for residential and noncommercial use will not be installed without specific review and approval by the public
works director.
4. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions cannot be discharged to the
wastewater facility unless completely neutralized and approved by the public works director for discharge.
5. Any waters or wastes containing reducing substances of an organic or inorganic nature, toxic or nontoxic, which exert an immediate
chlorine demand shall not be discharged into the wastewater facility if discharge of such agents will prevent the achievement of an
adequate chlorine residual in the effluent of the wastewater treatment works.
6. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances cannot be discharged to the wastewater facility
in concentrations exceeding limits established by the public works director. Dilution shall not be used to decrease the concentration.
7. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life or concentrations as may exceed limits established by the public works director in
compliance with applicable state and federal regulations.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 169/318
8. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of nine and five-tenths (9.5).
9. Materials which exert or cause:
a. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime residues) or of dissolved solids
(such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
b. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, animal blood, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).
c. Unusual chemical oxygen demand, or biochemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a
significant load on the wastewater treatment works.
d. Slugs or shocks constituting an unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes which will disturb the normal functioning of the
wastewater facility.
10. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment works
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
E. City Authority:
1. If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances
or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection D of this section, and which in the judgment of the public works director may
have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a
public nuisance, the public works director may:
a. Reject the wastes;
b. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; or
c. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
2. If the public works director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the public works director and the state and subject to the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
F. Testing Of Industrial Waste: Testing of an industrial waste will be performed at least twice a year or whenever found necessary by the
public works director. The person discharging the waste shall be liable for payment of all costs arising from the testing of the industrial
waste. (Ord. 699, 6-14-1982; amd. 2001 Code)
G. Grease And Sand Traps: Grease, oil and sand traps shall be properly installed and used on all premises in which food is commercially
prepared or served, including institutional premises, and on any other premises when the director of public works determines they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease or oil in large amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other
harmful ingredients. All traps shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director of public works and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. No later than December 31, 2003, all traps shall conform to the standards
established by the uniform plumbing code as adopted by the city of Deming. The contents of each such trap shall be pumped at least
monthly by persons licensed by the state of New Mexico to receive and dispose of such waste. The director of public works may require
that a trap be pumped more often, depending on the volume of waste collected in such trap, and notice of such requirement will be in
writing mailed to the property owner or occupant at the address contained in the city's occupation license records or personally delivered
to the property owner, occupant or manager of the premises. Records evidencing compliance with this section shall be maintained on
the premises and be available for inspection by the public works director or his designee(s). Such records shall, at a minimum, contain
the date and time a trap is pumped and the name, address, telephone number and signature of the person who pumped the trap. The
pumping and record keeping provisions of this section shall not apply to schools when they are seasonally closed.
In addition to the penalties established by section 1-4-1 of this code, the director of public works shall disconnect municipal utilities to
any property upon which a violation of this section exists. (Ord. 1056, 1-14-2002)
H. Preliminary Treatment: Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for any industrial liquid wastes, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
I. Control Manhole:
1. When required by the public works director, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial liquid wastes
shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meter and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes.
2. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, constructed in such a manner as to prevent infiltration of
ground and surface waters, and should be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the public works director. The manhole
shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 170/318
J. Sampling:
1. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes shall be determined in accordance with the latest
edition of standard methods and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control
manhole. The control manhole shall be located so that sampling of the industrial waste will be performed before discharge into the
public sewer system.
2. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the wastewater treatment
works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a
24 hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is approximate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not
always, COD, BOD and settleable solids analyses are obtained from 24 hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are determined
from periodic grab samples.) (Ord. 699, 6-14-1982)
K. Bulk Liquids Prohibited: The wastewater treatment plant is a part of the city's sewer system and all sewer use regulations are applicable
to the wastewater treatment plant. Specifically, the dumping of bulk liquids into the collection system or wastewater treatment plant is
prohibited. (2001 Code)
9-5-7: PROVISION FOR USER FEES AND RECOVERED COSTS:
A. Equitable User Fees: The governing body of the city shall take the necessary steps to establish an equitable system of user fees. The
purpose hereof is that each individual nonindustrial user shall pay an equitable portion of the city cost of constructing the wastewater
facilities plus a portion of the total operation and maintenance costs.
B. Residences And Commercial Users:
1. Residences: For residences, the user fees shall be computed as follows:
UC
=
A + (K)(V)
Where:
UC
=
Monthly user charge fee in dollars per month.
A =
Fixed charge, by user class, made for being connected to the sewer system in dollars per month whether or not
any wastewater is discharged to the system.
K =
Basic charge made per 1,000 gallons of waste discharge in dollars per month.
V =
Volume of waste discharge in thousands of gallons per month based on average winter water usage; if actual
water use measurements are not available, this value will be established by the city on the basis of expected
water use for the water using facilities and/or services offered at the building being served.
2. Commercial: For commercial users, the user fees shall be computed as follows:
UC
=
A + (K)(V)
Where:
UC
=
Monthly user charge fee in dollars per month.
A =
Fixed charge, by user class, made for being connected to the sewer system in dollars per month whether or not
any wastewater is discharged to the system.
K =
Basic charge made per 1,000 gallons of waste discharge in dollars per month.
V =
Volume of waste discharge in thousands of gallons per month based on actual water use. If measurements are
not available, this value will be established by the city on the basis of expected water use for the water using
facilities and/or services offered at the building being served.
C. Access To Water Utility Records: For the purpose of assessing equitable user fees, any person discharging wastes to the sanitary
sewers shall permit access by the city to water utility records for that person's property. (Ord. 942, 12-9-1996; amd. 2001 Code)
9-5-8: SEWER RATES, FORMULA1:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 171/318
A. Formula For Computation Of Residential User Fees:
UC =
A + (K)(V)
Where:
UC
=
Monthly user charge fee in dollars per month per hookup.
A =
Fixed charge, by user class, made for being connected to the sewer system in dollars per month per hookup, based
upon fixed costs.
K =
Basic charge made per 1,000 gallons of wastewater discharged in dollars per month per hookup.
V =
Volume of waste discharged in thousands of gallons per month based on an average of the lowest 3 monthly
consumptions for November, December, January and February, with the following exceptions and conditions:
1. Water consumption to be actual if data is available to the city 30 days prior to billing. If water consumption data is not
available, billing is to be based upon estimates of the director of public works.
2. The director of public works, or his designee, may review water consumption quantities at any time and make
necessary adjustments based on most recent data available.
B. Formula For Computation Of Commercial User Fees:
UC =
A + (K)(V)
Where:
UC
=
Monthly user charge fee in dollars per month per hookup.
A =
Fixed charge, by user class, made for being connected to the sewer system in dollars per month per hookup, based
upon fixed costs.
K =
Basic charge made per 1,000 gallons of wastewater discharged in dollars per month per hookup.
V =
Volume of wastewater discharged in thousands of gallons per month based on actual water usage, with the following
exceptions and conditions:
1. Water consumption to be actual if data is available to the city 30 days prior to billing. If water consumption data is not
available, billing is to be based upon estimates of the director of public works.
2. The director of public works, or his designee, may review water consumption quantities at any time and make
necessary adjustments based on most recent data available.
(Ord. 1185, 4-16-2009)
C. Formula For Computation Of Industrial User Fees:
IC =
A + (K)(V) I + a(SS-5)
5
b(COD-400)
400
Where:
IC =
Industrial charge, dollars per year.
V =
Volume discharge, gallons per year.
SS =
Settleable solids of a given industrial waste, milliliters per liter.
a =
0.6
=
That fraction of the total cost which is attributable to settleable solids removal.
b =
0.4
=
That fraction of the total cost which is attributable to chemical oxygen demand removal.
A =
Basic annual charge levied for being connected, whether or not sewage or other wastewaters are being
discharged to the system; dollars per year.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 172/318
K =
Annual charge per unit volume of waste, dollars per million gallons.
COD
=
Chemical oxygen demands of a waste, milligrams per liter.
If settleable solids concentration is less than 5 milliliters per liter and chemical oxygen demand is less than 400 milligrams per liter, the
following formula shall apply: IC = A + (K)(V). (Ord. 547, 10-13-1975)
D. Current Rates:
1. Rates:
Monthly Rate
Effective June 1, 2013, Reflected In July's Billing Cycles
Base Rate Incremental Rate Per 1,000 Gallons Incremental Rate Per 100 Cubic Feet
Residential $12.50 $0.669 $0.499
Commercial 14.50 0.736 0.549
Lift station _ 0.928 0.694
Monthly Rate
Effective June 1, 2014, Reflected In July's Billing Cycles
Base Rate Incremental Rate Per 1,000 Gallons Incremental Rate Per 100 Cubic Feet
Residential $12.50 $0.876 $0.654
Commercial 14.50 0.964 0.719
Lift station _ 1.216 0.909
Sewer main extension greater than five feet (5') in depth to be installed at option of the city and charged at actual city cost for installation
and material or the actual contract cost plus administration to the city.
2. Rate Review: Not less frequently than once every twelve (12) months, the established sewer service rates provided for hereby shall
be reviewed and amended if necessary to meet the determined need to recover sufficient revenues to provide for operation,
maintenance and replacement costs. (Ord. 1236, 6-4-2013)
E. Payment: Sanitary sewer charges levied pursuant to this section shall be payable upon billing by the city. (Ord. 942, 12-9-1996)
9-5-9: PENALTY:
A. Penalty Imposed: Every person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be punished as provided in the general penalty in section 1-
4-1 of this code, and each day this chapter is violated shall constitute a separate offense. The conviction and punishment of any person
for a violation shall not excuse or exempt such person from the payment of any fee due or unpaid at the time of such conviction and
nothing herein shall prevent a criminal prosecution of any violation of the provisions of this chapter.
B. Collection Of Judgment: No property of any person shall be exempt from levy and sale of execution issued for the collection of a
judgment for any fee imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 1190, 7-13-2009)
Chapter 6
CITY DEPOSIT FEES; UTILITY CHARGES; PAYMENT OF BILLS; DELINQUENT
ACCOUNTS
9-6-1: DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
A. Fee Imposed On Residential Users: The Director of Public Works shall require any residential user of a City utility presently indebted or
who may become indebted to the City, whether for services, water, gas, garbage disposal, sewer disposal, Occupation Tax, paving lien,
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 173/318
or otherwise, to pay a deposit fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to the designated fund to secure payment of any indebtedness due
the City by the depositor.
B. Fee Imposed On Commercial Users: The Director of Public Works shall require any commercial user of a City utility presently indebted or
who may become indebted to the City, whether for services, water, gas, garbage disposal, sewer disposal, Occupation Tax, paving lien,
or otherwise, to pay minimum deposit fees as outlined below, to the designated fund to secure payment of any indebtedness due the
City by the depositor.
1. Small commercial: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
2. Large commercial: Five hundred dollars ($500.00).
The Director of Public Works shall determine the difference between small and large commercial by previous utility usage or industry
standards.
C. Collection: The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized to collect residential and commercial deposits from any and all persons
who are now, or hereafter may become indebted to the City.
D. Ensure Payment Of Indebtedness: All such deposits shall be held by the Director of Public Works to ensure payment of indebtedness
owed by any such depositor to the City without interest.
E. Deposit Applied Toward Delinquency: Should any customer fail to meet their scheduled payments for any one month and services are
disconnected, the deposit shall be applied to the delinquent account prior to the time that gas, water, sewer or garbage service is
recommenced to the customer. (Ord. 1258, 12-14-2015)
9-6-2: DEPOSIT REFUND:
There shall be no refunds of any deposits for residential or commercial services until such services have been discontinued and all
payments have been made. (Ord. 1258, 12-14-2015)
9-6-3: TRANSFER OF DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS:
Should any customer owe any amount for any City utilities at the time utility services are discontinued and move to another location within
the City where additional services are required by such customer, all such delinquent charges owed by the customer shall be paid in full
prior to new utility services being placed in customer's name. In the event a closed account is found with an outstanding balance and the
responsible customer is found to have an active account, the delinquent account's charges shall be transferred to the customer's active
account. (Ord. 1258, 12-14-2015)
9-6-4: DISCONNECTION AND RECONNECTION FEES:
The following schedule shall apply when service is turned off for nonpayment of utility bills:
A. Service Turned Off For Nonpayment: The service user shall pay the bill including all amounts owed, plus a reconnect fee of thirty five
dollars ($35.00) for utilities that were turned off. The thirty five dollar ($35.00) reconnection fee is a lump sum fee that applies to a single
or the combined utilities of gas, water, sewer or garbage collection.
1. Service Turned Off For Nonpayment And Deposit Or Portion Of Deposit Applied To Account: The service user shall pay the bill plus
the reconnection fee plus replace all or that portion of the original deposit that was applied to the account up to the original deposit
amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for residential users or the original amount determined for each commercial account. (Ord.
1258, 12-14-2015)
9-6-5: BILLING, PAYMENT OF BILLS; DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS:
A. Customer Classifications For Billing In Accordance With Established Rates Of Service Applicable To Chapters 1, 2, 3, And 5 Of This
Title:
1. Residential: Single-family detached, condominiums served by individual meters, townhouses served by individual meters, duplexes
served by individual meters, or mobile homes served by individual meters.
2. Multi-Family And Commercial (High Usage):
Multi-family - Any metered/account serving more than one dwelling unit; i.e., residences with guest houses, duplexes, triplexes, four7/
6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 174/318
plexes, apartment complexes, condominiums, town-homes, or mobile homes served by common meters.
Commercial - Retail, offices, hotels, motels, shopping centers, churches, and schools public and private, and high volume users.
B. Time Of Payment: Charges for all accounts will commence upon payment of deposit. Bills are due and payable in full fifteen (15) days
after the process date on the billing statement and will be considered past due at the close of business on the fifteenth day. All payments
must be received by the due date to be recorded as paid on time.
C. Late Fees: Should an account not be paid by the close of business fifteen (15) days after coming due, a late fee of ten percent (10%)
shall be added to the bill at the opening of business on day sixteen (16).
D. Delinquency; Discontinue Service: If the total amount then due is not paid after the adding of the late fee, the said account shall be
deemed delinquent and the Public Works Director may cause the utility services to be shut off from the premises upon which the
account is delinquent. The utility services shall not again be turned on until all arrears and a reconnection fee of thirty five dollars
($35.00), for metered services disconnected, is paid in full.
Accounts deemed delinquent will receive a disconnection notice at the same time of regular billing in the mail. The disconnection notice,
(colored) advises customer that account is delinquent and services will be disconnected if not paid by the date indicated on the letter.
The regular bill, (white) is the monthly statement reflecting the usage information for the month.
If the services are disconnected for non-pay and not paid and brought current three (3) days after being disconnected, account will be
closed and deposit applied. Deposit required; subsection 9-6-1E of this chapter. If the deposit on the account has been applied to the
account, account must also be paid in full prior to services being reconnected.
E. Reinstallation Fee: In the event that a meter is removed for such nonpayment, the same shall not be reinstalled and service shall not be
reinstated until the owner or occupant pays to the City a sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for such reinstallation along with all the
arrears paid in full.
F. Lien For Nonpayment: With the exception of subsection H of this section, in addition to any other remedy provided herein for the
enforcement and collection of any utility service rate, charge or account, all rates provided for in this chapter shall be charged against
the property on which it is furnished, and against the owner thereof, and shall be a lien against the premises to which any utility service
may be applied, and a charge against the owner therefor and the occupant thereof using the utility service. If for any cause, any sums
owing therefore become delinquent, the utility service shall be shut off, and in no case shall it be turned on to the same property until all
such delinquencies shall have been paid in full including accumulation of all late fees, penalties, and interest.
G. Responsibility For Payment: The property owner and occupant shall be jointly and severally liable for debt and money due on open
account to the City in an action waged by the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of all such rates as may be due
and unpaid, together with all penalties provided herein and costs, except as delineated in subsection H of this section. No change of
ownership or occupancy shall affect the application of this section.
H. Property Owner Disclaimer: Property owners shall file an annual written disclaimer, in accordance with New Mexico Statutes Annotated
3-23-6 subsection C, to relieve themselves from the responsibility delineated in subsection F of this section of any utility charges that
their renters may incur, the disclaimer must include the property owner's full name, location and number of rental properties that will be
disclaimed. Proof of ownership, such as a warranty deed, of the location proposed for disclaimer shall be provided to the City in
conjunction with the annual filing of the disclaimer. The disclaimer does not relieve the property owner of any debt incurred prior to
submitting the disclaimer to the City of Deming. Upon receipt of annual disclaimers, the City will date stamp and keep a copy for the
records. It is the responsibility of the property owner to maintain proof of filing of each disclaimer on an annual basis, no later than
January 10 of each year.
I. Landlord Standby: Landlord standby status is a service available to property owners when an owner's rental property is vacant or
between tenant occupancy. Landlord standby service will automatically transfer billed utility services to the property owner when a
tenant disconnects utility services or the City disconnects utility services for nonpayment. No additional deposit, disconnection or
reconnection fees are applicable as long as the owner is in good standing and no outstanding amounts are due from a previous landlord
standby status. Landlords shall annually provide written notice to the Utility Department for each individual property address to be listed
under landlord standby.
J. Shutoff Fees: In the event utility service is shut off pursuant to this section and a lock and/or restrictor plate is installed lawfully in or upon
the disabled and/or shutoff utility meter by an authorized City of Deming employee, the City of Deming shall collect the following fees
from the owner and/or occupant who is responsible for payment of said utility bill to the City of Deming. Once said fees are paid, the City
of Deming shall remove said lock or restrictor plate. The fees are codified as follows:
1. If applicable, a fifty dollar ($50.00) unauthorized removal or tampering fee if said lock or restrictor plate is removed by any person
other than an authorized City of Deming employee; and
2. A one hundred dollar ($100.00) reinstallation fee per meter in order to reinstall each meter after it is removed.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 175/318
K. Tampering Or Theft Of A Utility Service: It shall be unlawful for any owner and/or occupant of any real property whose utility meter has
been shut off by the application of a lock and/or restrictor plate based upon delinquency in the payment of utility services to remove or
cause to have removed the lock and/or restrictor plate from the utility meter for the purpose of any of the following:
1. Stealing said lock and/or restrictor plate which belongs to the City of Deming and whose value is less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00); or
2. Intentional misappropriation of said lock and/or restrictor plate after the utility meter has been locked and/or restricted and whose
value of the misappropriated property is less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); or
3. Converting use of the meter after it has been locked or restricted by the City of Deming with the intent to deprive the City of Deming of
water and/or natural gas from said utility meter having previously been shut off by an authorized representative of the City of Deming
by placing a lock and/or restrictor plate upon or in the utility meter and said value of the conversion is less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00); or
4. Obtaining or causing to be obtained the services of the utilities of water, wastewater and/or natural gas without paying for same and
after a lock and/or restrictor plate has been placed upon or in the utility meter by an authorized representative of the City of Deming
with the intent to cheat or defraud the City of Deming out of water and/or natural gas and the person obtaining the services is
obtaining a value of less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); or
5. Improper removal of any lock and/or restrictor plate from a City of Deming utility meter consists of any person removing any lock
and/or restrictor plate from a City of Deming utility meter after said utility meter has been shut off by an authorized representative of
the City of Deming for nonpayment of said utility service.
Any person who violates this section is guilty of a petty misdemeanor and shall be fined and/or imprisoned in accordance with title 1,
chapter 4 of this Code. For enforcement informational purposes only, in the event the value of the theft, misappropriation, conversion,
obtaining of the service, and/or improper removal noted in subsections K1 through K5 of this section is greater than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) but less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), it may be referred to the 6th Judicial District Attorney for prosecution as
a full misdemeanor under the laws of New Mexico. A value above five hundred dollars ($500.00) up to two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00), it may be referred to the 6th Judicial District Attorney for prosecution as a fourth degree felony; a value above two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) up to twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), it may be referred to the 6th Judicial District
Attorney for prosecution as a third degree felony; and above twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), it may be referred to the 6th
Judicial District Attorney for prosecution as a second degree felony. (Ord. 1266, 9-11-2017)
9-6-6: SEASONAL ACCOUNTS:
Upon written request, services on an account may be temporarily turned off for a period not to exceed one year. This will allow seasonal
residents to maintain an active account with the City without having to pay minimum service charges. There is a thirty five dollar ($35.00)
convenience fee for this service. Both water and gas meters will be locked while temporarily off. Turning services off temporarily does not
relieve the property owner from any usage that may occur during the time it is turned off. The account holder is responsible for ensuring all
usage charges are paid when they become due. Seasonal accounts that have been turned off for longer than one year may be turned off
and the deposit refunded to the account holder. (Ord. 1266, 9-11-2017)
Chapter 7
WATER, SEWER AND NATURAL GAS CONNECTION REGULATIONS AND
FEES
9-7-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter may be cited as the CITY OF DEMING WATER, SEWER AND NATURAL GAS CONNECTION REGULATIONS AND FEES
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1232, 11-13-2012)
9-7-2: STATUTORY AUTHORITY:
The regulations and fees established by this chapter are created pursuant to the enabling authority set forth in New Mexico Statutes
Annotated, 1978, sections 3-18-25, 3-25-1 et seq., 3-26-1 et seq., 3-27-1 et seq., and 3-49-1 et seq. (Ord. 1232, 11-13-2012)
9-7-3: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted to implement fees to connect to any city water and/or sanitary sewer and/or gas service in the project area
described in section 9-7-10 of this chapter. The specific purposes of such connections fees are:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 176/318
A. To authorize the city to implement a connection fee, plus an administrative fee of five percent (5%), for a connection to any water and/or
sanitary sewer and/or gas line in the project area described in section 9-7-10 of this chapter.
B. In general to allow the city to recoup its construction costs related to the construction of sanitary sewer, water and natural gas lines within
its corporate boundaries as well as to the territory occupied by such facilities where such facilities lie outside the city's corporate
boundaries.
C. To provide the city a reserve for the construction of new water, sanitary sewer or gas lines within its corporate boundaries as well as to
the territory occupied by such facilities where such facilities lie outside the city's corporate boundaries.
D. To provide the city a reserve for the replacement or upgrading of water, sanitary sewer and gas systems within its corporate boundaries
as well as to the territory occupied by such facilities where such facilities lie outside the city's corporate boundaries. (Ord. 1232, 11-13-
2012)
9-7-4: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
APPLICANT: A person proposing to connect to the city water system or the city sanitary sewer system or the city gas system and making
formal application to the city for such connection.
CONNECTION FEE: A onetime charge for a connection to the water or the sanitary sewer or the gas system of the city. The purposes of
such fee are to reimburse the city for its construction costs, for replacement costs and for ongoing maintenance of the systems and other
related incidental costs.
DIRECTOR: The director of public works of the city or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
FRONTAGE CHARGE: A linear foot fee assessed, at the time of application for service connection, for the property frontage parallel with
the water, sanitary sewer or gas lines, or any combination of these, which will serve the property. Frontage charges are levied to reimburse
the city for its construction costs of such services, for ongoing maintenance and for other related incidental costs.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, association, firm, syndicate, company, trust, corporation, department, bureau, agency, or any other
entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
SERVICE CONNECTION: All water, sanitary sewer and gas service connections for residential, commercial, industrial, or other uses.
STREET: A public way that has been dedicated or reserved by plat, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. For
purposes of this chapter, street shall include an alley where such alley contains city water or sanitary sewer or gas lines. (Ord. 1232, 11-13-
2012)
9-7-5: PROHIBITION:
No person shall connect to the water system, the sanitary sewer system or the natural gas system owned by the city until and unless the
appropriate application has been made and the appropriate connection fees have been paid. (Ord. 1232, 11-13-2012)
9-7-6: EXEMPTION:
The city is exempt from paying fees for connections and from all other provisions of this chapter for any water, gas or sanitary sewer service
located anywhere in the city. In addition, where any project is undertaken under the provisions of the city of Deming economic development
plan ordinance or the provisions of the affordable housing ordinance, the city council may waive the payment of any applicable connection
fees. (Ord. 1232, 11-13-2012)
9-7-7: INTERPRETATION:
All connection fees are calculated on the basis of property frontage. The charge for a service connection is a dollar value per linear foot of
frontage as stipulated in section 9-7-10 of this chapter. The fee stipulated in section 9-7-10 of this chapter is the fee to be paid per linear
foot of frontage on each side of the street. (Ord. 1232, 11-13-2012)
9-7-8: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE CONNECTION:
The provisions of sections 9-2-1, 9-4-1 and 9-5-5 of this title, as amended from time to time, shall apply to applications for connection to the
city gas system or the city water system or the city sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 1232, 11-13-2012)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 177/318
9-7-9: COLLECTION OF SERVICE CONNECTION FEES:
Water and/or sanitary sewer and/or gas connection fees are payable upon the earlier of:
A. An application for connection to the water, or sanitary sewer or gas systems of the city.
B. An application for a building permit for development or redevelopment of a parcel of land. (Ord. 1232, 11-13-2012)
9-7-10: SCHEDULE OF FEES:
The map entitled "legend A" in section 9-7-13 of this chapter, identifies the location of water, sanitary sewer and gas lines described in
project A below. Where there is a conflict between the said map and the descriptions in this section, the descriptions set out in this section
shall prevail. Any person, unless specifically exempted elsewhere in this chapter, wishing to connect to any water, gas or sanitary sewer
service in the project area described in this section shall pay the following service connection fees, which fees include the five percent (5%)
administrative charge authorized in subsection 9-7-3A of this chapter, for the respective streets and/or city areas as described below:
A. Cedar Street project (refer to map "legend A" in section 9-7-13 of this chapter for location of utilities described in this subsection):
1. Cedar Street: From 705 Pine Street to 4255 East Pine Street.
Water: Twenty two dollars twenty one cents ($22.21) per linear foot of frontage per side of street.
Natural gas: Nine dollars seventeen cents ($9.17) per linear foot of frontage per side of street.
2. Cedar Street: From Deming Del Sol Street to 4255 East Pine Street.
Sanitary sewer: Twenty one dollars sixty eight cents ($21.68) per linear foot of frontage per side of street.
3. Pine Street: From 3901 East Pine to 4255 East Pine.
Water: Twenty two dollars twenty one cents ($22.21) per linear foot of frontage per side of street. (Ord. 1232, 11-13-2012)
9-7-11: PENALTY:
Any violation of section 9-7-5 of this chapter is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for not
more than ninety (90) days or both. The city may also disconnect any service that is in violation of section 9-7-5 of this chapter. These
penalties are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other remedy available to the city. (Ord. 1232, 11-13-2012)
9-7-12: RECORDS:
A record of all payments made, including, but not limited to, the amount paid, the specific services involved, the date of payment, and the
specific property to which the payment is attributable, shall be kept by the director, and shall be available for inspection during normal city
business hours. (Ord. 1232, 11-13-2012)
9-7-13: MAP:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 178/318
(Ord. 1187, 6-8-2009)
Title 10
AIRPORT REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
10-1-1: SCOPE, AUTHORITY AND TITLE:
A. This chapter is applicable to the area within a nine thousand foot (9,000') radius from the center of each end of the primary surface of
each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs at Deming municipal airport. These regulations divide said
area into zones and within such zones, specify the land uses permitted, regulate and restrict the height to which structures and trees
may be erected or allowed to grow, and impose other restrictions and requirements necessary to effectuate the approach plan for said
airport, said airport approach plan having been heretofore formulated and adopted by this chapter and the authority for same and for
these regulations being New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 3-17-1 and section 3-39-16 et seq.; and federal aviation regulations,
part 77, objects affecting navigable airspace.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 179/318
B. These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the DEMING MUNICIPAL AIRPORT ZONING REGULATIONS FOR DEMING
MUNICIPAL AIRPORT. (Ord. 912, 10-9-1995)
10-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in these regulations, unless the context otherwise requires:
AIRPORT: Deming municipal airport, near Deming, New Mexico.
AIRPORT ELEVATION: The established elevation of the highest point on the usable landing area, which is four thousand three hundred ten
feet (4,310'), MSL.
AIRPORT REFERENCE POINT: The point established as the approximate geographic center of the airport landing area and is established
at a location described as follows: longitude 107°43'17" west, latitude 32°15'41" north.
HEIGHT: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in these regulations and shown on the zoning map, the
datum shall be mean sea level unless otherwise specified.
LANDING AREA: The area of the airport used for the landing or takeoff of aircraft.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any structure, tree or use of land which is lawfully in existence at the time these regulations become effective
and does not then meet the requirements of said regulations.
PRIMARY SURFACE: A surface longitudinally centered on a runway and extending two hundred feet (200') beyond each end of that
runway, provided the surface is hard; otherwise, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The primary surface is established as
two hundred feet (200') beyond each end of the runways and has a width of five hundred feet (500') for runway 8-26 and runway 4-22.
RUNWAY: The surface of an airport landing strip.
Other definitions are as set out in federal aviation regulations, part 77, objects affecting navigable airspace. (Ord. 912, 10-9-1995; amd.
Ord. 957, 11-10-1997)
10-1-3: ZONES:
In order to carry out the provisions of these regulations, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land
lying within the approach zones, transition zones, horizontal zone and conical zone. Such areas and zones are shown on the Deming
municipal airport zoning map, consisting of one sheet, adopted by the city council, and dated March 15, 1979, a copy of which is on file with
the city clerk and by reference made a part hereof. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: (Ord. 912, 10-9-1995)
A. Approach Zones: An approach zone is established at each end of all runways on Deming municipal airport for landings and takeoffs. The
approach zone shall be longitudinally centered on the extended runway center line and extending outward and upward from each end of
the primary surface and having a width equal to that of the primary surface at a distance of two hundred feet (200') beyond each end of
the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of two thousand feet (2,000') for runway 8-26 and for runway 4-22, all at a horizontal
distance of five thousand two hundred feet (5,200'), and at a slope of twenty feet (20') horizontally to one foot (1') vertically beyond each
end of all runways. (Ord. 912, 10-9-1995; amd. Ord. 957, 11-10-1997)
B. Transition Zones: Transition zones are hereby established adjacent to each runway and approach zone as indicated on the zoning map.
Transition zones extend outward and upward at right angles to the runway center line at a slope of seven feet (7') horizontally to one foot
(1') vertically from the sides of the primary surface and from the sides of the approach surfaces to the point where they intersect the
surface of the horizontal zones, or the conical zone.
C. Horizontal Zones: A horizontal zone is hereby established as the area within the perimeter which is constructed by swinging arcs of a
radius of five thousand feet (5,000') from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs
by lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach zones, conical zones and the transition zones.
D. Conical Zones: A conical zone is hereby established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends
outward therefrom at a slope of twenty feet (20') horizontally to one foot (1') vertically for a horizontal distance of four thousand feet
(4,000'). The conical zone does not include the approach zones and transition zones. (Ord. 912, 10-9-1995)
10-1-4: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
A. Limitations In Zones: Except as otherwise provided in these regulations, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or
maintained in any zone created by these regulations to a height in excess of the height limit herein established for each zone. Such
height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 180/318
1. Approach Zones: One foot (1') in height for each twenty feet (20') in horizontal distance beginning at a point two hundred feet (200')
from and at the elevation of the end of the runway and extending to a point five thousand two hundred feet (5,200') from the end of the
runway; (Ord. 912, 10-9-1995)
2. Transition Zones: One foot (1') in height for each seven feet (7') in horizontal distance beginning at any point two hundred fifty feet
(250') from the center line of runway 8-26 or runway 4-22, measured normal to and at the elevation of the center lines of the runways
extending two hundred feet (200') beyond each end thereof, extending to a height of one hundred fifty feet (150') above the airport
elevation which is four thousand three hundred ten feet (4,310') above the mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are
established height limits of one foot (1') vertical height for each seven feet (7') horizontal distance measured from the edges of all
approach zones and extending upward and outward to the points where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces; (Ord. 912,
10-9-1995; amd. Ord. 957, 11-10-1997)
3. Horizontal Zones: One hundred fifty feet (150') above the airport elevation or a height of four thousand four hundred sixty feet (4,460')
above mean sea level; and
4. Conical Zones: One foot (1') in height for each twenty feet (20') of horizontal distance beginning at the periphery of the horizontal
zones, extending to a height of three hundred fifty feet (350') above the airport elevation.
B. More Restrictive Limitations Prevail: Where an area is covered by more than one height limitation, the more restrictive limitations shall
prevail. Nothing in these regulations shall be construed as prohibiting the growth, construction or maintenance of any tree or structure to
a height up to two hundred feet (200') above the surface of the land within a three (3) mile radius of the airport reference point. (Ord.
912, 10-9-1995)
10-1-5: USE RESTRICTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of these regulations, no use may be made of land within any zone established by these regulations in
such manner as to create electrical interference with radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for flyers to
distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of flyers using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport
or otherwise endanger the landing, taking off or maneuvering of aircraft. (Ord. 912, 10-9-1995)
10-1-6: NONCONFORMING USES:
A. Regulations Not Retroactive: These regulations shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other changes or alteration of
any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date hereof, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any
nonconforming use. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure,
the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of these regulations and is diligently prosecuted.
B. Marking And Lighting: Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any nonconforming structure or tree is hereby
required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the
city council to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and
lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the owner of the nonconforming structure or tree, and shall conform
to the then current federal aviation administration rules and regulations. (Ord. 912, 10-9-1995)
10-1-7: PERMITS:
A. Future Uses:
1. Except as specifically provided in subsections A1a and A1b of this section, no material change shall be made in the use of the land
and no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted or otherwise established in any zone hereby created unless a permit
therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is
desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure or tree would conform to the
regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted.
a. In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and the conical zone but not within the limits of an approach zone or
transition zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than one hundred forty feet (140') of vertical height above
the ground except when, because of terrain, land contour or topographic features such tree or structure would extend above the
height limits prescribed for such zone.
b. In the areas lying within the limits of the approach zone but at a horizontal distance of not less than one thousand two hundred feet
(1,200') from each end of the runways, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than thirty feet (30') of vertical
height above the established airport elevation, except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for
such instrument or noninstrument approach zone.
2. Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction,
alteration or growth of any structure or tree in excess of any of the height limits established by these regulations except as set forth in
section 10-1-4 of this chapter.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 181/318
B. Existing Uses: No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming
use, structure or tree to be made or become higher, or become a greater hazard to air navigation, than it was on the effective date of
these regulations or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications
for such a permit shall be granted.
C. Nonconforming Uses Abandoned Or Destroyed: Whenever the city council determines that a nonconforming structure or tree has been
abandoned or more than eighty percent (80%) torn down, destroyed, deteriorated or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would
allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.
D. Variances: Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use his property, not
in accordance with these regulations, may apply to the city council, through the airport commission for a variance from such regulations.
Such variance shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations would result in practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest but will do substantial justice and be
in accordance with the spirit of these regulations.
E. Hazard Marking And Lighting: Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of these
regulations and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or trees in question at the
owner's own expense, to install, operate and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the
presence of an airport hazard. (Ord. 912, 10-9-1995)
10-1-8: ADMINISTRATION:
It shall be the duty of the city administrator to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and
variances shall be made to the city council through the airport commission upon forms furnished by it. Applications required by these
regulations to be submitted to said airport commission and city council shall be promptly considered and granted or denied by it. (Ord. 912,
10-9-1995)
10-1-9: BOARD OF APPEALS; APPEAL PROCEDURE:
There is hereby created a board of appeals, and appeal rights and procedures, under and pursuant to New Mexico Statutes Annotated
section 3-39-16 et seq. (Ord. 912, 10-9-1995)
10-1-10: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Judicial review may be had as provided in, under and pursuant to New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 3-39-23. (Ord. 912, 10-9-1995)
10-1-11: ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES:
Violations, penalties, and additional relief are as provided in, under and pursuant to New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 3-39-16 et seq.
(Ord. 912, 10-9-1995)
10-1-12: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed herein and any other regulations applicable to the
same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent
limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. (Ord. 912, 10-9-1995)
Chapter 2
AIRPORT AREA LAND USE
10-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose and intent of the regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter shall be to encourage land use patterns for housing and other
local needs that will separate uncontrollable noise sources from residential and other noise sensitive areas and to facilitate the orderly
development of areas around the airport by establishing regulations that must be met before such development will be permitted. (Ord. 912,
10-9-1995)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 182/318
10-2-2: AUTHORITY:
These regulations are adopted pursuant to New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 3-39-16 et seq. (Ord. 912, 10-9-1995)
10-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in these regulations, unless the context otherwise requires:
AIRPORT: An area used or intended to be used for the landing and take-off of aircraft.
CNR RATING: Composite noise rating value as computed pursuant to federal aviation administration standards and procedures and
arranged in contours on a map of airport area of influence (Reference "Land Use Planning Relating to Aircraft Noise", prepared for FAA by
Bolt, Beranek and Newman, Inc., October 1964, with appendix A, May 1965).
CNR ZONE 2: A designated area over which the noise rating is between one hundred (100) and one hundred fifteen (115) CNR.
CNR ZONE 3: A designated area over which the noise rating exceeds one hundred fifteen (115) CNR.
COMPATIBLE USE: A use which is presumed to be compatible for the zone in which it is proposed and may be permitted pursuant to these
regulations. A compatible use shall not be regarded as a use by right.
DESIGNATED AREA: That area around an airport for which land use controls are needed to prevent development that would be sensitive
to aircraft noise.
INCOMPATIBLE USE: A use which shall not be permitted in the CNR zone where it is proposed. (Ord. 912, 10-9-1995)
10-2-4: SCOPE:
These regulations shall apply to development within the airport CNR zones 2 and 3 as defined above. (Ord. 912, 10-9-1995)
10-2-5: NONCONFORMING USES:
The provisions of these regulations shall not apply to any nonconforming use existing on the effective date of the regulations, providing that
when the nonconforming structure, any reuse, reconstruction or replacement shall be deemed a new use and shall be subject to the
applicable provisions of these regulations. (Ord. 912, 10-9-1995)
10-2-6: ESTABLISHMENT OF AIRPORT ZONES:
A. In order to carry out the provisions of these regulations, the designated area around the Deming municipal airport shall hereby be divided
into the following zones:
1. CNR zone 2.
2. CNR zone 3.
B. The boundaries of the above zones are hereby established as shown in the map entitled airport land use regulation map for Deming
municipal airport which map and all proposed amendments thereto are hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of this
regulation.
C. In determining the boundaries of the above zones, the projected growth and the projected class of the airport as designated in the
current approved airport master plan or the New Mexico airport system plan shall be considered. (Ord. 912, 10-9-1995)
10-2-7: LAND USE SCHEDULE:
Except when permitted by a variance issued by the zoning authority:
A. Development upon land within the designated airport area shall be regulated in accordance with the following schedule of land uses for
various airport zones.
B. Any development which is proposed that is in more than one zone shall be limited to the more restrictive use.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 183/318
C. No designation of compatible use contained in this schedule shall be construed to abrogate or contravene the provisions of any local
zoning ordinance or other local, state or federal regulation.
D. The following are designated compatible uses in CNR zone 3:
1. Open space.
2. Mining, fishing and agriculture, except mink and poultry production.
3. When operated on land owned or leased by the airport authority: golf courses, tennis courts, riding and hiking trails.
All other uses are designated as incompatible uses in CNR zone 3.
E. The following are designated as compatible uses in CNR zone 2:
1. All uses designated as compatible in CNR zone 3.
2. Playgrounds and parks, including amusement parks.
3. Golf courses, riding stables and cemeteries.
4. Retail commercial establishments.
5. Commercial establishments including wholesale manufacturing, transportation, communications and utilities, but excluding outdoor
theaters and stadiums.
6. Other agriculture.
7. Hotels and motels; provided, that construction techniques provide ten (10) decibels extra noise reduction over the industry average for
similar structures and that such reduction is certified to by a qualified architect, structural engineer or acoustical engineer registered in
the state of New Mexico; and further provided, that airport hazard insurance is available to said establishments.
All other uses are designated incompatible uses in CNR zone 2.
F. Variances shall be granted by the zoning authority (comprised of the city council) for residential use on all residential lots which lie in CNR
zone 2 and which have been subdivided or sold for that purpose prior to adoption of this chapter. (Ord. 912, 10-9-1995)
10-2-8: ADMINISTRATION:
It shall be the duty of the city administrator to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for variances shall be
made to the city council through the airport commission upon forms furnished by it. Applications required by these regulations to be
submitted to the city council shall be promptly considered and granted or denied by it. Appeals, judicial review enforcement and remedies
shall be provided pursuant to New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 3-39-16 et seq. (Ord. 912, 10-9-1995)
10-2-9: ZONING COMMISSION:
The zoning authority, being the city council, will act as the zoning commission for purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 912, 10-9-1995)
10-2-10: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations and limitations prescribed herein and any other regulations applicable to the
same area, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. (Ord. 912, 10-9-1995)
Chapter 3
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR AIRPORT SERVICE PROVIDERS
10-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
AERONAUTICAL SURFACE: Those areas of the airport property used for aircraft or flight operations including runways, runway overruns,
runway clear zones, ramps, taxiways and aprons and the overlying airspace.
AIRCRAFT: Any vehicle lighter or heavier than air used for flight operations.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 184/318
AIRCRAFT MAINTENANCE: Any form of service provided to continue the airworthy status of any aircraft.
AIRCRAFT OWNER: Any business, corporation, or individual holding any certificate, license or permit showing ownership of a vehicle used
for flight operations.
AIRPORT MANAGER: That person designated by the city of Deming to oversee the operations being conducted on Deming municipal
airport.
BUSINESS OPERATOR: Any business, partnership, corporation or sole proprietor who has been granted access to the airport for the
purpose of offering a service or product to the flying public.
COMPETENT AIRCRAFT OPERATOR: Any individual who, by reason of training and certification, is qualified to conduct the operation in
progress.
DEMING MUNICIPAL AIRPORT: That land area owned by the city of Deming designated for use by aircraft, also called "airport".
EIP: The environmental improvement program of the state of New Mexico.
EPA: The environmental protection agency of the United States government.
FAA: The federal aviation administration of the United States department of transportation.
FAR: The federal air regulations (title 49 USC) issued by the FAA.
FBO: A business engaged in providing a service to the flying public.
FBO Service Definitions: FBO services are considered to include the following:
A. Aircraft sales, lease and rental.
B. Aircraft airframe, engine and accessory maintenance and repair.
C. Aircraft and ultralight aircraft lease and rental.
D. Skydiving training and flight support operations.
E. Aircraft POL sales.
F. Avionics, instrument and propeller repair stations.
G. Aircraft charter or air taxi operations.
H. Specialized commercial flying services.
Full Service FBO: A business engaged in providing the full range of services and products ordinarily required by aircraft and the flying
public, including fuel and oil products, flight training, aircraft sales, rental and charter, and maintenance and repair services.
Limited Service FBO: A business engaged in providing one or more aviation services to the flying public, not including the sale or
dispensing of fuel or lubricating oil products.
FIRE DEPARTMENT: The fire extinguishing and fire suppression department of the city of Deming.
FLYING CLUB: An organization of individuals possessing joint ownership of one or more aircraft for the exclusive use of the club
membership.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Those materials classified by the EPA as incompatible with aircraft operations or passenger and freight
operations with aircraft.
USFA: United States fire administration. (Ord. 960, 12-8-1997)
10-3-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR OPERATION:
The city shall have the power to adopt, amend or repeal rules and regulations for the operation and maintenance of the airport. Such rules
and regulations may include minimum standards for all aviation operations and businesses.
A. Compliance: No person shall operate or maintain any aircraft at the Deming municipal airport except in compliance with all ordinances,
rules and regulations of the city, the state and the federal aviation administration, or any other applicable statute. All aircraft operators
are responsible for knowledge of and compliance with all regulations pertaining to the operation being conducted. (Ord. 960, 12-8-1997)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 185/318
B. Violation; Penalty: Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter may be found guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished as
provided in the general penalty in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 960, 12-8-1997; amd. 2001 Code)
C. Business Activities:
1. Written Approval Required: No person shall use the airport in any manner whatsoever for any commercial, profit, gainful, or revenueproducing
purposes, without limitation to flight instruction, charter or air taxi operations or aircraft maintenance operations, without the
written approval of the city, nor shall any person post, display, or distribute any commercial or noncommercial sign, circular, handbill or
advertisement on the airport without the written prior approval of the airport manager.
2. Considerations: It shall be the policy of the city to consider requests from privately owned business entities to have access to the
aeronautical surface:
a. When such access is determined to be in the best interest of the city;
b. When such entity has shown itself to be qualified for such access under these rules; and
c. If such entity and the city have entered into a written contract to assure compliance of rules and regulations adopted herein, by its
owners, tenants, employees, agents and successors.
3. Use Of Common Areas: All business operators shall have the right in common with all others authorized to do business on Deming
municipal airport to use common areas of the airport including runways, taxiways, ramps, aprons, roadways, lights, signals and
reflectors for taxiing, takeoff, flying and landing of aircraft.
4. Responsible Conduct: All business operators shall conduct their activities and render their services in a safe, responsible, courteous
and efficient manner and be solely responsible for the acts of their employees, agents and tenants.
5. Compliance With Requirements; Display Permits: All business operators shall observe and comply with all laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations of the United States, the state of New Mexico, and the city, and display any and all permits and licenses required to
show compliance.
6. Insurance: All business operators shall, at their own expense, provide insurance in a manner and form acceptable to the city on the
basis of a general policy issued by an underwriter listed with the New Mexico insurance commission. Coverage for general liability,
personal injury, product and completed operations liability, and hangar keepers care and custody shall be provided in the amounts as
may by required by the city. The city will be named as an additional insured. The city requires that the underwriter notify the city of any
pending policy cancellation at least thirty (30) days before the terminal date. No business or organization will be permitted to
commence operations until and unless the city has in its possession a certificate of insurance showing the period covered, types and
amounts of insurance written and designation of the city as named insured.
7. Nondiscrimination Policy: Since the city has accepted federal assistance funding for airport improvement and maintenance, the
nondiscrimination requirements of title 49 USC apply to all business activities on the airport. Any operator denying access to the
services offered on the basis of race, sex, or national origin will face reentry and repossession of the leasehold and the improvements
constructed thereon.
8. Sublease Requirements: Any business operator on the Deming municipal airport who subleases or grants a particular right to another
from his leasehold shall include the required nondiscrimination statement from 14 CFR 152 in the sublease affected. Subleases must
be approved in writing by the city. Minimum standards required to be met may be accomplished by a combination of personnel from
the lessee and sublessee.
9. Interference With Surface Improvement Prohibited: The city reserves the right to further develop or improve the aeronautical surface
without interference or hindrance.
10. Maintenance Of Surface And Facilities By City: The city reserves the right, but shall not be obligated, to maintain and keep in repair
the aeronautical surface of the airport and all publicly owned facilities thereon.
11. City Agreements With U.S. Government Prevail: All forms of business operators' contracts and agreements regarding development,
maintenance and operation of the airport are subordinated to the provisions of agreements between the city and the United States
government.
12. Exclusive Right Not Granted: Nothing in any of the rules and regulations for the operation of the airport shall be construed to grant
an exclusive right within the meaning of 49 USC 1349.
13. Limitation On Surface Rights: Business operators' right to access of the aeronautical surface may be modified by whatever rights are
exercised by the federal government in time of war or national emergency.
14. Length Of Lease: All agreements for access to the airport shall be of sufficient duration as to permit reasonable recovery of the
investment made by the operator. This effectively ties length of the lease to the investment made. The city will not bind itself to
unnecessarily long lease terms that could act to limit future airport development. Those operators making substantial investment to
provide services to the airport's intended aviation users may obtain agreements of longer duration, though any lease with a term
exceeding five (5) years shall have provisions for periodic review and renegotiation at intervals not to exceed five (5) years.
15. Business Location: The locations of any site for any business shall be determined by the city in keeping with its airport master plan.
16. Fair Rates: The city shall establish fair and equitable rental, lease and fee rates applicable to airport property, which may be
amended from time to time. These rates shall be uniform for all business operators making the same or similar use of equivalent
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 186/318
airport facilities. Payments required to be made to the city must be paid in a timely manner. Lease and fuel flowage fees are due and
payable on the fifteenth of the month of the month incurred. Late fees of twenty five dollars ($25.00) or one percent (1%) of the total
due, whichever is greater, shall be assessed monthly if paid later than five (5) days after the due date.
17. Maintenance Of Facilities By Leaseholders: All structures, signs, driveways, curbs, walkways, aprons, dedicated taxiways and
aircraft service ramps, fuel storage and dispensing facilities, irrigation and watering systems and landscaping, whether owned by the
operator or leased from the city shall be maintained in first-class condition by the leaseholder and shall be treated, repaired and
repainted at such intervals as may be required by the city.
18. Ground Traffic Flow: The city reserves the right to establish ground traffic flow on the airport including ingress and egress points at
each business operations site.
19. Hazardous Conditions: In the event of a leak or spillage of any hazardous material, the business owner or his employees or agents
shall promptly notify the airport manager, city fire department or the city administrator. (Ord. 960, 12-8-1997)
10-3-3: GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACCESS:
Before a contract for access to the airport may be executed, the applicant must show to the satisfaction of the city that the purpose for
which access is requested is a business purpose consistent with any existing city planning or zoning ordinances and the airport master
plan. The applicant must show that:
A. Diminished Revenues: The proposed business requires access to the aeronautical surface of the airport and that the use to be made of
the facilities will not result in diminished revenues for the city.
B. Exclusive Right: The allowance of the activity requested will not involve granting exclusive right for the use of the aeronautical surface or
an exclusive right for the conduct of any business activity.
C. Undue Risk: The allowance of access will not create an undue risk to the control and possession of the airport for public airport purposes
or make it impossible for the city to carry out its agreements with the United States or the state.
D. Financial Stability Of Applicant: The applicant is financially capable of providing and maintaining the physical facilities necessary for the
conduct of the business proposed.
E. Insurance: The applicant will be able to provide insurance in the kinds and amounts as may be required by the city.
F. Consistent With Master Plan: The proposed access shall be consistent with the Deming municipal airport master plan.
G. Representatives And Successors Bound By Agreement: All covenants, restrictions, and terms of leases shall extend to and bind the
business operator's legal representatives, successors and assigns.
H. Violations; Corrective Action: If any business operator violates any terms or conditions of the lease agreement entered into with the city,
he shall be notified by the city of the violation, which will specify a reasonable period of not more than thirty (30) days for taking
corrective action. Failure of the business operator to remedy the violation cited within the time allowed shall cause the lease to be
terminated after the expiration of the thirty (30) day written notice to the business operator.
I. Termination Of Lease By Operator: A business operator may, on giving thirty (30) days' written notice to the city, terminate his lease or
business agreement. If a business operator terminates without the required notice, it shall be liable to the city for the lack of such
notification. Upon expiration or other termination of the lease, the business operator's rights to the premises shall cease and the
operator shall surrender the lease premises to the city.
J. Contents Of Application: Any application for business access to the airport made to the city shall include, as a minimum, the following:
1. A list of all the services to be offered.
2. The land area desired to lease.
3. Building space to be leased or constructed.
4. Number of aircraft to be provided.
5. Equipment and special tooling to be provided.
6. Number of persons to be employed.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 187/318
7. Short resumé of each of the owners and backers including the individual's background in managing/operating a business of this
nature.
8. Resumé of the manager's experience and background if other than those listed in subsection J7 of this section.
9. Times and days scheduled for operations.
10. Amounts and types of insurance to be carried.
11. Evidence and backgrounds of projections for the first and succeeding four (4) years.
12. Methods to be used to attract new business.
13. Amenities to be offered to attract business.
14. Expansion plans if business volume so warrants.
15. A plan showing in reasonable detail all construction required to serve the business site, showing locations of taxiways, ramps,
parking and tie-down areas planned for the leasehold requested, including a statement that the applicant understands that any
additions to the aeronautical surface must conform to current FAA and New Mexico standards and requirements and that the cost of
any construction will be made at applicant's expense.
16. A current financial statement, prepared or certified by a certified public accountant for the legal entity requesting a leasehold from the
city, including a listing of assets owned, being purchased or leased which will be used in the business, a current credit report for each
party owning or having a financial interest in the business.
17. An agreement to provide bond or a suitable guarantee of adequate funds to the city to be used to defray expenses and fees
normally paid by the lessee between the estimated time the lessee may default and the time a new lease may be executed by another
lessee.
18. A written authorization for the FAA, any aviation or aeronautics commission, administrators, and departments of any or all states in
which applicant has engaged in an aviation business, to release information concerning the applicant's record of operations. The
applicant will execute such forms and requests as may be required.
19. Proof of insurance or liability coverage for the business operation, flight operations, itinerant aircraft operations, and operators' and
premises' insurance.
20. Such other information as the Deming airport commission may require. (Ord. 960, 12-8-1997)
10-3-4: CITY ACTION ON APPLICATIONS:
All applications for leaseholds shall be reviewed and acted upon by the Deming airport commission within sixty (60) days of the date of the
application and recommendations for approval, denial or modification provided to the city council for final action. Disapproval of an
application may be recommended for the following reasons:
A. The applicant does not meet the qualifications, standards and requirements of these minimum standards.
B. The applicant's proposed operations or construction will create a safety hazard on the airport.
C. Granting the application will require expenditure of city funds, labor or material to complete the facilities planned, or the operation will
result in the loss of revenue to the city.
D. There is no appropriate space on the airport to accommodate the entire activity planned by the applicant.
E. The proposed operation, site development, or proposed construction does not comply with the airport master plan.
F. The use proposed for the area will result in traffic congestion or will unduly impact on the operations conducted by any existing FBO on
the airport, or prevent free access and egress from existing business areas.
G. Any party with an interest in the business application has supplied false information or has misrepresented any material fact in the
application or supporting documentation, or has failed to make full disclosure on the application.
H. Any party in the application for or conduct of the business has a record of violation of any of the rules or regulations for this or any other
airport.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 188/318
I. Any party to the application or conduct of the business has defaulted in the performance of any lease or agreement with this or any other
airport.
J. Any party to the application who is not sufficiently credit worthy and responsible in the judgment of the airport commission to provide the
payment required by the FBO lease.
K. The applicant does not have the financial resources to conduct the proposed operation for a minimum period of six (6) months.
L. An applicant or a person associated with the applicant's business is a felon or has been convicted of a crime of dishonesty or any crime
where a conviction can be shown to have a direct impact on the operations of the airport. (Ord. 960, 12-8-1997)
10-3-5: LEASE AGREEMENTS AND SERVICE REQUIRED OF FBOs:
A. Contents Of Lease: Each lease for airport facilities will contain the following terms:
1. The size of the business lot desired but in no case less than one acre.
2. The size of the hangar, office showroom complex but in no case less than five thousand (5,000) square feet unless the applicant can
demonstrate that providing five thousand (5,000) square feet poses an unnecessary economic burden on the business proposed.
3. Those business activities and only those activities to be conducted by the applicant. Addition of other operations or services will be
allowed only after the lease is amended to show those operations.
B. Trained Personnel: For each service offered to the public, the FBO shall have in his employ, and on duty during the appropriate business
hours, trained and certified personnel in such numbers as may be necessary to perform the service offered, and supervised by an
individual authorized to represent and act for the FBO.
C. Suitable Aircraft: If flight training is offered, an aircraft suitable to the training being offered, either owned or under lease, shall be
available during normal business hours. If ultralight aircraft training is offered, the FBO shall have one 2-person ultralight training aircraft
under his lease or ownership, and one instructor having a current FAA commercial pilot certificate or an advanced flight instructor's
rating from the U.S. ultralight association.
D. Trained Mechanic: Repair activities shall have at least one properly trained and rated mechanic, technician, or inspector for each of the
services offered in his employ and on duty during normal business hours. The FBO shall hold the appropriate repair stations certificates
issued by the FAA for the type of equipment he plans to service and/or install.
E. Fuel Storage: Each FBO stocking aviation fuels for his own use and not for resale to the public and who stores less than one thousand
(1,000) U.S. gallons may emplace aboveground lockable tanks, installed in such a manner as to permit easy inspection for tank integrity
at a location agreed upon by the airport manager.
F. Fuel And Oil Sales; Hours Available: Each FBO offering fuel and oil sales to the public shall carry at least 100LL aviation gasoline and jet
A turbine fuel, as well as the lubricants ordinarily used by these engines. Such operators shall establish service hours of at least eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. until dusk seven (7) days each week, with provisions for transient aircraft to obtain after-hours service.
G. Fuel Prices: Each FBO offering fuel and oil sales to the public shall price their products to be consistent with other facilities of similar size
and traffic density, except that the FBOs may make nondiscriminatory discounts and rebates for volume purchasers. Fuel prices shall be
posted on the delivery vehicle and the FBO office. Price changes shall be posted not less than seven (7) days before their effective date.
H. Requirements For Selling Fuel And Oil: Each FBO offering fuel and oil for sale to the flying public shall:
1. Maintain fuel dispensing equipment to applicable federal, state and local standards, including proper filtration and safety features to
permit safe dispensing of fuels and oils. Personnel operating fuel equipment shall be trained by the FBO and experienced in providing
into-plane fuel and oil delivery. FBOs will maintain accurate records of fuel sold and pay the agreed upon fuel flowage fee to the city
within fifteen (15) days of the close of the month in which the fuel was sold. The city may audit fuel sales records at any time during
normal business hours.
2. Provide proper equipment for aircraft ground towing, battery charging, shock strut, tire inflation and washing of both the aircraft and its
windows.
3. Provide for lawful handling and disposal of all solid, controlled and hazardous waste generated through the operations and service
provided.
4. Provide permanent restroom facilities for staff and customers.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 189/318
5. Provide a flight planning area with appropriate communications facilities and directories, charts, and maps for flight planning.
6. Provide a lounge/waiting room for passengers.
7. Unless provided by the city, provide approved storage for at least ten thousand (10,000) U.S. gallons of each fuel type required by the
lease.
8. One FBO on the airport shall install an FCC licensed radio transmitter/receiver on such airport advisory frequency as may be directed
by the FCC for the purpose of providing flight advisory information to the flying public. On receiving a call for airport information, the
following will be provided:
a. Wind direction and speed in knots.
b. Favored runway and known traffic.
c. Estimated altimeter.
d. (Optional) Location of the FBOs and fuel brands available on the airport.
I. Additional Lease Agreements: Each lease for an FBO will contain the following additional agreements:
1. The city has the right to enter leased facilities to assure that required maintenance and preservation is being accomplished by the
leaseholder.
2. Acknowledgment of the lessee's responsibility to maintain site ramps, parking and tie-down areas to FAA standards for the term of the
lease.
3. Acknowledgment that the leased access is limited to a specified number of years and may be terminated by material breach of
contract.
4. Agreement that lessee of any city-owned facility assumes full responsibility for maintenance and repair.
5. Acknowledgment that the lease or subleasing agreements may not be assigned without written approval of the city.
6. Acknowledgment that the lessee is responsible for payment of all taxes which may accrue from the business operations planned.
7. Acknowledgment that if the lease involves payment to the city based on annual gross revenue, or gross sales, the applicant will make
available to the city at any time during normal business hours, all records, reports, books or other pertinent information that may be
required by the city to fulfill its obligations to the FAA concerning sources of income for the airport. An annual report of the business
income summary is required on the anniversary date of the agreement.
8. A statement that the lessee will indemnify and hold harmless and assume defense of action of law or equity the city for liability of
every kind arising from the proposed business operation, including any employee, associate, or agent of the applicant, but not
including sole negligence or wilful misconduct on the part of the city or its agents or employees.
9. The lessee acknowledges his statutory responsibility to provide workers' compensation and unemployment insurance.
10. Acknowledgment by the city that a multiple activity fixed base operation may be unable to meet all of the standards for FBOs on the
opening day of business. However, all services to be offered under the lease shall be required to be available not later than twelve
(12) months after the effective date of the lease.
11. If storage of fuel to be used by the business exceeds five hundred (500) U.S. gallons, such storage will be sited as directed by the
airport manager. Such facilities shall be in strict conformance to federal, state and local rules and regulations pertaining to hazardous
liquid fuel storage.
J. Fuel Cooperatives: Fuel cooperatives where several pilots purchase fuel for use in their own aircraft are not recognized nor supported by
the Deming airport commission.
K. Aero Clubs: Aero clubs may store fuel in such quantities and locations as may be authorized by the airport manager. Fuel may be
dispensed into club-owned aircraft only, and adequate records will be maintained showing the aircraft registration number and the
number of gallons delivered. Aero clubs will pay a flowage fee equal to that charged the FBOs on the fifteenth of each month following
the delivery of the fuel.
L. Fueling By Individual Owners: Individual aircraft owners may fuel their own aircraft with the FAA approved grade of fuel. No aircraft will be
fueled in a hangar or other closed space. Records of fuel purchased and delivered into the aircraft will be maintained to establish proof
of compliance with federal, state and local rules and regulations for aircraft fueling. A fuel flowage fee will be paid to the city at the same
rate as is charged the FBOs for the privilege of delivering fuel into planes on the Deming municipal airport. Fueling containers will be
removed from the airport on completion of the fueling operation. Storage off the airport is also subject to federal, state and local
ordinances. (Ord. 960, 12-8-1997)
10-3-6: AIRCRAFT OPERATING RULES:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 190/318
No aircraft operations shall be conducted at the Deming municipal airport except in conformance with current federal air regulations. The
following additional local regulations shall be adhered to:
A. Parking Of Aircraft: Aircraft shall be parked in designated areas only and shall have parking brakes set and/or chocks in place to prevent
movement and shall be firmly attached to the ground by ropes or chains.
B. Traffic Patterns: The traffic pattern at Deming municipal airport is left-hand for all runways at a pattern altitude of 900'AGL (5200'MSL).
Traffic patterns and pattern altitudes will be adhered to except after declaration of an in-flight emergency requiring such deviation. The
circumstances surrounding the departure from the established pattern will be reported in writing to the airport manager within fifteen (15)
days of the event.
C. Engines Running Near Hangars: Aircraft shall be stopped and all engines shut down before approaching within twenty five feet (25') of
any hangar or building. No aircraft engines will be started when the aircraft is within twenty five feet (25') of any hangar or building. No
engines shall be started or run up within a hangar or other closed space or when the aircraft is within one hundred feet (100') and tailed
to the hangar doors.
D. Use Of Designated Runways: Aircraft shall take off and land only on designated runways. Landings and takeoffs from taxiways is
prohibited.
E. Flight Tests: Flight tests involving unusual altitudes or performance shall be accomplished in the areas prescribed by the airport manager.
F. Unlicensed Aircraft: No person shall operate an unlicensed or nonairworthy aircraft or an aircraft with a known malfunction except with
the prior approval and under permits issued by the FAA.
G. Aircraft Standing On Runway: No aircraft shall be allowed to stand on any runway. No aircraft shall block entry to or exit from any runway
or taxiway longer than necessary to complete required preflight checks and tests incidental to flight. No aircraft shall enter upon any
runway without first assuring, by visual inspection, that no hazard of collision exists with any person, vehicle, object or aircraft.
H. Starting Aircraft: Aircraft engines will not be started unless competent personnel are at the controls, the parking brakes are set or the
wheels are chocked to prevent unwanted aircraft movement. Aircraft shall be taxied at a safe and reasonable speed for the prevailing
conditions.
I. Passenger Loading Or Unloading: Passengers and freight shall be loaded or unloaded only after the engines have come to a complete
stop.
J. Access To Surface: Access to the aeronautical surface is restricted to the following personnel:
1. Aircraft owners and/or licensed pilots.
2. Personnel authorized by the FBOs.
3. Personnel engaged in loading/off loading passengers and freight.
Spectators shall not be permitted on the ramp without prior written permission of the airport manager.
K. Authority Of Airport Manager: The airport manager may refuse to allow any operation or delay any operation if he deems such a
restriction necessary for safety. (Ord. 960, 12-8-1997)
10-3-7: FLYING CLUBS:
Flying clubs are nonprofit entities organized for the express purpose of providing their members with any number of aircraft for their
personal use. Aircraft must be vested in the name of the club for the owners on a prorata share. The club may not derive greater revenue
from the use of the aircraft than the cost to operate, maintain and replace the aircraft. An aero club qualifies as an individual under federal
grant assurances and as such has the right to fuel and maintain the aircraft using the labors of its members. In return, a flying club must
provide the airport manager with certificates of insurance in the same rates and amounts as required of the FBOs. The flying club shall
maintain a list of current members so that the airport manager may reasonably determine that the club is a nonprofit organization and not
an FBO in disguise.
A. FAA Order Requirements: Flying clubs wishing to base operations on the airport shall operate in compliance with FAA order 5190.6
(current) appendix 8. This order requires, in part, that:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 191/318
1. Clubs will not derive more revenue from flight operations than that amount required to operate, maintain and replace its aircraft.
2. Flying clubs shall be nonprofit partnerships or corporations.
3. All aircraft shall be owned by all the members.
4. No part of the earnings of the club may be used to benefit any member. No salaries, bonuses, or wages shall be paid to any member.
5. No commercial flight operations are permitted, nor shall any member of the club lease or sell any aviation goods or services to any
other person or business. This does not preclude the club from selling or trading its capital assets.
6. No person who is not a member of the club will be permitted to operate or use club aircraft. An exception is made for the single case
of flight instructors not holding a membership in the club under subsection A8 of this section.
7. Members of the club who hold FAA mechanics' licenses, who perform maintenance on club aircraft, may not be paid. Credit for work
performed may be granted for payment of flight time or payment of dues and fees for both mechanics and flight instructors.
8. Members of the club who are FAA certified flight instructors may instruct other members of the club, in club aircraft. They may not
charge the club or its members for flight instructor services. If no member of the club holds a current CFI rating (or those who do, do
not desire to donate their time to the club), a paid CFI may conduct flight training for club members in club aircraft. Instructors routinely
offering services at Deming municipal airport shall obtain appropriate permission and permits to conduct such operations from the city
before any instruction is started.
B. Charter Or Bylaws Provided To Airport Manager: The club shall provide the airport manager a current copy of its charter, bylaws and/or
articles of association and the names of the directors, officers and members, updated semiannually, number and type of aircraft,
evidence that the aircraft are properly certificated, evidence that the aircraft ownership is vested in the club and a copy of the operating
rules of the club. Account books will be provided on demand by the airport manager or city administrator.
C. Fuel Storage Facilities: A flying club, exercising its option of providing its own fuel storage facilities, must comply with all federal, state
and local laws, regulations and ordinances pertaining to such facilities and site the storage and handling equipment as directed by the
airport manager.
D. Violation; Terminate Operations: A club which violates any of the foregoing, or permits one or more of its members to do so, will be
required to terminate all operations at the Deming municipal airport. (Ord. 960, 12-8-1997)
10-3-8: MOTOR VEHICLES:
All persons using the airport shall operate all automobiles, motorcycles, trucks or any other wheeled vehicle in accordance with the
following:
A. Parking: Vehicles shall not be parked in areas other than those designated by the airport manager.
B. For Hire Vehicles: Common carrier and for hire vehicles shall stand and be loaded in the areas designated by the airport manager.
C. Certified Personnel: Vehicles shall be operated only on ramps or aprons by personnel certified for such duty.
D. Operation On Runways Or Taxiways: Vehicles operated on the runways or taxiways are subject to the following restrictions:
1. All operations shall be authorized whether by the airport manager or the individual FBOs.
2. Operators will be trained and certified for operations on the runways or taxiways.
3. Vehicles operated on the runways shall carry a checkered flag of a size and form approved by the airport manager.
4. Vehicle speed shall not exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour in congested and parking areas and twenty five (25) miles per hour on the
ramps, aprons and taxiways.
5. Vehicles improperly parked may be towed by the city, and owners are responsible for the towing fees. (Ord. 960, 12-8-1997)
10-3-9: FIREARMS:
A. Only persons authorized by federal, state or local governments shall carry or discharge a firearm within the airport boundaries and then
only in the proper discharge of his duties.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 192/318
B. Hunting and target practice is prohibited. (Ord. 960, 12-8-1997)
10-3-10: FIRE SAFETY:
The following fire safety rules apply:
A. Storage Or Operation In Hangars: No person shall store or operate an automobile, truck or other motor vehicle within the community
hangars. Power operated tugs or tractors operated within any hangar shall be first approved by the airport manager.
B. Fires Or Smoking Near Aircraft Or Fuel Areas: No person shall kindle any light or open flame, smoke any cigarette, cigar or pipe within
fifty feet (50') of any aircraft, fuel delivery vehicle or fuel storage area.
C. Certain Maintenance Operations Restricted: Maintenance operations involving welding, flame or plasma cutting shall not be conducted
concurrently with any spray finishing operation in the same hangar or building. Such maintenance operations shall only be conducted in
areas approved by the airport manager.
D. Fire Training Programs: Each FBO shall institute fire training programs for their employees covering the use of portable firefighting
equipment and site evacuation for all personnel working on the premises. (Ord. 960, 12-8-1997)
E. Fire Extinguishers: Portable fire extinguishers shall be procured and installed by the FBO in the public areas of the airport as directed by
the city fire chief. The tenant of each airplane hangar and any other structure on airport property shall procure and install a fire
extinguisher in each such hangar or structure. Every fire extinguisher shall be of a type and size and located in a place designated by
the city fire chief. Every fire extinguisher shall be properly maintained and accessible for use in an emergency and shall not be removed
from locations designated by the city fire chief for any reason other than use against fire or for recharging. (Ord. 1057, 3-11-2002)
F. Access Lanes: Access lanes to all fire extinguishing equipment shall be kept clear and unobstructed at all times.
G. Storage Of Flammable Materials: No person shall store or stock any flammable material or liquids within any hangar or building without
prior approval by the airport manager as to the area, type of container and quantity.
H. Use Of Flammable Materials Restricted: All tenants of city owned buildings shall maintain the floors clear of oil, grease, fuels, and other
flammable materials. Lessees shall provide drip pans to catch operating fluids leaking from aircraft in their custody. No fuels or
flammable substances will be used to clean floors or ramp areas. Flammable materials such as oily rags shall be kept in covered metal
storage containers in such numbers as may be required.
I. Parts Cleaning: Parts cleaning will be accomplished with either nonflammable liquids or liquids having a flash point in excess of one
hundred degrees Fahrenheit (100°F). Used solvents will be disposed of by EPA approved procedures. No such material will be dumped
into any drain, open ditch, manhole or any other area on the airport.
J. Electrical Wiring Installations; Inspection: Any added electrical wiring or appliances shall be installed in accordance with the national
electrical code and inspected by a licensed inspector approved by the airport manager.
K. Report Fire To City Fire Department: Every person who becomes aware of a fire, smoke or smoldering combustion which is not
contained within a suitable burning container shall report the location and nature of the fire to the Deming fire department.
L. Compliance With Fire Regulations: All persons shall comply with fire regulations as may be published from time to time by the Deming
fire department. Those FBOs found in violation of fire safety code shall be required to immediately remedy the defect. Failure to do so
shall result in the city applying such remedy as it may see fit at the expense of the FBO. (Ord. 960, 12-8-1997)
10-3-11: FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY:
All owners of aircraft based on the Deming municipal airport shall maintain financial responsibility in the amounts as may be required by the
city. All Deming municipal airport based aircraft owners shall furnish the city evidence of meeting the required financial responsibility. The
minimum shall be:
Each accident $250,000.00
Bodily injury or death (each person) 250,000.00
Property damage 250,000.00
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 193/318
Evidence acceptable to the city is a certificate of insurance or a bond issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in the
state. Aircraft owners not meeting this requirement will not be permitted to operate from the Deming municipal airport. (Ord. 960, 12-8-1997)
10-3-12: DAMAGE TO AIRCRAFT:
A. Witnesses to, and participants in, any action which results in damage to an aircraft on the Deming municipal airport shall promptly make
a full written report of the circumstances surrounding the incident to the airport manager.
B. Owners and operators of aircraft damaged on the airport shall be responsible for removal of the damaged aircraft, parts or debris
resulting from the accident after approval for such move has been approved by the airport manager or the FAA. (Ord. 960, 12-8-1997)
10-3-13: DAMAGE TO AIRPORT PROPERTY:
Any person causing damage to airport property or structure shall report the loss to the airport manager and be responsible for the cost of
the repairs required. (Ord. 960, 12-8-1997)
10-3-14: CLEANLINESS:
All persons using the airport shall place rubbish, garbage or other trash and debris into trash containers located around the airport. Aircraft
owners and operators shall keep their hangar and storage areas clean and neatly stored. (Ord. 960, 12-8-1997)
10-3-15: TRESPASSING:
No person shall walk, drive, operate any motorized vehicle or conduct any activity of any sort not related to aircraft operations on the
aeronautical surface without prior written approval of the airport manager. (Ord. 960, 12-8-1997)
10-3-16: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:
Many materials transported by ground and air vehicles are incompatible with each other and the environment of the aircraft. The research
and special programs administration of the federal government has prepared voluminous regulations in an attempt to identify all of the
hazards involved in the transportation of such materials (49 USC 5101-5127 contains the federal hazardous material transportation law).
Flight personnel must be diligent in ascertaining the exact nature of materials presented for transportation by air, particularly in the case of
liquids. (Ord. 960, 12-8-1997)
10-3-17: HANGAR RENTALS:
There are three (3) 8,400-square foot hangars and six (6) "T" hangars on the south side of the airport and two (2) 5,000-square foot
hangars, ten (10) "T" hangars and one 10,000-square foot hangar on the north side. Space is leased from the city, whose office also
maintains a waiting list for eventual assignment to space. Priority for assignment to "T" hangars is given to local aircraft owners whose
aircraft is presently in one of the community hangars. If the "T" hangars are not filled by local pilots, they will be assigned to aircraft owners
from other nearby communities in order of accession from the waiting list. Priority for the community hangars will be
corporate/government/business long term lease, followed by individual aircraft owners. Only after all aircraft owners desiring space have
been served will consideration be given to other nonaviation uses of the buildings. Such leases will be on a year to year basis, permitting
reversion to aircraft use should the demand develop. A copy of the hangar lease agreement is available from the airport manager or the city
offices. Hangar rents are due and payable in advance of occupancy. (Ord. 1138, 5-8-2006)
10-3-18: RAMP PARKING FEE:
Any inactive aircraft parked on any ramp area of the airport for a period exceeding two (2) weeks will be assessed a ramp parking fee equal
to the equivalent monthly community hangar fee in effect or, on a per diem basis, a fee equal to the monthly equivalent community hangar
fee in effect divided by thirty (30) plus twenty five percent (25%), whichever is less. (Ord. 1099, 11-8-2004)
Title 11
BUILDING REGULATIONS
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 194/318
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODES
11-1-1: ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODES:
The purpose of this title is to provide for the administration and enforcement by the city of Deming of the technical codes adopted by the
state of New Mexico and to provide minimum standards for the protection of life, environment, public safety, and welfare, and for the
conservation of energy in the design, construction, and maintenance of buildings and residences. The regulations as set out in the following
articles of title 14 of the New Mexico administrative code and regulations specifically adopted by the city of Deming are hereby incorporated
by reference in this title, and shall include later amendments and editions.
2006 New Mexico commercial building code
2006 international building code: appendix H: signs
2006 New Mexico residential building code
2006 plumbing code
2006 New Mexico swimming pool and hot tub code (phase III)
2006 New Mexico mechanical code
2006 New Mexico electrical code
2008 New Mexico electrical safety code
2008 New Mexico solar energy code
2006 New Mexico energy conservation code (phase III)
2006 New Mexico existing building code
2006 international property maintenance code
A copy of each of the codes adopted by reference in this section shall be available for inspection during the building inspector's normal and
regular business hours, at the Deming municipal building. (Ord. 1192, 11-5-2009)
11-1-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODES:
A. Sign Code: The sign code, adopted by reference in section 11-1-1 of this chapter, is amended to modify the 2006 international building
code: appendix H signs in certain respects and to add provisions relating to the specific needs of the city:
Section H101.1 Application For Permit: The following language is added to the existing section H101.1:
Application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by a fee of $15.00 paid to the city of Deming.
Section H102.1 Definitions:
On-Premises Sign: Any sign which advertises activities conducted on the property upon which the sign is located and within the area
actually utilized for the purpose of the activity it advertises.
Off-Premises Sign: Any sign identifying or advertising a business, person, activity, good, product, or service not located on the premises
where the sign is installed and maintained or which directs persons to any location not on the premises.
Section H105 Design And Construction:
Lighting. All lighted signs shall be designed, located, shielded and directed so as to prevent the casting of glare or direct light from
artificial illumination upon adjacent or surrounding property or public roadways or into the sky.
Section H110 Roof Signs:
No off-premises signs shall be permitted above the roof or parapet of any building or structure.
Section H111 Wall Signs:
Wall Signs: No off-premises wall signs shall be allowed within the city of Deming.
Message Boards: Signs shall not include or be illuminated by flashing, intermittent or moving lights without prior approval of the Deming
city council. An application for such approval shall be made to the planning and zoning commission and the public given notice and
opportunity to be heard as to whether, and under what conditions, such a sign should be allowed.
Temporary Signs: A-frame signs, sandwich signs and curb signs will be allowed only within private property. No such sign shall exceed
an area of nine (9) square feet on each side and all such signs shall be anchored securely so as to keep it in place. No such sign shall
be placed upon a public sidewalk or right of way without prior approval of the city of Deming administrator or the community services
director and the execution by the sign owner of an agreement under which the owner agrees to carry liability insurance with the city of
Deming named as an additional insured and the owner agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city of Deming for injury to persons or
property related to such sign. All commercial signage located within the boundaries of municipal or school parks, recreation areas, and
athletic fields (i.e. baseball, soccer, football, and BMX) shall fall within the province of the parks and recreation commission and the city
council of Deming or the Deming public school board of education depending on ownership.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 195/318
Sign Content: It shall be unlawful for any sign to contain the imitation or simulation of official U.S. interstate, state, county or city highway
sign shields or command language within such shields or in combination with such shields such as "stop", "slow", "turn right", "turn left",
"straight ahead" or any such words whether used alone or in combination so as to cause a motorist to be misled in any manner. It shall
be unlawful for any sign to have any obscene or vulgar content.
Location And Size: On-Premises Signs: On-premises wall signs shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total surface area of any wall.
On-premises ground signs shall not exceed a size of two square feet for every one foot of street or highway frontage of the premises. No
on-premises sign shall exceed a height of fifty (50) feet above the middle road grade, except that on-premises signs along Cedar Street
and Railroad Avenue shall not exceed a height of one hundred (100) feet above the middle grade of those streets.
Off-Premises Signs: No off-premises signs shall be allowed in the city of Deming. In the event the Deming city council grants a variance
to allow an off-premises sign, the following limitations on location, size and density shall apply.
(a) Off-premises signs shall not be located anywhere within the city of Deming except along U.S. Interstate Highway 10, U.S. Highway
180, Highway 70/80 and N.M. Highway 11 and only as provided herein.
(b) No off-premises signs shall be allowed in the areas bounded by Cedar Street on north, Florida Street to the south, Silver Street to the
east and Copper Street to the west.
(c) Interstate 10: No sign shall be erected without first obtaining permits from both the state of New Mexico and the city of Deming.
(d) U.S. Highway 180 North: Signs along U.S. Highway 180 North (Gold Avenue from Railroad Avenue north to the Deming city limit)
shall not exceed forty feet in height measured from the middle grade of U.S. Highway 180, shall not exceed 320 square feet and shall be
spaced a minimum of 500 feet apart on the same side of the roadway from a legally permitted off-premises sign.
(e) N.M. Highway 11: Signs along N.M. Highway 11 (Cody Road from Poplar Street south to the Deming city limit), shall not exceed a
height of 40 feet, measured from the middle grade of N.M. Highway 11, shall not exceed 320 square feet and shall be spaced a
minimum of 1,500 feet apart on the same side of the roadway from a legally permitted off-premises sign and 750 feet apart on the
opposite of the roadway from a legally permitted off-premises sign.
(f) U.S. Highway 70/80: Signs along U.S. Highway 70/80 (Pine Street) shall not exceed a height of 40 feet, measured from the middle
grade of U.S. Highway 70/80, shall not exceed 320 square feet apart on the same side of the roadway and 750 feet apart on the
opposite of the roadway from a legally permitted off-premises sign.
(g) Interstate 10: Signs along Interstate 10 shall not exceed a height of 40 feet, measured from the middle grade of Interstate 10, shall
not exceed 672 square feet and shall be spaced a minimum of 2,000 feet apart on the same side of the roadway and 1,000 feet apart on
the opposite of the roadway from a legally permitted off-premises sign.
Ground Signs: On-premises ground signs shall not exceed an area equal to two square feet per one foot of premises street or highway
frontage and shall not in any event exceed an area of one hundred (100) square feet. All spherical, double-faced or multi-faced signs
shall be treated as one sign and the total area of the sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet.
Applicability: The provisions of this code do not apply to any nonconforming use existing on the effective date of this ordinance,
providing that any substantial reconstruction or replacement of other sign shall be deemed a new use and shall be subject to the
applicable provisions of the sign code. If a nonconforming sign has been abandoned or more than 50% torn down, destroyed,
deteriorated or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such sign to be rebuilt or repaired except in conformity with the
provisions of this sign code, excepting for density.
B. Political Signs: Political signs shall be limited to four (4) square feet by eight (8) square feet in size. Signs posted on vacant land must
have written authorization by the property owner. No signs may be posted upon any building structure, or grounds that are owned,
operated or maintained by any public agency or utility. Signs shall not obstruct or encroach on any public way. Signs must be placed not
to obstruct the vision of a driver to see approaching vehicles to the left and right and all traffic signs. Signs may not be posted more than
sixty (60) days prior to any primary or general election. Candidates or affiliates are responsible for removing the signs within ten (10)
days after the election. In primary, nominating primary, or runoff elections, the winning candidate may keep the political signs until ten
(10) days after the general election. City code enforcement officers are authorized to remove any political campaign sign posted in
violation of this subsection. (Ord. 1192, 11-5-2009)
11-1-3: BUILDING PERMIT FEES:
Any person may apply to the city building inspector for building permits by filing an application in the form prescribed by the city building
inspector from time to time and by submitting the following fees with the application: (Ord. 940, 12-9-1996)
A. General Permits: General permits required for any construction or alteration project: A minimum ten dollar ($10.00) fee up to an
estimated value of proposed construction or valuation value of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), then two dollars ($2.00) shall be added
to the minimum fee for each one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or any portion thereof estimated value in excess of five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) of the proposed construction or alteration thereafter. The minimum ten dollar ($10.00) fee on residential projects shall
include completion of the "homeowners' responsibilities" form. (Ord. 1052, 12-10-2001)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 196/318
B. Mechanical Permits: Mechanical permits required in addition to the general permit for inspection of the following items adopted from
14.5.5.13 NMAC and any future amendments:
1. Administrative fee for any inspection $37.50
2. Each plumbing fixture, including backflow protection therefor 4.00
3. Each water distribution system 4.00
4. Each building sewer 4.00
5. Each water heater 4.00
6. Each water conditioner 6.00
7. Each evaporative cooler 6.00
8. Each swimming pool 50.00
9. Each vacuum breaker or backflow device which is not an integral part of a plumbing fixture or supply pipe thereto
4.00
10.
Each gas piping system 6.00
11. Each gas appliance 4.00
12.
Each gas pipe outlet 4.00
13.
Reinspection 37.50
14.
Ventilation system 6.00
15.
Refrigeration system 6.00
16.
Central furnace ductwork 10.00
17.
Each domestic hot water solar heating system 10.00
18.
Each solar space heating system 20.00
19.
Final certificate of approval 7.50
20.
Sewage ejector/grinder 4.00
21.
Grease trap/interceptor 4.00
22.
Water service line 4.00
23.
Gas yard line 4.00
24.
Combination unit (HVAC) 4.00
25.
Fan coil unit 4.00
26.
Hot water radiant heating system 10.00
27.
Chilled water distribution system 10.00
28.
Steam and condensate piping system 10.00
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 197/318
29.
Roof drainage system 10.00
30.
Chiller 10.00
31.
Cooling tower 10.00
32.
Commercial kitchen hood 10.00
33.
Commercial duct system 10.00
34.
Medical gas system 10.00
(Ord. 1188, 7-13-2009)
C. Fencing: The general building permit required in subsection A of this section is required prior to the construction of any fence or wall.
Prior to the issuance of such a permit, the property owner or contractor shall submit to the city building inspector a sketch of the property
indicating the location and dimensions of the proposed fence or wall. No permit shall be issued unless the proposed fence or wall will
meet the requirements of the city building code and any other applicable ordinance. (Ord. 982, 11-9-1998)
D. Double Fee: If any work, other than site preparation, for which a permit is required is commenced prior to obtaining the necessary permit,
the city building inspector shall assess a fee in the amount twice the usual permit and inspection fees, or refer the violation for action by
the city of Deming building inspector.
E. Reinspection Fee: A fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for reinspection shall be paid when an inspection is requested by the permit
holder or any other authorized person, and the structure fails the inspection, the structure is not ready for the inspection, and/or the
inspector is required to return for an inspection for any other reason, not otherwise attributable to the city of Deming building inspector.
(Ord. 1147, 9-11-2006)
F. Skipped Inspection Fee: If a required inspection has been missed due to the action(s) of the permit holder or any person authorized to act
for the permit holder, a skipped inspection fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be assessed by the building inspector for the
first skipped inspection. A four hundred dollar ($400.00) fee shall be assessed by the building inspector for each missed inspection
thereafter. The above fees shall be assessed on a per permit basis. (Ord. 1151, 11-13-2006)
11-1-4: FAIR HOUSING:
A. Policy Statement: It shall be the policy of the city of Deming, New Mexico, pursuant to the constitutions of the United States of America
and the state of New Mexico, and also its power to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of its residents, that all persons,
regardless of race, creed, color, religion, gender, ancestry, national origin, handicap, age, lawful source of income, families with children,
or gender or marital status of the person maintaining the household, are entitled to fair and equal access to housing. The city does
hereby reconfirm its position to encourage and promote fair housing practices for all housing provided by the New Mexico district V
housing authority and the Luna County Housing Corporation.
B. Definitions: The following definitions shall apply to this section:
DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE: Any act that is unlawful under subsection C of this section and title 42 USC chapter 45 - fair
housing.
DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof, which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, association, firm, syndicate, company, trust, corporation, department, bureau, agency, or any other
entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
C. Prohibited Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following because of race, creed, color, religion, gender, ancestry,
national origin, handicap, age, lawful source of income, families with children, or gender or marital status of the person maintaining the
household:
1. Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rent of, or otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person.
2. To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services
or facilities in connection therewith.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 198/318
3. To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale
or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination.
4. To represent to any person that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rent when such dwelling is in fact so available.
5. For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective
entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons.
6. To discriminate in the sale or rent, or to otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a physical
or mental handicap.
If someone has a physical or mental disability, a landlord may not:
a. Refuse to let them make reasonable modifications to a dwelling or common use areas at their expense, if necessary to enable the
disabled person to use the dwelling; or
b. Refuse to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies or practices, if necessary for the disabled person to use the dwelling.
D. Exemptions:
1. Nothing in this section shall prohibit any religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization
operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society from limiting the sale,
rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates, to persons of the same religion or denomination, or from giving preference
to such persons.
2. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or
purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy
of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members.
3. Nothing in this section limits the applicability of any reasonable city of Deming restrictions regarding the maximum number of
occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling.
4. Nothing in this section shall prohibit discrimination on the basis of age or on the basis of families with children with respect to
dwellings designed for the elderly. The provisions of section 807 42 USC 3607 (b)(2) of the federal fair housing act shall apply in this
regard.
E. Complaints: Violations of the fair housing act and this fair housing section shall be referred to the New Mexico district V housing authority
to act on its behalf within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 1070, 3-31-2003)
11-1-5: INDOOR WATER CONSERVATION:
The following regulations shall apply to promote indoor water conservation:
A. Definition: "Water conservation" means any beneficial reduction in water use or water loss.
B. Indoor Plumbing Fixtures:
1. All new residential buildings and all new nonresidential buildings, including all additions and renovations to existing residential and
nonresidential buildings that involve either the installation of new toilets or the replacement of existing toilets, shall install low flush
toilets which use no more than 2.0 gallons per flush (gpf).
2. All new residential buildings and all new nonresidential buildings, including all additions and renovations to existing residential and
nonresidential buildings that involve either the installation of new showerheads or the replacement of existing showerheads, shall
install showerheads with a maximum flow rate that does not exceed 2.5 gallons per minute (gpm).
3. All new residential buildings and all new nonresidential buildings, including all additions and renovations to existing residential and
nonresidential buildings that involve either the installation of new faucets or the replacement of existing faucets, shall install faucets
with a maximum flow rate that does not exceed 1.5 gallons per minute (gpm).
C. Indoor Appliances:
1. It is recommended, but not mandatory that all new residential buildings and all new nonresidential buildings, including all additions
and renovations to existing residential and nonresidential buildings that involve either the installation of new dishwashers or the
replacement of existing dishwashers, to install low water use dishwashers which require no more than thirteen (13) gallons of water in
the regular cycle and have a cycle adjustment that reduces the water used for small loads.
2. It is recommended, but not mandatory that all new residential buildings and all new nonresidential buildings, including all additions
and renovations to existing residential and nonresidential buildings that involve either the installation of new clothes washing
machines or the replacement of existing clothes washing machines, to install low water use clothes washing machines which require
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 199/318
no more than forty three (43) gallons of water in the regular cycle and no more than fifty three (53) gallons of water in the permanent
press cycle, and have a cycle or water level adjustment that reduces the water used for small loads.
3. It is recommended, but not mandatory that all new residential buildings and all new nonresidential buildings, to install a hot water
recirculation system approved by Underwriters Laboratories or other similar, nationally accepted approval agency. Alternatively, a
"demand water heater" system, installed centrally or at the point of use, may be used if such system is approved by Underwriters
Laboratories, or other similar, nationally accepted approval agency.
D. Outdoor Appliances:
1. It is recommended, but not mandatory that all new residential buildings and all new nonresidential buildings, including all additions
and renovations to existing residential and nonresidential buildings that involve either the installation of new evaporative coolers or the
replacement of existing evaporative coolers, to install manufactured coolers with certified water conservative features.
E. Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1087, 6-14-2004)
11-1-6: WATER CONSERVATION; USE OF GRAY WATER:
The following regulations shall apply to the use of gray water for residential landscape purposes:
A. Definitions:
GRAY WATER: Untreated household wastewater that has not come in contact with toilet waste and includes wastewater from bathtubs,
showers, washbasins, clothes washing machines and laundry tubs, but does not include wastewater from kitchen sinks or dishwashers
or laundry water from the washing of material soiled with human excreta, such as diapers.
B. Use Of Gray Water For Residential Landscape Purposes:
1. Under sections 74-6-2 and 74-6-4, New Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978, as amended, a resident, without a permit from the New
Mexico environmental department, may apply less than two hundred fifty (250) gallons per day of private residential gray water
originating from his/her residence for the resident's household gardening, composting or landscape irrigation if:
a. A constructed gray water distribution system provides for overflow into the sewage collection or on site wastewater treatment and
disposal system;
b. A gray water storage tank is covered to restrict access and to eliminate habitat for mosquitoes or other vectors;
c. A gray water system is sited outside of a floodway;
d. Gray water is vertically separated at least five feet (5') above the ground water table. Gray water shall not be applied within one
hundred feet (100') of a domestic well or within two hundred feet (200') of a public water well;
e. Gray water pressure piping is clearly identified as a nonpotable water conduit;
f. Gray water is used on the site where it is generated and does not run off the property lines;
g. Gray water is applied in a manner that minimizes the potential for contact with people or domestic pets. Gray water application
methods that reduce contact include drip irrigation, shallow piping systems, or mulch trenches;
h. Ponding of gray water is prohibited and application of gray water must be managed to minimize standing water and to prevent
saturation of the soil;
i. Gray water is not sprayed;
j. Gray water is not discharged to a watercourse. Discharge of gray water must be at least one hundred feet (100') from streams or
lakes or twenty five feet (25'), plus the depth of the arroyo, from an arroyo; and
k. Gray water use within municipalities or counties complies with all applicable municipal or county ordinances enacted pursuant to
chapter 3, article 53, New Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978.
2. A gray water system that is designed to discharge more than two hundred fifty (250) gallons per day from a private residence requires
a permit from the New Mexico environment department.
3. Notwithstanding that a permit from the New Mexico environment department is not required in order to apply less than two hundred
fifty (250) gallons per day of private water, any resident who wishes to apply less than two hundred fifty (250) gallons per day of
private residential gray water, and who wishes to construct, install, or alter, or cause to be constructed, installed or altered any gray
water system, shall first obtain a plumbing permit, from the construction industries division of the regulation and licensing department
of the state of New Mexico, and such gray water system shall comply with all standards for gray water systems set out in appendix G
of the uniform plumbing code, 1997 edition as adopted by the city of Deming, or such later editions, as may be adopted, from time to
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 200/318
time, by the city of Deming. The installation of a gray water system shall be done or supervised by a licensed plumber, and such
licensed plumber shall certify that such installation complies with the standards of the uniform building code.
C. Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1087, 6-14-2004)
Chapter 2
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM
11-2-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, a "wind energy conversion system" (hereinafter called WECS) is defined as any device such as a wind charger,
windmill or wind turbine, which converts wind energy to a form of usable energy. (Ord. 691, 1-11-1982)
11-2-2: APPLICATION FOR INSTALLATION; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
A. Filing Of Application: It shall be unlawful for any person to hereafter install any WECS within the city without first filing an application for
such installation and complying with the regulations pertaining to such unit hereinafter set forth.
B. Contents: Prior to the installation of any WECS unit, an application shall be filed with the building inspector of the city on a form approved
by the city. Such application shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. A copy of the windplant manufacturer's claim as to survival windspeed.
2. A copy of the windplant manufacturer's warranty.
3. A copy of the tower manufacturer's survival windspeed claim.
4. A copy of the tower manufacturer's warranty.
5. A copy of the installing dealer's service warranty.
6. A copy of the manufacturer's operation and service manual.
C. Plans And Specifications: In addition to the above information, any applicant for a permit to install a WECS unit shall submit to the
building inspector written plans and specifications showing evidence of compliance with the following regulations:
1. A WECS unit shall be set back from the property line of the applicant the height of the tower plus the rotor length, unless a variance is
granted pursuant to the zoning ordinances of the city.
2. A WECS unit shall be set back the height of the tower plus the rotor length from overhead power lines located below the height of the
tower.
3. That the WECS unit is not mounted on any rooftop or attached to any existing structure other than a freestanding tower properly
engineered for the system.
4. The tower climbing apparatus shall be no lower than twelve feet (12') from the ground or an anti-climb device shall be installed from
ground level up to a minimum of ten feet (10'), or a fence six feet (6') high with a locking gate shall be placed around the tower base,
and, that any guide wires are adequately protected from any accidental damage or vandalism.
5. That the WECS system shall not cause interference with radio, TV, microwave or any other communication and electronic equipment
within the vicinity of the unit.
6. That the tower support base of a WECS unit is five (5) rotor distances from the tower support base of any other WECS unit.
7. That the WECS unit shall be installed by a licensed and authorized WECS dealer.
8. That, if the WECS unit is to be interconnected to a utility system, that it will meet the requirements for interconnection and operation
as set forth in the electric utilities' current service regulations applicable to small power producing qualifying facilities, and complies
with all applicable building codes.
9. That the noise generated by the WECS unit shall conform to any existing noise control ordinances or shall be no more than the
background noise in the area.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 201/318
10. That the tower construction of a WECS unit within the vicinity of the airport is in accordance with FAA regulations. (Ord. 691, 1-11-
1982)
11-2-3: APPROVAL OF BUILDING INSPECTOR REQUIRED:
No WECS unit recognized or designated as any prototype or experimental unit shall be installed without the written approval of the building
inspector. (Ord. 691, 1-11-1982)
11-2-4: PENALTY:
Any person who installs a WECS unit within the city limits without first filing an application as provided herein, or who fails to comply with
the regulations set forth above shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code, and any violation hereof shall
be deemed a nuisance and may be abated by injunction or other legal proceedings. (Ord. 691, 1-11-1982)
Chapter 3
NUMBERING HOUSES AND LOTS
11-3-1: NUMBERING REQUIRED:
The mayor shall, by and with the consent of the city council, appoint some competent person to number all of the houses and lots situated
within the corporate limits. (Ord. 62, 7-11-1911)
11-3-2: PLATS FOR NUMBERING:
A. Plat Of City: The person so appointed shall, within sixty (60) days after his appointment as aforesaid, make and complete a plat of the
city, showing the names of all streets and avenues in the city, together with the numbers of the lots and blocks as the same appear upon
the plat of the original townsite and the various additions and subdivisions thereto on file with the county, and designating and showing
the numbers of all houses and lots as follows:
The corporate limits as shown on the plat aforesaid shall, for the purpose of numbering the houses and lots, be divided into four (4)
subdivisions and all houses and lots abutting on or adjoining the streets and avenues running north and south which lie north of Pine
Street shall be designated "No. North Street" (or Avenue) and those lying south of said street shall be designated "No. South Street" (or
Avenue); and all houses and lots abutting on or adjoining the streets and avenues running east and west, which lie east of Gold Avenue
shall be designated "No. East Street" (or Avenue), and those lying west of said avenue shall be designated "No. West Street" (or
Avenue). Every twenty five foot (25') frontage on any street or avenue shall carry a separate number and the general plan of one
hundred (100) numbers in a block, in use in most cities, shall be carried out in numbering the houses and lots in Deming. Houses and
lots along the north and east sides of streets and avenues shall carry odd numbers and those on the south and west sides shall carry
even numbers.
B. Plat Available For Inspection: Said plat, when completed, shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be the property of the city, and shall at
all times during the business hours be subject to the right of inspection by any property owner in the city, or his agent. (Ord. 62, 7-11-
1911)
11-3-3: DUTY OF OWNER:
A. City To Notify Property Owners: The person appointed by the mayor as provided in section 11-3-1 of this chapter shall notify the owner or
agent in charge of any house in the city what the number thereof is, and said owner or agent shall within fifteen (15) days thereafter
cause said number to be painted or affixed on said house in a conspicuous place in figures not less than two and one-half inches (21/2")
in height.
B. New Buildings: All persons erecting any house in the city at any time hereafter are hereby required to comply with the provisions of this
chapter by painting or affixing thereto the number thereof after they have acquired the same from the city clerk, which information shall
be furnished them by the city clerk free of charge. (Ord. 62, 7-11-1911)
Chapter 4
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
11-4-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 202/318
A. Statutory Authorization: The legislature of the state of New Mexico has in statutes amended (New Mexico Statutes Annotated), 1978,
section 3-18-7 delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
Therefore, the city council of the city of Deming, New Mexico, does ordain as follows.
B. Findings Of Fact:
1. The flood hazard areas of Deming are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all
of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
2. These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are
inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
C. Statement Of Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
1. Protect human life and health;
2. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
3. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
4. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
5. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in floodplains;
6. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to
minimize future flood blight areas; and
7. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
D. Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses: In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods:
1. Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood
heights or velocities;
2. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;
3. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters;
4. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development, which may increase flood damage;
5. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands. (Ord. 1204, 9-13-2010)
11-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING: Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is
characterized by high velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
APEX: A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes
unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
APPURTENANT STRUCTURE: A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of
which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
AREA OF FUTURE CONDITIONS FLOOD HAZARD: The land area that would be inundated by the one percent (1%) annual chance (100-
year) flood based on future conditions hydrology.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM)
with a one percent (1%) or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet (3') where a clearly defined channel
does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 203/318
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking
has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-
30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood
insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood
that has a one percent (1%) chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year; also called the base flood.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL: A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation
system.
CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by
the entire system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING: For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by
foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the
effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as
"existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation of additional sites by the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM): An official map of a community, issued by the administrator, where the boundaries of the
flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated as zones A, M, and/or E.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the federal emergency management agency has
delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): See definition of Flood Elevation Study.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
B. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and
which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a
"special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams,
reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering
standards.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage,
including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police
power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood
damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of Flood
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 204/318
Or Flooding).
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY: See definition of Regulatory Floodway.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers,
and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a listing maintained by the department of the interior) or preliminarily
determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the secretary of the interior; or
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior; or
2. Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices
to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage
devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor;
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of
section 60.3 of the national flood insurance program regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a
"recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the North American vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other
datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or
after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction"
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is: a) built on a single chassis; b) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projections; c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and d) designed primarily not for
use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 205/318
RIVERINE: Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA: See definition of Area Of Special Flood Hazard.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the coastal barrier resources act (Pub. L.
97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit
date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
building.
STRUCTURE: For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally
aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes
structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include
either: a) any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions or b) any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
a "historic structure".
VARIANCE: A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see section 60.6
of the national flood insurance program regulations.)
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations.
A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the North American vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where
specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas. (Ord. 1204, 9-13-2010)
11-4-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Lands To Which This Chapter Applies: This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city of
Deming, New Mexico.
B. Basis For Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood Hazard: The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency
management agency in the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or flood hazard boundary map (FHBM), community number 350038, dated
October 19, 2010.
C. Establishment Of Development Permit: A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of
this chapter.
D. Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of
this chapter and other applicable regulations.
E. Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
F. Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 1) considered as minimum requirements; 2)
liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes.
G. Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 206/318
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part
of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 1204, 9-13-2010)
11-4-4: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Designation Of The Floodplain Administrator: The city engineer or designee is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to
administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (emergency management and
assistance - national flood insurance program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
B. Duties And Responsibilities Of The Floodplain Administrator: Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
1. Maintain and hold open for public inspection, pursuant to the New Mexico inspection of public records act, all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
2. Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of
manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
3. Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this chapter.
4. Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies (including section 404 of the federal water pollution control act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from
which prior approval is required.
5. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the
necessary interpretation.
6. Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the New Mexico department of
homeland security and emergency management (DHSEM), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence
of such notification to the federal emergency management agency.
7. Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
8. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with subsection 11-4-3B of this chapter, the floodplain
administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal,
state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of section 11-4-5 of this chapter.
C. Permit Procedures:
1. Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and
may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed
landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the
foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
a. Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;
c. A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the
floodproofing criteria of subsection 11-4-5B2 of this chapter;
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed
development;
e. Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection B1 of this section.
2. Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this
chapter and the following relevant factors:
a. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
b. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
c. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
d. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
e. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 207/318
f. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and
bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
g. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;
h. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
i. The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use.
D. Variance Procedures:
1. The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements
of this chapter.
2. The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision,
or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
3. Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent
jurisdiction.
4. The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the federal
emergency management agency upon request.
5. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the national register of historic
places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter.
6. Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant
factors in subsection C2 of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
7. Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter (subsection 11-4-1C of this chapter).
8. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
9. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary
to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
10. Prerequisites for granting variances:
a. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.
b. Variances shall only be issued upon: 1) showing a good and sufficient cause; 2) a determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and 3) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
c. Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the
lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased
risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
11. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary
for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: a) the criteria outlined in subsections D1 through D10 of this section are
met, and b) the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create
no additional threats to public safety. (Ord. 1204, 9-13-2010)
11-4-5: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
A. General Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial
improvements:
1. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
2. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
3. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 208/318
4. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;
5. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
6. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
7. On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
B. Specific Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in: 1) subsection
11-4-3B of this chapter, 2) subsection 11-4-4B8 of this chapter, or 3) subsection C3 of this section, the following provisions are required:
1. Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor
(including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor
shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in subsection 11-4-4C1a of
this chapter, is satisfied.
2. Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in
relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
3. Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely
for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
a. A minimum of two (2) openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade.
c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
4. Manufactured Homes:
a. Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FIRM shall be installed using methods and
practices that minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored
to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over the top or
frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
b. Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's
FIRM on sites: 1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, 2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, 3) in an
expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or 4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on
which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such
that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
c. Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection B4b of this
section be elevated so that either:
(1) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, or
(2) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength
that are no less than thirty six inches (36") in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
C. Standards For Subdivision Proposals:
1. All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with subsections
11-4-1B, C, and D of this chapter.
2. All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet
floodplain development permit requirements of subsections 11-4-3C and 11-4-4C of this chapter; and the provisions of this section.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 209/318
3. Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise
provided pursuant to subsection 11-4-3B or 11-4-4B8 of this chapter.
4. All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
5. All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. (Ord. 1204, 9-13-
2010)
11-4-6: PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements
(including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person
who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than ninety (90) days, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and
expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city of Deming from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 1204, 9-13-2010)
Chapter 5
WIND EROSION AND DUST CONTROL
11-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall mean:
AMBIENT AIR: That portion of the atmosphere, external to buildings, to which the general public has access. Land owned or controlled by
the stationary source and to which public access is precluded by a fence, physical barriers, or other effective means is exempted from the
ambient air.
APPLICANT: Any person, corporation, or public or private organization proposing a development which would involve disturbance to the
natural terrain.
CHEMICAL SOIL STABILIZATION/SUPPRESSIVE: A method of dust control implemented by any person to mitigate emissions by applying
petroleum resins, asphaltic emulsions, acrylics, adhesives, or any other approved material that are not prohibited for use by the city, the
state environment department, the environmental protection agency, or any other law, rule, or regulation.
CLEARING: Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
CONSTRUCTION DEMOLITION ACTIVITIES: Any on site activities preparatory to or related to building alteration, rehabilitation, removal or
razing, or improvement on real property, including the placement and upkeep of mobile or manufactured homes or buildings. "Construction"
also means construction of roadway systems including, arterials, expressways, interstates, tunnels, overpasses, bridges, interchanges,
residential and commercial streets within a subdivision, and airport runway improvements.
DISTURBED AREA: Any area in which the soil will be altered by grading, leveling, scraping, cut and fill activities, excavation, brush and
timber clearing, grubbing, and unpaved soils on which vehicle operations and/or movement will or has occurred.
DUST CONTROL AND SOIL EROSION PLAN: A written description of all reasonably available control measures (RACMs) to be
implemented at a work site and/or in transit to and from a work site for any earthmoving, construction, or potential dust generating
operation. Such written description may be incorporated into building and construction plans or a separate document submitted with said
plans.
DUST GENERATION OPERATION: Any activity capable of generating fugitive dust, including, but not limited to, activities associated with
creating a disturbed area, construction and demolition activities, and the movement of vehicles on unpaved roadways or parking areas.
EROSION AND DUST CONTROL PLAN: A set of plans indicating the specific measures and sequencing to be used to control sediment
and erosion on a development site during and after construction.
EROSION CONTROL: A measure that prevents erosion.
EXCAVATE: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, or any other similar material is dug into, cut, removed, displaced, relocated, or bulldozed,
and includes the resulting conditions.
FILL: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, or any other similar material is placed or moved to a new location aboveground. The fill is also
the difference in elevation between a point of existing undisturbed ground and a designated point of higher elevation of the final grade.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 210/318
FUGITIVE DUST OR DUST: Organic and inorganic particulate matter in quantities and of a duration that may with reasonable likelihood
injure human or animal health or plant life, reduce safe visibility, cause property damage, or degrade visibility. Water vapor, steam, or
particulate matter emissions emanating from a duct or stack of process equipment are not fugitive dust.
GRADING: Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof.
GRUBBING: The process of digging up and removing the roots, trunk, branches and stems of all plants in order to clear the land.
HIGH WIND EVENT: A climatological occurrence in which the average wind speed exceeds a threshold in which fugitive dust will be
generated from undisturbed areas, naturally covered areas, disturbed areas, and construction sites, regardless of reasonably available
control measure implementation. Notwithstanding other climatic conditions, the average wind speed for high wind events is a sustained
wind speed of twenty five (25) miles per hour or greater.
LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY: Any physical land development activity which includes such actions as clearance of vegetation, moving or
filling of land, removal or excavation of soil or mineral resources or similar activities.
NATURAL COVER: Any vegetation which exists on the property, prior to any construction activity or achieved through vegetation restoration
back to a natural state, including the placement of sod.
PALLIATIVE: Any agent used to lessen or reduce dust emissions.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Any material emitted or entrained into the air as liquid or solid particulate, with the exception of uncombined
water.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: The first land disturbing activity associated with a development, including land preparation such as clearing,
grading, and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements, footings, piers, or foundations; erection of temporary
forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as garages.
STRIPPING: Any activity that removes or significantly disturbs the vegetative surface cover, including clearing and grubbing operations.
VISIBLE DUST EMISSION: Dust of such opacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than an opacity of twenty
percent (20%), for a period or periods aggregating more than three (3) minutes in any one hour.
WIND SPEED: The average wind velocity, regardless of direction, based on a sixty (60) minute average from the nearest weather report or
PM10 monitoring station, or by a portable wind instrument located at the site. (Ord. 1144, 7-10-2006)
11-5-2: PURPOSE; APPLICABILITY:
A. Purpose And Intent: The purpose of this chapter is to protect and maintain the natural environment and to reduce the health effects
caused by the creation of fugitive dust and wind erosion as a result of the operations and activities with new or existing construction and
development. This chapter is also intended to limit the negative health and safety impacts when natural events do occur, such as fugitive
dust creation through high winds. Also, the actions required within this chapter are not intended, necessarily, to cease all manmade dust
generation activities when such natural events occur and the actions taken to reduce dust generation may be overcome by the natural
occurrence.
B. Applicability: The provisions of this chapter are applicable to any situation involving any disturbance to the terrain, topsoil or vegetative
ground cover, including grading, grubbing, stripping, cut and fill activity and similar operations, upon any property within the city of
Deming as provided for in this chapter. Compliance with the requirements as described in this chapter shall not be construed to relieve
the owner/applicant of any obligations to obtain necessary state or federal permits.
C. Exemptions: Any person seeking an exemption from any of the provisions of this chapter shall submit a petition to the city building official
for approval. The following activities are automatically exempted from the provisions of this chapter:
1. Regular agricultural operations, including cultivating, tilling, harvesting, growing, and the raising of farm animals or fowl, excluding
unpaved roads associated with such operations.
2. Governmental activities during emergencies, health or life threatening situations or in conjunction with any officially declared disaster
or state of emergency.
3. Operations conducted by essential service utilities to provide electricity, natural gas, oil and gas transmission, cable television,
telephone, water and sewage during service outages and emergency disruptions.
4. Temporary use of unpaved roads and parking lots which generate less than twenty (20) vehicle trips per day for less than three (3)
successive calendar days.
5. Excavations for cemeteries for burial of human or animal remains.
6. Existing quarry operations actively engaged in excavating rock, sand, and/or gravel. (Ord. 1144, 7-10-2006)
11-5-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 211/318
A. Each person shall use reasonably available control measures (RACMs) to prevent a violation of this chapter. No person shall allow
fugitive dust, track out, or transported material from any active operation, open storage pile, paved or unpaved roadway or disturbed
surface area, or inactive disturbed surface area to be carried beyond the property line, right of way, easement or any other area under
control of the person generating or allowing the fugitive dust. Failure to comply with this subsection shall be a violation of this chapter.
B. No person shall permit building materials or any construction waste or other materials to be blown from the site by the wind.
C. Failure to comply with a fugitive dust control term or condition shall be a violation of this chapter.
D. A person whose violation of this chapter results in fugitive dust being deposited upon land beyond the limits of the permitted area shall
take all actions necessary to remedy damage caused by a violation proven with credible evidence. Such remedies may include, but are
not limited to, compensation, removal of the fugitive dust and/or repair of any damage, obtaining permission from property owners or
operators before doing any work on the damaged property. It shall be a separate violation of this part to fail to remove the fugitive dust
and repair the damage as specified in the written schedule or any extension agreed to by the person and the damaged property owner.
No violation will occur if the failure to perform the corrective actions is for any reason beyond the control of the person performing the
work including, without limitation, acts of God or government preemption in connection with a national emergency or if the allegedly
damaged property owner refuses to grant reasonable permission and access to conduct the remediation activities.
E. The city, in adopting this chapter, shall collect a twenty five dollar ($25.00) permit fee for review of a stand alone soil erosion and dust
control plan. Otherwise, the fee will be considered as incorporated in other permit fees being collected at the time of the review. (Ord.
1144, 7-10-2006)
11-5-4: DUST CONTROL AND SOIL EROSION PLAN:
In order to obtain permit approval for any land disturbing activity involving a site of three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet or more,
and prior to the issuance of any building permit and prior to the commencement of any activity on the site, the applicant shall file with the
building official a soil erosion and dust control plan and shall obtain the building official's approval of such plan. In assessing the plan, the
building official may consult with any person, agency, or organization he or she deems appropriate.
The following constitutes the minimum information required in the control plan as part of any building or subdivision development:
A. Name, address and phone number of person(s) responsible for the preparation, submittal and implementation of the control plan.
B. A plot or plat of survey of the site which describes:
1. The total area of land surface to be disturbed and the total area of the entire project site, in areas or square feet, depending on scale;
2. The operation(s) and activities to be carried out on the site;
3. All actual and potential sources of fugitive dust emissions on the site.
C. A description of RACMs or combination thereof to be applied during all periods of dust generating operations to each of the fugitive dust
sources described on the plot or plat. For each source identified at least one control measure must be implemented. The same control
measure(s) may be used for more than one dust generating activity.
D. Approval and issuance of the building and/or subdivision construction permit(s) and the approval of all outlined RACMs contained within
the control plan shall mandate the implementation of said RACMs by the developer, contractor, builder, owner, and/or agents as part of
construction activities. (Ord. 1144, 7-10-2006)
11-5-5: REASONABLY AVAILABLE CONTROL MEASURES (RACMS):
Reasonably available control measures to be implemented in accordance with this chapter may include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Using dust suppressants applied in amounts and rates recommended by the manufacturer;
B. Using wet suppression;
C. Upwind windbreaks, including fabric fences;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 212/318
D. Starting construction at the location that is upwind from the prevailing wind direction and stabilizing disturbed areas before disturbing
additional areas;
E. Stopping active operations during high wind;
F. Cleanup and removal of track out material;
G. Retaining natural vegetation during the construction phase of building excluding the building pad site;
H. Utilizing existing or natural vegetation as part of the required landscaping for the site;
I. Temporary seeding or revegetation for soil stabilization when grades are not ready for permanent seeding;
J. Surfacing with gravel or other mulch material of a size and density sufficient to prevent surface material from being airborne;
K. Mulching and crimping of straw or hay as specified;
L. Installing permanent perimeter and/or interior fence walls;
M. Designing subdivisions of building sites to utilize existing predevelopment grades;
N. Applying palliatives or chemical soil suppressant/stabilizer for idle construction areas;
O. Restricting access to lot by subcontractors by providing parking areas. (Ord. 1144, 7-10-2006)
11-5-6: GENERAL AND NONCONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. Ground Cover Removal Prohibited: No person, no matter the size of the property, shall disturb the topsoil or remove ground cover on any
real property within the city limits and thereafter allow the property to remain unoccupied, unused, vacant, or undeveloped unless
reasonable actions are taken to prevent generation of dust. Such reasonable actions must be submitted to the building official in the
form of a wind erosion and dust control plan and must be approved by the building official prior to any removal of ground cover by the
applicant.
B. Vacant Land; Weed Eradication And Dust Suppression:
1. For all vacant or underdeveloped lots, weed eradication is limited to removal of specific weeds only through mowing or hoeing and not
the removal of natural vegetation. Clearing of the entire lot is prohibited.
2. Once weeds are removed or mowed, dust suppression can be achieved through watering, chemical suppressant application, or the
expansion of natural, nonweed vegetation areas on site. Natural vegetation shall consist of those plant varieties that are indigenous to
New Mexico or that are determined to be native or natural plant varieties by the city building official.
C. Storage Of Materials: Actions shall be taken to ensure that such areas or uses with the potential of becoming or generating fugitive dust
and particulate matter, shall be covered, moistened, compacted, or otherwise treated to prevent fugitive dust creation.
D. Existing Operations: For existing operations, ongoing, and/or permanently sited institutional, commercial and/or industrial facilities or
operations which may continuously generate fugitive dust, individual control plans with the corresponding RACMs shall be submitted to
the building official for approval. Approval shall be made by the building official or his or her designee and shall be communicated in
writing to the property/business owner. (Ord. 1144, 7-10-2006)
11-5-7: CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS:
A. Notification: Where a person fails to comply with control measures approved by the building official or with any provision of this chapter,
the building official or his or her designee, or city code enforcement officer, shall notify the person of that fact and specify a period of
time in which the person must achieve compliance. Failure to comply within a twenty four (24) hour minimum or within the time
determined by the city constitutes grounds for a notice of violation. The building official may also issue a stop work order where a
building permit has been issued. Correction of conditions may include the amendment of plans to reflect additional or new control
measures.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 213/318
B. Remedial Action: The city or its designated agent, after proper notice, may enter upon any real property where dust is being generated
and take such remedial and corrective action as he or she deems necessary when the owner, occupant, operator, or any tenant, lessee,
or holder of any possessory interest or right in the involved land fails to do so.
C. Costs: Any costs incurred in connection with any remedial or corrective action taken by the city, pursuant to this chapter, shall be
assessed against the owner of the property involved. Failure to pay the full amount of such incurred costs shall result in a lien against
the property. The lien shall remain in full force and effect until all costs have been fully paid, which may include cost of collection and
reasonable attorney fees.
D. Effective Date: For all existing emission sources governed by this chapter, the activity must be completed within six (6) months of the
effective date hereof or be brought into full compliance. For existing, ongoing, and/or permanently sited institutional, governmental,
commercial and/or industrial facilities or operations, the dust control provisions of this chapter shall be submitted in writing, approved,
and implemented within six (6) months of the effective date hereof.
E. Liability: All persons owning, operating, or in control of any equipment or property who shall cause, permit, or participate in, any violation
of this chapter shall be individually and collectively liable to any penalty or punishment imposed by and under this code.
F. Offenses: Any persons who violate any provision of this chapter, including, but not limited to, any application requirement; any permit
condition; any fee or filing requirement; any duty to allow or carry out inspection, or any requirement by the city is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1144, 7-10-2006)
11-5-8: CITY NOT LIABLE:
A. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to be construed to create or form the basis for any liability on the part of the city, or its
officers, employees or agents for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of responsible parties to comply with the provisions of
this chapter, or by reason or in consequence of any inspection, notice, order, certificate, building permit, permission or approval
authorized or issued or done in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this chapter, or by reason of any action or inaction
on the part of the city related in any manner to the enforcement of this chapter by its officers, employees or agents.
B. The building official, code enforcement officer, or other city employee charged with the enforcement of this chapter, acting in good faith
and without malice on behalf of the city, shall not be personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result
of any act required by the city, or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of these duties. Any suit brought against the building
official, code enforcement officer, or other city employee because of an act or omission performed in the enforcement of any provisions
of this chapter shall be defended by the city.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall impose any liability on the city or any of its officers or employees for construction or cleanup of the erosion
and sediment control measures listed herein. (Ord. 1144, 7-10-2006)
Title 12
ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL REGULATIONS
12-1-1: PURPOSE:
A. This title is for the purpose of establishing and carrying into effect the several powers, duties and privileges conferred upon the city in,
under and by an act of the state legislature known as New Mexico Statutes Annotated sections 3-21-1 through 3-21-26. These
regulations and restrictions have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan and are designed to lessen congestion in the
streets; to promote health and the general welfare; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air;
to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation,
water, sewage, schools, parks and other public requirements. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955; amd. 2001 Code)
B. These regulations and restrictions have been made after reasonable consideration, among other things, of the character of the district
and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view of conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate
use of land throughout the city. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 214/318
12-1-2: INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION:
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
safety, health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this title to interfere with, or abrogate or
annul any other provision of this code, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued, and not in conflict with any of the
provisions of this title, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises, and likewise not in
conflict with this title; nor is it intended by this title to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements
between parties, except that if this title imposes a greater restriction, this title shall control. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-1-3: DEMING-LUNA COUNTY EXTRATERRITORIAL ZONING REGULATIONS:
A. Adoption: The Deming-Luna County extraterritorial zoning regulations adopted by the Deming-Luna County extraterritorial authority on
January 3, 1979, shall be and hereby is adopted by the city by reference, pursuant to New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 3-17-6.
B. Copy Available For Inspection: A copy of the Deming-Luna County extraterritorial zoning regulations adopted by reference is available for
inspection during the city clerk's normal and regular business hours at the Deming municipal building. (Ord. 632, 3-12-1979; amd. 2001
Code)
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS
12-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, certain words and terms are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and the
singular number shall include the plural; and the plural, the singular; the word "building" shall include the word "structure"; the word "lot"
shall include the word "plot"; and the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory.
Whenever used in this title the following words shall have the meanings herein ascribed:
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A subordinate building or a portion of the main building, the use of which is incidental to that of the dominant use
of the building or premises.
ALLEY: A public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property.
APARTMENT HOUSE: See definition of Dwelling, Multiple.
AUCTION HOUSE: A building and appurtenant lands, or a property, where antiques, and/or property, and/or objects of art, furniture,
equipment, and other goods are offered for sale to persons who bid on the object in competition with one another.
AUTOMATIC IRRIGATION SYSTEM: A complete set of system components that includes the water source, the water distribution network,
and the general irrigation equipment. The system operates in accordance to a preset program within a controller.
BACKFILL: Soil that is used to fill a planting hole after a plant's roots have been positioned in the planting hole.
BASEMENT: A story having part but not more than one-half (1/2) of its height below grade. A basement is counted as a story for the
purpose of height regulations, if subdivided and used for business or dwelling purposes by others than a janitor employed on the premises.
BERM: Graded mounds of soil used to create a screen, buffer, or a landscape design element.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals, or lodging
and meals, are provided for three (3) or more persons, but not exceeding twenty (20) persons.
BUILDING: Any structure for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind; and when separated by
dividing walls without openings, each portion of said building, so separated, shall be deemed a separate building.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard
roof, or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
CELLAR: A story having more than one-half (1/2) of its height below grade.
DECIDUOUS SHADE TREE: A tree that sheds all its leaves every year at a certain season.
DEVELOPMENT: The use of any land, the carrying out of any building activity, the making of any material change in the use, or intensity of
use, or appearance of any building, structure or land, or the dividing of land into lots, blocks or parcels.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 215/318
DISTRICT: Any section of the city for which the regulations governing the use of buildings and premises or the height and area are uniform.
DRIP EMITTER: A low volume emission device that delivers water at low rates. Drip emitters are used to apply water directly to an
individual plant root system.
DROUGHT TOLERANT PLANTS: Low water use plants that, after they are established, can survive with little or no supplemental watering.
DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof, which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A building or portion thereof designed for occupancy by three (3) or more families.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building designed for occupancy by one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building designed for occupancy by two (2) families.
DWELLING UNIT: A room or group of rooms for the domestic use of one or more individuals living as a single, independent housekeeping
unit, occupied or intended for occupancy by one household or family with cooking (not more than 1 kitchen), eating, sleeping, living, and
sanitary facilities.
EROSION: The detachment and movement of soil particles or fragments by water, wind, ice, and/or gravity.
EVERGREEN TREE: A tree, either broadleaf or conifer, which maintains at least a portion of its leaves or needles throughout the year.
FAMILY: One or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a
"boarding house", "lodging house", or "hotel" as herein defined.
FENCE OR WALL: Any structure used to enclose all or part of a property for the purpose of security, privacy or aesthetics.
FILLING STATION: Any building or premises used principally for the storing, dispensing, sale, or offering for sale at retail of automobile
fuels, or oils.
FRONTAGE: Property on one side of a street measured along the line of the street.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building designed or used for the storage of not more than three (3) motor driven vehicles owned and
used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory. Not more than one of the vehicles may be a commercial motor vehicle of not
more than two (2) tons' capacity.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building, or portion thereof, other than a private or storage garage, designed or used for servicing, repairing,
equipping, hiring, selling or storing motor driven vehicles.
GARAGE, STORAGE: A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for housing four (4) or more motor driven vehicles.
GRADE: A. For buildings having walls adjoining one street only, the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the wall adjoining the street.
B. For buildings having walls adjoining more than one street, the average of the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of all walls
adjoining the streets.
C. For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average level for the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls
of the building.
Any wall approximately parallel to and not more than five feet (5') from a street line is to be considered as adjoining the street.
GROUND COVER: Plants grown for their low spreading capabilities for the protection of soils, to prevent growth of weeds, and for aesthetic
purposes.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation or profession carried on by a member of a family residing on the premises, in connection with which
there is used no sign other than one nonilluminated nameplate attached to the building entrance which is not more than one square foot in
area; provided, that no commodity is sold upon the premises, except that which is prepared upon the premises; provided, that no person is
employed other than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises; provided, that no mechanical equipment is installed or
used except such that is normally used for domestic or household purposes.
HOTEL: A building used as an abiding place of more than twenty (20) persons who are lodged with or without meals for compensation.
INSTITUTION: A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or nonprofit establishment for public use.
INTERIOR COURT: An open space that is more than one-half (1/2) surrounded by a single building.
INTERIOR LANDSCAPE BORDERS: A landscaped buffer located along common side and rear property lines between two (2) similar or
different land uses.
IRRIGATION SYSTEM: The combination of elements such as automatic controllers, meters, pressure vacuum breakers, pipes, valves,
emitters, bubblers, spray heads, tubing and other materials designed for the purpose of transporting water to landscape areas.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 216/318
LANDSCAPING: The combination of elements such as trees, shrubs, ground covers, vines and other organic material for the express
purpose of creating an attractive and pleasing environment. Plazas, patios, art, decorative courtyards, decorative walkways, decorative
lighting and decorative furniture may also be considered landscape elements.
LODGING HOUSE: A building where lodging only is provided for compensation to three (3) or more, but not exceeding twenty (20),
persons, in contradistinction to hotels open to transients.
LOT: A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by one main building, together with its accessory buildings, and uses customarily
incidental to it, including the open spaces required by this title.
LOT, CORNER: A lot adjoining two (2) or more streets at their intersection.
LOT, DEPTH OF: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot having a frontage on two (2) nonintersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES: The lines bounding a lot.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk of Luna County,
or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk of Luna County.
MOBILE HOMES AND HOUSE TRAILERS1: A dwelling unit, built and assembled, designed for conveyance after fabrication, on streets and
highways on its own wheels, or on flatbed or other trailers, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling unit complete and
ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations such as locating on jacks or other foundation, or
connections to utilities. A prefabricated house or structure shall not be included in this definition.
NONCONFORMING USE: The use of any premises contrary to the use provisions of this title for the district in which the premises is
located.
OVERHEAD SPRAY HEADS: An irrigation method that delivers water to the landscape materials in a spray or stream like manner from
aboveground spray heads (including pop ups, impulse sprinklers, rotors, micromisters, etc.).
PARKING LOT: A parcel of land devoted to unenclosed parking spaces.
PARKING SPACE: A surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one automobile, together with a surfaced driveway
connecting the parking space with a street or alley and permitting ingress and egress of an automobile.
PLACE: An open unoccupied space other than a street or alley permanently reserved as the principal means of access to adjoining
property.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A land development concept that provides greater design flexibility by allowing deviations from the
typical development standards required by the zoning ordinance. A planned unit development may be of a single residential type or a
combination of residential types; or it may be a diverse mix of residential, commercial and recreational uses all contained in one
development and/or subdivision. A planned unit development views the entire tract of land rather than each individual lot to take advantage
of design and other opportunities such as land features or vegetation to create more attractive and creative projects than would otherwise
be possible under standard zoning regulations.
ROCK MULCH: A nonsoluble protective covering that includes rock, gravel, decomposed granite, or crushed rock applied to the soil surface
to reduce weed growth, reduce evaporation of moisture from the soil surface, maintain even temperature around plant roots, and slow
erosion.
RUNOFF: Irrigation water that is not absorbed by the soil to which it is applied and which flows onto other areas. Runoff may result from
water that is applied at too great a rate (application exceeds infiltration rates) or where a severe slope exists.
SITE: A parcel of land or several contiguous parcels of land used or occupied, or to be used or occupied, by a building and accessory
buildings and the area belonging to such buildings, bounded by a property line or a designated portion of a public street.
SMALL BUSINESS: As defined by the U.S. department of commerce.
SOIL: All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of whatever origin that overlies bedrock and can be readily excavated.
SPECIAL USE: A use of land permitted within a particular use district, that, because of inherent special characteristics, or possible impact
on adjacent properties or possible impact on the integrity of the particular zone in which it is located, requires a higher and a stricter level of
review.
STORM WATER DETENTION: A system, method or facility used for the on site temporary storage of storm water runoff for subsequent
release, at controlled rates, into downstream conveyance systems.
STORM WATER RETENTION: A system, method, or facility for the on site storage of storm water runoff which is not subsequently
discharged into a downstream conveyance system; but, rather may be consumed by evapotranspiration, domestic reuse, or drained into the
subsurface through infiltration.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 217/318
STORY: That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there be no floor
above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF: A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet (3')
above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area is finished off for use. A half story containing
independent apartment or living quarters shall be counted as a full story.
STREET: All property dedicated or intended for public or private street purposes or subject to public easements therefor.
STREET LANDSCAPE BORDER: A required landscaped area adjacent to urban principal arterial streets, urban minor arterial streets and
urban collector streets as categorized in the city of Deming comprehensive plan, January 2003. This includes any street so classified at
present and in the future by city council.
STREET LINE: A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams
or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which has a permanent location on the ground or is attached to something
having a permanent location on the ground, including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, advertising signs, billboards,
backstops for tennis courts and pergolas.
SWALE: A depression in grade that controls and directs the flow of surface water.
TOURIST OR TRAILER CAMP OR COURT: An area containing one or more structures designed to be used as temporary living facilities of
two (2) or more families and intended primarily for automobile transients, or providing space where two (2) or more ten foot (10') trailers can
be parked.
TURF: Any grassy area maintained by frequent mowing, fertilization and watering used for lawns and playing fields.
WATER HARVESTING: A system, and/or facilities for the collection of rain and storm water for reuse for landscape irrigation and other
purposes. For large scale water harvesting projects, the proponent shall contact the office of the state engineer for New Mexico to ensure
that the project will not inappropriately affect rainwater runoff so as to negatively impact a public water supply.
XERISCAPE: A creative method of landscaping that emphasizes water conservation. This is accomplished by following sound landscaping
practices such as planning and design, soil improvements, limited turf areas, use of mulches, use of low water demand plants, efficient
irrigation, and appropriate and regular maintenance. When combined, these practices can produce an attractive, efficient, sustainable
landscaping arrangement for all residential, commercial, industrial, public and institutional developments.
YARD: An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure
from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard,
the depth of a front yard, or the depth of a rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the building shall be used.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side yard lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between
the street line or another lot line and the main building or any projection thereof, other than steps, unenclosed balconies and unenclosed
porches.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the rear of a lot measured between lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the
rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projections other than steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. On corner
lots, the rear yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. On both corner lots and interior
lots, the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
YARD, SIDE: A yard between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front line to the rear yard line. (Ord. 252, 12-7-
1955; amd. Ord. 501, 7-2-1973; Ord. 983, 11-9-1998; Ord. 1069, 1-13-2003; Ord. 1080, 11-10-2003; Ord. 1086, 6-14-2004)
Chapter 3
DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES; MAP
12-3-1: DIVISION INTO DISTRICTS:
In order to regulate and restrict the height, number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot that may be
occupied, the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the density of population, and the location and use of buildings, structures and
lands for trade, industry, residence or other purposes, the city is hereby divided into districts of which there shall be sixteen (16) in number,
known as: (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 1248, 5-12-2014)
A Single-family dwelling district
A-1 Single-family dwelling district
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 218/318
A-3 Single-family dwelling district
A-4 Single-family dwelling district
A-5 Use district
B Multiple dwelling district
B-1 Dwelling district
B-2 Use district
B-3 Use district
C Commercial district
C-1 Neighborhood commercial district
C-2 Commercial district
D Industrial district
T Use district
T-2 Use district
G Government district
(Ord. 252, 12-7-1955; amd. Ord. 276, 5-5-1958; Ord. 364, 11-4-1963; Ord. 378, 11-2-1964; Ord. 385, 5-3-1965; Ord. 429, 5-6-1968; Ord.
516, 7-1-1974; Ord. 620, 10-9-1978; Ord. 661, 10-13-1980; Ord. 705, 9-13-1982; Ord. 706, 9-13-1982; Ord. 708, 10-11-1982; Ord. 1248, 5-
12-2014)
12-3-2: BOUNDARIES; MAP:
A. Boundaries Shown On District Map: The boundaries of the districts are shown upon the map which is made a part of this title and is
designated as the district map. The district map and all of the notations, references, and other information shown thereon are part of this
title and have the same force and effect as if the district map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon were
all fully set forth or described herein, which district map is properly attested and is on file with the city clerk. (Ord. 404, 5-2-1966)
B. Rules Where Uncertainty May Arise: Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the
district map referred to and made a part of this title, the following rules apply:
1. The district boundaries are either streets or alleys unless otherwise shown, and where the districts designated on the district map
referred to and made a part of this title are bounded approximately by street or alley lines, the street or alley shall be construed to be
the boundary of the district.
2. Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated, and where the property has been or may hereinafter be divided into blocks
and lots, the district boundaries shall be construed to be the lot lines, and where the districts designated on the district map referred to
and made a part of this title are bounded approximately by lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the districts
unless the boundaries are otherwise indicated on the district map.
3. In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines of the district map referred to and made a part of this title shall be determined by
use of the scale appearing on the district map. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-3-3: ANNEXATIONS:
All territory which may be hereafter annexed to the city which has been zoned by the Deming-Luna County extraterritorial zoning authority
shall be subject to all of the regulations of the same district which said territory has been zoned at the time of such annexation until
otherwise changed by an amendment to this chapter. (Ord. 649, 4-14-1980)
12-3-4: VACATED THOROUGHFARES:
Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the city council, the zoning districts adjoining each side of such
street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation and all area included in the vacation shall then and
thenceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended districts. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-3-5: PROHIBITIONS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 219/318
Except as hereinafter provided:
A. Use Of Premises: No person shall use any premises for uses other than those permitted in the district in which such premises is located.
B. New Buildings: No building shall be erected unless it shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such premises is located.
C. Alteration Of Existing Buildings: No building shall be enlarged, structurally altered or moved unless such enlargement, structural
alteration or moving shall conform to the regulations for the district in which the premises is located.
D. Lots: Every building hereafter erected, enlarged or structurally altered shall be located on a "lot" as defined in section 12-2-1 of this title,
and in no case shall there be more than one main building on one lot. Land that is part of one lot and that is not in excess of the area
requirements for that lot shall not be used to satisfy the area requirements of any other lot. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
Chapter 4
USE DISTRICT REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. A SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
12-4A-1: APPLICATION:
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this title when referred to in this article, are the A single-family dwelling
district regulations. (Ord. 252, 12-5-1955)
12-4A-2: USE REGULATIONS:
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
Children's nurseries, play schools, nursery schools, or children's centers.
No children's nursery, play school, nursery school, or children's center shall be operated in the city, unless it is operated in compliance with
the rules and regulations and standards for nurseries promulgated, adopted and approved by the New Mexico department of public health,
and unless, prior to the operation thereof, said nursery, play school, nursery school or children's center has been approved by the New
Mexico department of public health or its duly authorized agents.
Church or public building bulletin board not exceeding ten (10) square feet in area, and temporary signs not exceeding six (6) square feet in
area appertaining to the lease, hire, or sale of a building or premises; provided, however, that there shall be no more than one such sign on
any one lot.
Churches.
Golf courses, except miniature courses and driving tees operated for commercial purposes.
Home occupations.
Nurseries and truck gardening, but not the raising of poultry, pets or livestock for strictly commercial purposes or on a scale that would be
objectionable because of noise or odor to surrounding residences.
Parks and playgrounds, city owned or operated.
Public schools, elementary and high, and educational institutions having a curriculum the same as ordinarily given in public schools.
Single-family dwellings of not less than eight hundred (800) square feet of floor space.
Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the
construction work.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the above uses, not involving the conduct of a business, including a private garage.
Any accessory building that is not a part of the main structure shall be located not less than sixty feet (60') from the front lot line. (Ord. 252,
12-7-1955; amd. Ord. 342, 11-4-1962)
12-4A-3: USE RESTRICTIONS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 220/318
A. Parking: See subsections 7-2-3E and F of this code. (Ord. 1068, 10-14-2002)
B. Mobile Homes: No "mobile home or house trailer" as defined in section 12-2-1 of this title shall be placed or set, permanently or
otherwise, in, or upon any area now or hereafter designated as an A single-family dwelling use district, by the zoning ordinances of the
city. (Ord. 501, 7-2-1973)
12-4A-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35') in height, except as provided in chapter 7 of this title. (Ord.
252, 12-7-1955)
12-4A-5: AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Front Yard:
1. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty five feet (25'), unless forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage on
one side of the street between two (2) intersecting streets is improved with buildings that have observed a front yard line having a
variation in depth of not more than ten feet (10'), in which case no building shall project beyond the average front yard so established,
but this regulation shall not be interpreted to require a front yard of more than thirty five feet (35').
2. Where lots have double frontage, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
B. Side Yard:
1. Except as provided in chapter 7 of this title, there shall be a side yard on each side of the front eighty feet (80') of the one-story
portions of buildings having a width of not less than five feet (5'), and a side yard on each side of the front eighty feet (80') of the twostory
portions of buildings, having a width of not less than seven and one-half feet (71/2').
2. The side yard on the front eighty feet (80') of the side street of a corner lot shall be not less than fifteen feet (15'). (Ord. 255, 5-22-
1956)
C. Rear Yard: Except as provided in chapter 7 of this title, there shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than thirty feet (30') or twenty
percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever amount is smaller. All walls hereafter constructed abutting on any alleyway shall contain
a gate or entry suitable to provide access to the alley. (Ord. 887, 11-14-1994)
D. Intensity Of Use: Every lot shall have an area of not less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet per family, except that if a lot has less
area than required and was a lot of record prior to the effective date of this title, such lot may be used for one single-family dwelling;
provided, that all other district regulations are observed. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-4A-6: MOBILE HOMES; PARKING1:
A. Parking Limitation: It shall be unlawful for any person to place or park, or allow to be placed or parked, any mobile home or house trailer
exceeding twenty five feet (25') in length in, or upon any area now, or hereafter designated as an A single-family dwelling district or B
multiple dwelling district, by the zoning ordinances of the city.
B. Authority To Tow Away; Fees: The police department and all members thereof are hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or have
removed and towed away by commercial towing service, any mobile home or house trailer illegally parked or placed as provided in this
title. Mobile homes or house trailers so towed away shall be stored in a safe place and shall be restored to the owner thereof upon
payment of a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) plus actual costs of towing within twenty four (24) hours after the time such vehicle was
removed, plus five dollars ($5.00) for each additional day or fraction thereof.
C. Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by section 1-4-1 of this code,
and each day's violation of this section shall be a separate and continuing offense. (Ord. 471, 1-3-1972)
12-4A-7: SPECIAL USES:
Additional dwelling unit. The provisions of subsection 12-3-5D of this title notwithstanding, one additional dwelling unit is permitted either
within an existing single-family dwelling, or attached to an existing single-family dwelling unit, or as a separate building located on the same
site as the existing single-family dwelling subject to the following regulations:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 221/318
A. The additional dwelling unit shall be for the permanent use of a blood relative of the owner-occupant, except that such additional dwelling
unit may be used for a guest who is not a blood relative for a period of no more than thirty (30) days in any one calendar year.
B. The additional dwelling unit shall not be a mobile home, trailer, camper, recreational vehicle or any structure that does not meet the
building regulations adopted by the city of Deming, and/or does not meet manufactured home standards set by the federal department
of housing and urban development.
C. The additional dwelling unit and the existing single-family dwelling shall meet all requirements of the city of Deming zoning ordinance and
all building regulations set out in title 11, chapter 1 of this code.
D. The additional unit shall not have a house number separate from the existing single-family dwelling.
E. The additional dwelling unit shall not have its own separate utility connections, such as water, sewer, electrical and gas. The additional
dwelling unit shall connect to the utilities of the existing single-family dwelling.
F. The additional dwelling unit shall not be advertised, displayed or used as a rental unit available to the general public. In the event the city
approves the special use, then prior to the city issuing a special use permit, the owner of the existing dwelling unit shall provide proof of
a deed restriction stating that the additional dwelling unit shall not be rented or leased on the open market.
G. The city council may revoke a special use permit for an additional dwelling unit and require removal of the additional dwelling unit upon a
finding of failure to comply with the provisions of this section or a failure to comply with any conditions imposed with the original approval
of the special use. (Ord. 1080, 11-10-2003)
ARTICLE B. A-1 SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
12-4B-1: DISTRICT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established an A-1 single-family dwelling district within the city limits. The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth
elsewhere in this title when referred to in this article, are the A-1 single-family dwelling district regulations designed to provide a fully
protected residential area comprising all of blocks AA, A, B, C, D, E, F, G, and H, western village addition to the city. (Ord. 1122, 10-4-2005)
12-4B-2: REGULATIONS:
No lot shall be used except for residential purposes. (Ord. 1122, 10-4-2005)
A. Restrictions:
1. No building shall be erected, altered, placed, or permitted to remain on any lot other than one detached single-family dwelling not to
exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories in height and a private garage or carport for no more than three (3) cars.
2. No store, office, or other place of business of any kind and no hospital, sanatorium, or other place for the care or treatment of the sick
or disabled, physically or mentally, or any theater, saloon or other place of entertainment, or any church shall ever be erected or
permitted upon any of the lots or any part thereof and no house or lot shall ever be used for a business involving inventory.
3. There shall be no trailer houses or houses built around or incorporating trailer homes. All camper trailers, campers or boats shall be
stored behind the dwelling house, within the garage, or by the side of a house, if hidden from street view by a fence or shrubs. No
trailer or camper shall be lived in while parked on the property.
4. There shall be no unused automobiles, machinery or equipment allowed on these premises outside of enclosed garages.
5. All driveways or parking areas used for parking vehicles shall be constructed of concrete or asphaltic paving. (Ord. 429, 5-6-1968)
B. Park And Civic Areas: (Rep. by Ord. 1122, 10-4-2005)
C. Home Occupations: Any occupation or profession carried on by a member of a family residing on the premises, in connection with which
there is used no sign other than one nonilluminated nameplate attached to the building entrance which is not more than one square foot
in area; provided, that no commodity is sold upon the premises except that which is prepared upon the premises; provided, that no
person is employed other than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises; provided, that no mechanical equipment is
installed or used except such that is normally used for domestic or household purposes.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 222/318
D. Accessory Buildings And Uses: Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the above uses, not involving the conduct of a
business. Any accessory building which is not a part of the main structure shall not be located on any lot nearer to the front line or
nearer to the side street line than the minimum building setback lines shown on the recorded plat. See section 12-4B-4 of this article.
E. Temporary Buildings: Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction shall be removed immediately upon completion of
construction work.
F. Signs: No sign of any kind shall be displayed to the public view on any lot except one professional sign as described under subsection C
of this section; one sign of not more than five (5) square feet in area advertising the property for sale or rent, or sign used by a builder to
advertise property during construction period only.
G. Oil Drilling: No oil drilling, oil development operations, oil refinery, quarrying or mining operations of any kind shall be permitted upon or
in any lot, nor shall oil wells, tanks, tunnels, mineral excavations or shafts be permitted upon or in any lot. No derrick or other structure
designed for use in boring for oil or natural gas shall be erected, maintained or permitted upon any lot.
H. Animals1: No animals, livestock, or poultry of any kind shall be raised, bred or kept on any lot, except that the usual household domestic
animals shall be allowed; namely dogs, cats, or other household pets; provided, that they are not kept, bred or maintained for any
commercial purpose, or in excessive numbers.
I. Garbage: No lot shall be used or maintained as a dumping ground for rubbish. Trash, garbage or other waste shall not be kept except in
sanitary containers. All containers, incinerators or other equipment for the storage or disposal of such material shall be kept in a clean
and sanitary condition and must meet the standards and restrictions of the city.
J. Water Supply: No individual water supply system shall be permitted on any lot unless such system is located, constructed, equipped and
maintained in accordance with the requirements, standards and recommendations of state and local public health authority. Approval of
such system as installed shall be obtained from such authority.
K. Sewage Disposal: No individual sewage disposal system shall be permitted on any lot unless such system is designed, located and
constructed in accordance with the requirements, standards and recommendations of state and local public health authorities. Approval
of such system as installed shall be obtained from such authority. (Ord. 429, 5-6-1968)
L. Parking: See subsections 7-2-3E and F of this code. (Ord. 1068, 10-14-2002)
12-4B-3: SIZE AND ARCHITECTURAL REGULATIONS:
A. New Construction: All structures on said lots shall be of new construction and no buildings shall be removed from any other location onto
any of said lots.
B. Requirements And Restrictions:
1. No dwelling house shall be erected which contains less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of finished livable space,
exclusive of attached garage, porches, patios and breezeways.
2. Two-story homes must have a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet of livable space at ground floor level.
3. Basements, whether used for storage, utility, or living purposes, are not to be included when computing livable space.
4. All structures must be in conformity with the edition of the uniform building code2, as published by the International Conference of
Building Officials, adopted by the city.
5. Construction of houses must be completed within one year after commencement of first construction activity.
C. Height: No building shall exceed two (2) stories in height. (Ord. 429, 5-6-1968)
12-4B-4: AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Building Location: No building shall be located on any lot nearer to the front lot line or nearer to the side street line than the minimum
building setback lines shown on the recorded plat. In any event, no building shall be located on any lot nearer than twenty feet (20') to
the front lot line, or nearer than fifteen feet (15') to any side street line. No building shall be located nearer than five feet (5') to an interior
lot line, except that no side yard shall be required for a garage or other permitted accessory building located forty feet (40') or more from
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 223/318
the minimum building setback line. No dwelling shall be located on any interior lot nearer than ten feet (10') to the rear lot line, or
eighteen feet (18') from the centerline of the alley, whichever is the greater dimension. For the purposes of these restrictions, eaves,
steps and open porches shall not be considered as part of a building; provided, however, that this shall not be construed to permit any
portion of a building on a lot to encroach upon another lot.
B. Lot Area And Width: No dwelling shall be erected or placed on any lot having a width of less than ninety three feet (93') at the minimum
building setback line, nor shall any dwelling be erected or placed on any lot having an area of less than nine thousand three hundred
(9,300) square feet.
C. Sight Distance At Intersections: No fence, wall, hedge or shrub planting which obstructs sight lines at elevations between two feet (2')
and six feet (6') above the roadways shall be placed or permitted to remain on any corner lot within the triangular area formed by the
street property lines and a line connecting them at points twenty six feet (26') from the intersection of a street line, or in case of a
rounded property corner, from the intersection of the street property lines extended. The same sight line limitations shall apply on any lot
within ten feet (10') from the intersection of a street property line with the edge of a driveway or alley pavement. No trees shall be
permitted to remain within such distances of such intersections unless foliage line is maintained at sufficient height to prevent
obstruction of such sight lines.
D. Easements: Easements for installation and maintenance of utilities and drainage facilities are reserved as shown on the recorded plat
over the rear five feet (5') of each lot in addition to the alley easements. (Ord. 429, 5-6-1968)
12-4B-5: SPECIAL USES:
Additional dwelling unit. The provisions of subsection 12-3-5D of this title notwithstanding, one additional dwelling unit is permitted either
within an existing single-family dwelling, or attached to an existing single-family dwelling unit, or as a separate building located on the same
site as the existing single-family dwelling subject to the following regulations:
A. The additional dwelling unit shall be for the permanent use of a blood relative of the owner-occupant, except that such additional dwelling
unit may be used for a guest who is not a blood relative for a period of no more than thirty (30) days in any one calendar year.
B. The additional dwelling unit shall not be a mobile home, trailer, camper, recreational vehicle or any structure that does not meet the
building regulations adopted by the city of Deming, and/or does not meet manufactured home standards set by the federal department
of housing and urban development.
C. The additional dwelling unit and the existing single-family dwelling shall meet all requirements of the city of Deming zoning ordinance and
all building regulations set out in title 11, chapter 1 of this code.
D. The additional unit shall not have a house number separate from the existing single-family dwelling.
E. The additional dwelling unit shall not have its own separate utility connections, such as water, sewer, electrical and gas. The additional
dwelling unit shall connect to the utilities of the existing single-family dwelling.
F. The additional dwelling unit shall not be advertised, displayed or used as a rental unit available to the general public. In the event the city
approves the special use, then prior to the city issuing the special use permit, the owner of the existing dwelling unit shall provide proof
of a deed restriction stating that the additional dwelling unit shall not be rented or leased on the open market.
G. The city council may revoke a special use permit for an additional dwelling unit and require removal of the additional dwelling unit upon a
finding of failure to comply with the provisions of this section or a failure to comply with any conditions imposed with the original approval
of the special use. (Ord. 1080, 11-10-2003)
ARTICLE C. A-3 SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
12-4C-1: DISTRICT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established an A-3 single-family dwelling district within the city limits. The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth
elsewhere in this title when referred to in this article, are the A-3 single-family dwelling district regulations. (Ord. 620, 10-9-1978)
12-4C-2: USE REGULATIONS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 224/318
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
Church or public building signs not exceeding ten (10) square feet in area, and other temporary signs not exceeding six (6) square feet in
area which shall pertain only to the lease, rent or sale of the premises or building thereon. There shall be no more than one such sign on
any one building site.
Churches.
Parks owned by the city.
Public schools.
Single-family dwellings.
Accessory buildings and uses incident to the above uses, not involving the operation of a business or enterprise. Any such building that is
detached from the main structure on the premises shall be at least sixty feet (60') from the front lot line. (Ord. 620, 10-9-1978)
12-4C-3: USE RESTRICTIONS:
A. Mobile Homes: No "mobile home or house trailer" as defined in section 12-2-1 of this title in excess of thirty two feet (32') in length shall
be placed or stored, permanently or otherwise, in or upon any area or building site within this dwelling district. (Ord. 620, 10-9-1978)
B. Parking: See subsections 7-2-3E and F of this code. (Ord. 1068, 10-14-2002)
C. Storage Of Trailers, Mobile Homes: All trailers of any nature, and mobile homes less than thirty two feet (32') in length, shall be stored
behind the main structure on the premises or along the side of the structure so long as there is a fence enclosing same from adjoining
lots.
D. Livestock Hauling Vehicles, Storage: No trailer or other vehicle used for hauling livestock of any nature may be stored or parked on the
premises.
E. Campers Or Trailers: No campers or trailers may be inhabited while stored on the premises.
F. Unused Vehicles, Parts: No unused motor vehicles, salvage parts, material, machinery or equipment shall be stored or placed on the
premises except in an enclosed garage.
G. Animals1: No animals, livestock or poultry of any kind shall be raised, bred or sheltered on any building site except for the usual
household pets and so long as they are not kept for commercial purposes.
H. Home Occupations: Any occupation or profession of a member of a family residing on the premises may be maintained so long as there
is no marking other than a nonilluminated sign less than one square foot in area used for identification and that only commodities made
or assembled on the premises by members of the family actually living on the premises are sold or exchanged. No equipment may be
used or installed on the premises except that which is normally used for household or hobby purposes. (Ord. 620, 10-9-1978)
12-4C-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35') in height from ground level. (Ord. 620, 10-9-1978)
12-4C-5: AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Building Sites:
1. Every building site shall have an area of not less than nine thousand (9,000) square feet per residence except that if a building site
has less area than prescribed herein and had an existing residential use at the effective date of this article, such lot may be continued
to be used for that existing residential use only. If the dwelling comprising that existing use is voluntarily razed, destroyed or otherwise
moved from the premises, any replacement residential dwelling must comply with the floor space requirements for dwellings
hereinafter set forth. If any dwelling existing at the effective date of this article is voluntarily razed, destroyed or otherwise moved from
the premises, any such replacement dwelling may be constructed on the building site regardless of whether the building site contains
less than nine thousand (9,000) square feet of area.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 225/318
2. Every building site shall have a width of not less than seventy feet (70') at the minimum building setback line which shall be twenty
five feet (25').
B. New Construction; Enclosure; Frontage: All structures in said district shall be of new construction and no buildings, including double wide
mobile homes intended for permanent installation or prefabricated buildings, shall be moved from any other location onto any building
site in the district.
1. All residential dwellings shall be enclosed by walls of substantial construction with side walls being not less than two and one-half feet
(21/2') high and rear walls not less than four feet (4') high. Substantial construction will be considered to be: brick, block, masonry,
cedar or redwood fencing material2.
2. Where building sites have double frontage, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets.
C. Livable Space: No dwelling house shall be constructed which contains less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of
finished livable space, exclusive of attached garages, porches, patios and breezeways. Two-story dwelling houses shall have a
minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet of finished livable space on the ground floor level. Basements, whether used for storage,
utility or living purposes, are not to be included when determining livable space.
D. Churches And Schools: No church or public school shall be constructed which contains less than two thousand (2,000) square feet of
finished usable space, exclusive of unattached accessory buildings.
E. Front Yard:
1. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty five feet (25').
F. Side Yard:
1. Except as provided in chapter 7 of this title, there shall be a side yard on each side of the one-story portions of buildings having a
width of not less than five feet (5'), and a side yard on each side of the two-story portions of buildings having a width of not less than
seven and one-half feet (71/2').
2. The side yard on the side street of a corner lot shall be not less than fifteen feet (15'). (Ord. 620, 10-9-1978)
G. Rear Yard: Except as provided in chapter 7 of this title, there shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than thirty feet (30') or twenty
percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever amount is smaller. All walls hereafter constructed abutting on any alleyway shall contain
a gate or entry suitable to provide access to the alley. (Ord. 887, 11-14-1994)
12-4C-6: SPECIAL USES:
Additional dwelling unit. The provisions of subsection 12-3-5D of this title notwithstanding, one additional dwelling unit is permitted either
within an existing single-family dwelling, or attached to an existing single-family dwelling unit, or as a separate building located on the same
site as the existing single-family dwelling subject to the following regulations:
A. The additional dwelling unit shall be for the permanent use of a blood relative of the owner-occupant, except that such additional dwelling
unit may be used for a guest who is not a blood relative for a period of no more than thirty (30) days in any one calendar year.
B. The additional dwelling unit shall not be a mobile home, trailer, camper, recreational vehicle or any structure that does not meet the
building regulations adopted by the city of Deming, and/or does not meet manufactured home standards set by the federal department
of housing and urban development.
C. The additional dwelling unit and the existing single-family dwelling shall meet all requirements of the city of Deming zoning ordinance and
all building regulations set out in title 11, chapter 1 of this code.
D. The additional unit shall not have a house number separate from the existing single-family dwelling.
E. The additional dwelling unit shall not have its own separate utility connections, such as water, sewer, electrical and gas. The additional
dwelling unit shall connect to the utilities of the existing single-family dwelling.
F. The additional dwelling unit shall not be advertised, displayed or used as a rental unit available to the general public. In the event the city
approves the special use, then prior to the city issuing a special use permit, the owner of the existing dwelling unit shall provide proof of
a deed restriction stating that the additional dwelling unit shall not be rented or leased on the open market.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 226/318
G. The city council may revoke a special use permit for an additional dwelling unit and require removal of the additional dwelling unit upon a
finding of failure to comply with the provisions of this section or a failure to comply with any conditions imposed with the original approval
of the special use. (Ord. 1080, 11-10-2003)
ARTICLE D. A-4 SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
12-4D-1: DISTRICT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established an A-4 single-family dwelling district within the city limits. The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth
elsewhere in this title when referred to in this article, are the A-4 single-family dwelling district regulations. (Ord. 661, 10-13-1980)
12-4D-2: USE REGULATIONS:
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
Church or public building signs not exceeding ten (10) square feet in area, and other temporary signs not exceeding six (6) square feet in
area which shall pertain only to the lease, rent or sale of the premises or building thereon. There shall be no more than one such sign on
any one building site.
Churches.
Parks owned by the city.
Public schools.
Single-family dwellings.
Accessory buildings and uses incident to the above uses, not involving the operation of a business or enterprise. Any such building that is
detached from the main structure on the premises shall be at least sixty feet (60') from the front lot line. (Ord. 661, 10-13-1980)
12-4D-3: USE RESTRICTIONS:
A. Mobile Homes: No "mobile home or house trailer" as defined in section 12-2-1 of this title in excess of thirty two feet (32') in length shall
be placed or stored, permanently or otherwise, in or upon any area or building site within this dwelling district. (Ord. 661, 10-13-1980)
B. Parking: See subsections 7-2-3E and F of this code. (Ord. 1068, 10-14-2002)
C. Trailers And Mobile Homes, Storage: All trailers of any nature, and mobile homes less than thirty two feet (32') in length, shall be stored
behind the main structure on the premises or along the side of the structure so long as there is a fence enclosing same from adjoining
lots.
D. Livestock Hauling Vehicles, Storage: No trailer or other vehicle used for hauling livestock of any nature may be stored or parked on the
premises.
E. Campers Or Trailers: No campers or trailers may be inhabited while stored on the premises.
F. Unused Motor Vehicles, Parts: No unused motor vehicles, salvage parts, material, machinery or equipment shall be stored or placed on
the premises except in an enclosed garage.
G. Animals1: No animals, livestock or poultry of any kind shall be raised, bred or sheltered on any building site except for the usual
household pets and so long as they are not kept for commercial purposes.
H. Home Occupations: Any occupation or profession of a member of a family residing on the premises may be maintained so long as there
is no marking other than a nonilluminated sign less than one square foot in area used for identification and that only commodities made
or assembled on the premises by members of the family actually living on the premises are sold or exchanged. No equipment may be
used or installed on the premises except that which is normally used for household or hobby purposes. (Ord. 661, 10-13-1980)
12-4D-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 227/318
No building shall exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35') in height from ground level. (Ord. 661, 10-13-1980)
12-4D-5: AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Area Of Site:
1. Every building site shall have an area of not less than seven thousand one hundred (7,100) square feet per residence except that if a
building site has less area than prescribed herein and had an existing residential use at the effective date of this article, such lot may
be continued to be used for that existing residential use only. If the dwelling comprising that existing use is voluntarily razed, destroyed
or otherwise moved from the premises, any replacement residential dwelling must comply with the floor space requirements for
dwellings hereinafter set forth. If any dwelling existing at the effective date of this article is involuntarily razed, destroyed or otherwise
moved from the premises, any such replacement dwelling may be constructed on the building site regardless of whether the building
site contains less than seven thousand one hundred (7,100) square feet of area.
2. Every building site shall have a width of not less than fifty feet (50') at the minimum building setback line which shall be twenty five
feet (25').
B. New Construction; Enclosure; Frontage: All structures in said district shall be of new construction and no buildings, including double wide
mobile homes intended for permanent installation, shall be moved from any other location onto any building site in the district.
1. All residential dwellings shall be enclosed by walls of substantial construction with side walls being not less than two and one-half feet
(21/2') high and rear walls not less than four feet (4') high. Substantial construction will be considered to be: brick, block, masonry,
cedar or redwood fencing material.
2. Where building sites have double frontage, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets.
C. Livable Space: No dwelling house shall be constructed which contains less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of
finished livable space, exclusive of attached garages, porches, patios and breezeways. Two-story dwelling houses shall have a
minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet of finished livable space on the ground floor level. Basements, whether used for storage,
utility or living purposes, are not to be included when determining livable space.
D. Churches And Schools: No church or public school shall be constructed which contains less than two thousand (2,000) square feet of
finished usable space exclusive of unattached accessory buildings.
E. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty five feet (25').
F. Side Yard:
1. Except as provided in chapter 7 of this title, there shall be a side yard on each side of the one-story portions of buildings having a
width of not less than five feet (5'), and a side yard on each side of the two-story portions of buildings, having a width of not less than
seven and one-half feet (71/2').
2. The side yard on the side street of a corner lot shall be not less than fifteen feet (15'). (Ord. 661, 10-13-1980)
G. Rear Yard: Except as provided in chapter 7 of this title, there shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than thirty feet (30') or twenty
percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever amount is smaller. All walls hereafter constructed abutting on any alleyway shall contain
a gate or entry suitable to provide access to the alley. (Ord. 887, 11-14-1994)
12-4D-6: SPECIAL USES:
Additional dwelling unit. The provisions of subsection 12-3-5D of this title notwithstanding, one additional dwelling unit is permitted either
within an existing single-family dwelling, or attached to an existing single-family dwelling unit, or as a separate building located on the same
site as the existing single-family dwelling subject to the following regulations:
A. The additional dwelling unit shall be for the permanent use of a blood relative of the owner-occupant, except that such additional dwelling
unit may be used for a guest who is not a blood relative for a period of no more than thirty (30) days in any one calendar year.
B. The additional dwelling unit shall not be a mobile home, trailer, camper, recreational vehicle or any structure that does not meet the
building regulations adopted by the city of Deming, and/or does not meet manufactured home standards set by the federal department
of housing and urban development.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 228/318
C. The additional dwelling unit and the existing single-family dwelling shall meet all requirements of the city of Deming zoning ordinance and
all building regulations set out in title 11, chapter 1 of this code.
D. The additional unit shall not have a house number separate from the existing single-family dwelling.
E. The additional dwelling unit shall not have its own separate utility connections, such as water, sewer, electrical and gas. The additional
dwelling unit shall connect to the utilities of the existing single-family dwelling.
F. The additional dwelling unit shall not be advertised, displayed or used as a rental unit available to the general public. In the event the city
approves the special use, then prior to the city issuing a special use permit, the owner of the existing dwelling unit shall provide proof of
a deed restriction stating that the additional dwelling unit shall not be rented or leased on the open market.
G. The city council may revoke a special use permit for an additional dwelling unit and require removal of the additional dwelling unit upon a
finding of failure to comply with the provisions of this section or a failure to comply with any conditions imposed with the original approval
of the special use. (Ord. 1080, 11-10-2003)
ARTICLE E. A-5 USE DISTRICT
12-4E-1: DISTRICT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established an A-5 use district within the city limits. The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this title
when referred to in this article, are the A-5 use district regulations. (Ord. 708, 10-11-1982)
12-4E-2: PURPOSES:
This zone permits low density and uses incidental thereto, including agriculture, provided:
A. Land use is in complete compliance with subdivision regulations of the city1.
B. All lots zoned for agriculture-residential shall have not less than two (2) acres net and shall be limited to one single-family dwelling. (Ord.
708, 10-11-1982)
12-4E-3: USE REGULATIONS:
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
Children's nurseries, play schools, nursery school, or children's centers.
No children's nursery, play school, nursery school, or children's center shall be operated in the city, unless it is operated in compliance with
the rules and regulations and standards for nurseries promulgated, adopted and approved by the New Mexico department of public health,
and unless, prior to the operation thereof, said nursery, play school, nursery school or children's center has been approved by the New
Mexico department of public health or its duly authorized agents.
Church or public building bulletin board not exceeding ten (10) square feet in area, and temporary signs not exceeding six (6) square feet in
area appertaining to the lease, hire, or sale of a building or premises; provided, however, that there shall be no more than one such sign on
any one lot.
Churches.
Commercial agricultural activity, and incidental structures, provided the lot has an area of at least two (2) acres net.
Fowl. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain at his residence or place of business chickens, geese, turkeys, guineas or other like
fowl in excess of twenty five (25) in number, or to slaughter any fowl for the purpose of sale.
Golf courses, except miniature courses and driving tees operated for commercial purposes.
Home occupations.
Livestock. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, house, maintain, pasture or breed a horse, mule, colt, ass, bull, ox, cow, calf, hog, pig,
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 229/318
sheep, cattle or other livestock (hereinafter referred to as "livestock") of any kind within the city limits, except in areas zoned A-5, and as
provided herein:
A. Number Of Animals: Cattle, horses, goats and sheep may be maintained in the city limits only if the premises on which they are
maintained consist of at least two (2) acres of land, except that lambs and Vietnamese potbellied or mini-pigs may be kept within the
city limits pursuant to subsection 6-2-13 of this code. No more than two (2) head of cattle, horses, goats or adult sheep may be
maintained on such two (2) acre parcel. An additional two (2) head may be kept at the ratio of two (2) head per additional acre of open
land area, with a total not to exceed ten (10) head per parcel or contiguous parcels owned by the same owner. Two (2) head of
livestock under the age of four (4) months shall be counted as one grown animal, but only where proof of the age of each animal can
be shown.
B. Setback Requirement: No livestock shall be kept, housed, maintained or pastured within two hundred feet (200') of a neighboring
residence not owned by the owner of the livestock. In the event such a residence is constructed or placed within two hundred feet
(200') of a place where livestock has previously been continuously housed, maintained or pastured for a substantial period of time, the
setback requirement shall not apply unless:
1. The title to the premises where the livestock is housed, maintained or pastured is transferred to another owner; or
2. The maintenance, housing or pasturing of livestock on the premises is discontinued.
C. Sanitary Conditions: Livestock shall be kept in a sanitary and healthful manner for the protection of the animals, persons living on the
premises and neighbors. The provisions of section 6-2-14 of this code shall apply to animals kept in the city limits pursuant to this
zoning use regulation.
D. Nuisance: No person shall allow livestock to constitute a nuisance.
E. Feed Storage: All feed for animals kept pursuant to this zoning use regulation shall be stored out of public view and protected from
the elements and shall be kept free of rodents and pests.
F. Fencing: Animals kept pursuant to this zoning use regulation shall be confined to the owner's property by a fence or wall which
complies with city ordinances and with the setback requirements herein.
G. Boarding And Commercial Enterprises: Livestock shall not be boarded or be kept for any commercial purpose, unless otherwise
provided by city zoning ordinances.
Nurseries and truck gardening, but not the raising of poultry, pets or livestock, for strictly commercial purposes or on a scale that would be
objectionable because of noise or odor to surrounding residences.
Parks and playgrounds, city owned or operated.
Public schools, elementary and high, and educational institutions having a curriculum the same as ordinarily given in public schools.
Single-family dwelling of not less than eight hundred (800) square feet of floor space.
Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the
construction work.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the above uses, not involving the conduct of a business, including a private garage.
Any accessory building that is not a part of the main structure shall be located not less than sixty feet (60') from the front lot line. (Ord. 708,
10-11-1982; amd. Ord. 981, 11-9-1998)
12-4E-4: SPECIAL USES:
Additional dwelling unit. The provisions of subsection 12-3-5D of this title notwithstanding, one additional dwelling unit is permitted either
within an existing single-family dwelling, or attached to an existing single-family dwelling unit, or as a separate building located on the same
site as the existing single-family dwelling subject to the following regulations:
A. The additional dwelling unit shall be for the permanent use of a blood relative of the owner-occupant, except that such additional
dwelling unit may be used for a guest who is not a blood relative for a period of no more than thirty (30) days in any one calendar year.
B. The additional dwelling unit shall not be a mobile home, trailer, camper, recreational vehicle or any structure that does not meet the
building regulations adopted by the city of Deming, and/or does not meet manufactured home standards set by the federal department
of housing and urban development.
C. The additional dwelling unit and the existing single-family dwelling shall meet all requirements of the city of Deming zoning ordinance
and all building regulations set out in title 11, chapter 1 of this code.
D. The additional unit shall not have a house number separate from the existing single-family dwelling.
E. The additional dwelling unit shall not have its own separate utility connections, such as water, sewer, electrical and gas. The
additional dwelling unit shall connect to the utilities of the existing single-family dwelling.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 230/318
F. The additional dwelling unit shall not be advertised, displayed or used as a rental unit available to the general public. In the event the
city approves the special use, then prior to the city issuing a special use permit, the owner of the existing dwelling unit shall provide
proof of a deed restriction stating that the additional dwelling unit shall not be rented or leased on the open market.
G. The city council may revoke a special use permit for an additional dwelling unit and require removal of the additional dwelling unit
upon a finding of failure to comply with the provisions of this section or a failure to comply with any conditions imposed with the
original approval of the special use.
Agricultural nursery.
Agricultural products, stands and incidental signs for display or sale of agricultural products is permitted provided the number of stands is
limited to one per lot, and provided the size of the stand does not exceed four hundred (400) square feet of floor area.
Animals.
A. Animals not included in section 12-4E-3 of this article shall be considered conditional uses. Approval for any conditional use must be
obtained through application to the city planning and zoning commission.
B. Raising of swine for shows, fairs, exhibits, and similar displays, shall be permitted provided the number of swine does not exceed the
number of swine called for in the market or breeding classes or any area fair or the New Mexico state fair. All swine must be disposed
of and removed from the premises within thirty (30) days after such shows, fairs, or exhibits have closed.
Veterinary hospital. (Ord. 1080, 11-10-2003)
12-4E-5: AREA USES:
A. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty five feet (25').
B. Side Yard: There shall be a side yard on each side of the buildings of not less than fifteen feet (15').
C. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than thirty feet (30').
D. Open Space: Eight thousand (8,000) or more square feet of open space per dwelling unit shall be preserved. (Ord. 708, 10-11-1982)
E. Parking: See subsection 7-2-3F of this code. No off street parking shall be allowed. (Ord. 1068, 10-14-2002)
F. Other:
1. Swimming Pools: Swimming pool locations will comply with the national electrical safety and local electric utility safety codes, and
other applicable codes.
2. Electronic Towers:
a. Any plans for electronic towers must comply with the existing wind energy conversion system (WECS) ordinance2.
b. Any permit to install an electronic tower must be obtained from the city engineer.
c. The maximum height of the tower shall not exceed sixty five feet (65').
d. The setback for any electronic tower shall be the height of the tower from any property line.
3. Underground Utilities: The installation of underground utilities shall be optional. (Ord. 708, 10-11-1982)
ARTICLE F. B MULTIPLE DWELLING DISTRICT
12-4F-1: APPLICATION:
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this title when referred to in this article, are the B multiple dwelling district
regulations. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-4F-2: USE REGULATIONS:
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 231/318
Any use permitted in the A single-family dwelling district.
Boarding and lodging houses.
Hospitals and clinics, but not animal hospitals, animal clinics or mental hospitals.
Multiple dwelling, containing a floor space of not less than three hundred (300) square feet per family.
Nonprofit religious, educational, and philanthropic institutions, but not penal or mental treatment institutions.
Private clubs and lodges, excepting those the chief activity of which is customarily carried on as a business.
Professional offices, or studios of doctors, dentists, artists, musicians, lawyers, authors and beauticians. Also, printing or publishing houses,
provided there are no more than five (5) employees therein at any one time.
Retail outlets, small, with a showroom not to exceed three hundred (300) square feet, with no more than three (3) employees, business
hours eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M., operating Monday through Friday.
Two-family dwelling, containing a floor space of not less than six hundred (600) square feet per family.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the above uses not involving the conduct of a business, including a private garage.
Any accessory building that is not a part of the main structure shall be located not less than sixty feet (60') from the front lot line. (Ord. 252,
12-7-1955; amd. Ord. 811, 5-14-1990; Ord. 893, 12-12-1994)
12-4F-3: USE RESTRICTIONS:
A. Parking: See subsections 7-2-3E and F of this code. (Ord. 1068, 10-14-2002)
B. Mobile Homes: No "mobile home or house trailer" as defined in section 12-2-1 of this title shall be placed or set, permanently or
otherwise, in, or upon any area now or hereafter designated as a B multiple dwelling district, by the zoning ordinances of the city. (Ord.
501, 7-2-1973)
12-4F-4: PARKING REGULATIONS:
Whenever a structure is erected, converted or structurally altered for multiple dwelling or two-family dwelling purposes, one parking space
shall be provided on the lot for each dwelling unit in the structure. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-4F-5: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
The height regulations are the same as those in the A single-family dwelling district. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-4F-6: AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Yards: The yard regulations shall be the same as in the A single-family dwelling district.
B. Interior Courts: All interior courts shall have a width equal to at least the height of the highest part of the building forming the court.
C. Intensity Of Use: Every lot shall contain an area of not less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet per family. (Ord. 252, 12-
7-1955)
12-4F-7: MOBILE HOMES; PARKING:
A. Parking Restricted: It shall be unlawful for any person to place or park, or allow to be placed or parked, any mobile home or house trailer
exceeding twenty five feet (25') in length in, or upon any area now, or hereafter designated as an A single-family dwelling district or a B
multiple dwelling district, by the zoning ordinances of the city.
B. Towing Away; Fees: The police department and all members thereof are hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed
and towed away by commercial towing service, any mobile home or house trailer illegally parked or placed as provided in this article.
Mobile homes or house trailers so towed away shall be stored in a safe place and shall be restored to the owner thereof upon payment
of a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) plus actual costs of towing within twenty four (24) hours after the time such vehicle was removed, plus
five dollars ($5.00) for each additional day or fraction thereof.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 232/318
C. Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by section 1-4-1 of this code,
and each day's violation of this section shall be a separate and continuing offense. (Ord. 471, 1-3-1972)
ARTICLE G. B-1 DWELLING DISTRICT
12-4G-1: APPLICATION:
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this title when referred to in this article, are the B-1 dwelling district
regulations. (Ord. 276, 5-5-1958)
12-4G-2: USE REGULATIONS:
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
Any use permitted in the B multiple dwelling district.
House trailers containing a floor space of not less than five hundred (500) square feet and properly connected to utilities.
Mobile home parks, pursuant to chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 276, 5-5-1958; amd. Ord. 505, 11-12-1973; 2001 Code)
12-4G-3: PARKING REGULATIONS:
See subsections 7-2-3E and F of this code. Parking regulations shall be the same as in the B multiple dwelling district. (Ord. 1068, 10-14-
2002)
12-4G-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
The height regulations are the same as in the B multiple dwelling district. (Ord. 276, 5-5-1958)
12-4G-5: AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Yards: The yard regulations shall be the same as in the B multiple dwelling district.
B. Intensity Of Use: Every lot upon which a house trailer is placed shall contain an area of not less than three thousand five hundred (3,500)
square feet per family. (Ord. 276, 5-5-1958)
C. Exception: In each case where the installation of a mobile home on approved lots of less than one hundred forty two feet (142') in depth
and the depth prohibits compliance with the area regulations, the rear yard requirements may be waived, provided said lot abuts the
alleyway. (Ord. 909, 7-10-1995)
ARTICLE H. B-2 USE DISTRICT
12-4H-1: DISTRICT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a B-2 use district within the city limits. The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this title
when referred to in this article, are the B-2 use district regulations. (Ord. 705, 9-13-1982)
12-4H-2: DEFINITION:
A B-2 use district shall be defined as any single-family dwelling unit designed to be sold and held in fee simple as a unit, but forming one of
a group or series to two (2) or more additional buildings separated by one another by common property lines but limited to a maximum of
eight (8) additional units in one group but no more than sixteen (16) units in one city block having ninety thousand (90,000) square feet.
(Ord. 705, 9-13-1982)
12-4H-3: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED BEFORE DISTRICT ESTABLISHED:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 233/318
No B-2 use district as herein defined shall be established within the city limits until there is submitted to the city planning and zoning
commission and approved by the city council, copies of the articles of incorporation and bylaws of a homeowners' association proposing the
establishment of such district, together with all restrictive covenants, a proposed plan showing the building locations, a drainage plan, and
such other data as may be required by the planning and zoning commission to ensure compliance with this article. (Ord. 705, 9-13-1982)
12-4H-4: USE REGULATIONS:
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
Children's nurseries, play schools, nursery school, or children's centers.
No children's nursery, play school, nursery school, or children's center shall be operated in the city, unless it is operated in compliance with
the rules and regulations and standards for nurseries promulgated, adopted and approved by the New Mexico department of public health,
and unless, prior to the operation thereof, said nursery, play school, nursery school or children's center has been approved by the New
Mexico department of public health or its duly authorized agents.
Church or public building bulletin board not exceeding ten (10) square feet in area, and temporary signs not exceeding six (6) square feet in
area appertaining to the lease, hire, or sale of a building or premises; provided, however, that there shall be no more than one such sign on
any one lot.
Churches.
Golf courses, except miniature courses and driving tees operated for commercial purposes.
Home occupations.
Nurseries and truck gardening, but not the raising of poultry, pets or livestock for strictly commercial purposes or on a scale that would be
objectionable because of noise or odor to surrounding residences.
Parks and playgrounds, city owned or operated.
Public schools, elementary and high, and educational institutions having a curriculum the same as ordinarily given in public schools.
Single-family dwellings of not less than eight hundred (800) square feet of floor space.
Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the
construction work.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the above uses, not involving the conduct of a business, including a private garage.
Any accessory building that is not a part of the main structure shall be located not less than sixty feet (60') from the front lot line. (Ord. 705,
9-13-1982)
12-4H-5: USE RESTRICTIONS:
A. Mobile Homes: No "mobile home or house trailer" as defined in section 12-2-1 of this title, and in excess of thirty two feet (32') in length
shall be placed or stored, permanently or otherwise, in or upon any area or building site. (Ord. 705, 9-13-1982)
B. Parking: See subsections 7-2-3E and F of this code. (Ord. 1068, 10-14-2002)
C. Storage Of Trailers And Motor Homes: All trailers and motor homes of any nature, and mobile homes less than thirty two feet (32') in
length, shall be stored in a common area provided by developer and so designated by developer.
D. Livestock Hauling Vehicles, Storage: No trailer or other vehicle used for hauling livestock of any nature may be stored or parked on the
premises.
E. Campers Or Trailers: No campers or trailers may be inhabited while stored on the premises.
F. Motor Vehicles, Parts: No unused motor vehicles, salvage parts, material, machinery or equipment shall be stored or placed on the
premises except in an enclosed garage.
G. Animals1: No animals, livestock or poultry of any kind shall be raised, bred or sheltered on any building site except for the usual
household pets and so long as they are not kept for commercial purposes. (Ord. 705, 9-13-1982)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 234/318
12-4H-6: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed twenty six feet (26') in height from finished ground level. (Ord. 705, 9-13-1982)
12-4H-7: AREA REGULATIONS:
Every dwelling unit site shall have a lot area of not less than two thousand three hundred (2,300) square feet.
A. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty five feet (25').
B. Side Yard: There shall be a side yard on each side of the buildings of not less than fifteen feet (15').
C. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than thirty feet (30'). (Ord. 705, 9-13-1982)
D. Parking: See subsections 7-2-3E and F of this code. No more than seventy percent (70%) of the required front yard area shall be used
for off street parking. (Ord. 705, 9-13-1982; amd. Ord. 1068, 10-14-2002)
E. Landscaping:
1. A minimum of not less than fifteen percent (15%) of the required front yard shall be used for landscaping.
2. Native landscaping is permissible and will be encouraged.
F. Usable Open Space:
1. Usable open space shall be provided on site with a minimum of seven hundred fifty (750) square feet per unit.
2. Any variance must be approved by the association establishing the B-2 use district pursuant to this article.
G. Other:
1. Swimming Pools: Swimming pool locations will comply with the national electrical safety and local electric utility safety codes, and
other applicable codes.
2. Solar Rights: The height and width of the structure over twenty six feet (26') high shall fall within forty five degree (45°) angle planes
drawn from the horizontal at the mean grade along each internal boundary of the premises and each adjacent public right-of-way
center line, or drainage right-of-way center line. To protect solar access, a structure over twenty six feet (26') high may not exceed the
northern boundary of these forty five degree (45°) planes, but may be sited in any other direction within planes drawn at a sixty degree
(60°) angle from the same boundaries of center line.
3. Electronic Towers: Any plans for electronic towers must be approved by the association establishing the B-2 use district pursuant to
this article and comply with the existing wind energy conversion system (WESC) ordinance2.
4. Underground Utilities: All utilities will be installed underground.
5. Yard Or Garage Sale: No more than one per unit in a twelve (12) month period. Any single sale shall not exceed three (3) consecutive
days. (Ord. 705, 9-13-1982)
ARTICLE I. B-3 USE DISTRICT
12-4I-1: DISTRICT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a B-3 use district within the city limits. The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this title
when referred to in this article, are the B-3 use district regulations. (Ord. 706, 9-13-1982)
12-4I-2: DEFINITION:
A B-3 use district shall be defined as a residential/commercial development, in which each unit is owned individually, whether the unit
includes air space, walls, floors or any combination thereof, and in which other areas and facilities within the development are owned and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 235/318
maintained jointly by a group, association or corporate entity, but the title to the real estate beneath each unit shall be owned in common by
the group, association or corporate entity. (Ord. 706, 9-13-1982)
12-4I-3: USE REGULATIONS:
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
Children's nurseries, play schools, nursery school, or children's centers.
No children's nursery, play school, nursery school, or children's center shall be operated in the city, unless it is operated in compliance with
the rules and regulations and standards for nurseries promulgated, adopted and approved by the New Mexico department of public health,
and unless, prior to the operation thereof, said nursery, play school, nursery school or children's center has been approved by the New
Mexico department of public health or its duly authorized agents.
Church or public building bulletin board not exceeding ten (10) square feet in area, and temporary signs not exceeding six (6) square feet in
area appertaining to the lease, hire, or sale of a building or premises; provided, however, that there shall be no more than one such sign on
any one lot.
Churches.
Golf courses, except miniature courses and driving tees, operated for commercial purposes.
Home occupations.
Nurseries and truck gardening, but not the raising of poultry, pets or livestock for strictly commercial purposes or on a scale that would be
objectionable because of noise or odor to surrounding residences.
Parks and playgrounds, city owned or operated.
Public schools, elementary and high, and educational institutions having a curriculum the same as ordinarily given in public schools.
Single-family dwellings of not less than eight hundred (800) square feet of floor space.
Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the
construction work.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the above uses, not involving the conduct of a business, including a private garage.
Any accessory building that is not a part of the main structure shall be located not less than sixty feet (60') from the front lot line. (Ord. 706,
9-13-1982)
12-4I-4: USE RESTRICTIONS:
Uses incidental to an apartment such as daycare center, news, cigar, or candy stand, delicatessen, personal-service shop, and the like, are
permitted with an apartment development, provided:
A. The use is intended for the private use of residents of premises on which the incidental use is located.
B. At least one hundred (100) dwelling units are on the same premises.
C. The total floor area for all shops in the development is limited to a maximum of two percent (2%) of the gross floor area of the
condominiums.
D. The use is not directly accessible to the general public or directly accessible from public right of way.
E. A sign or window display relating to the use is not discernible from a public right of way.
F. Clubhouse, provided it has no liquor license. (Ord. 706, 9-13-1982)
12-4I-5: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed twenty six feet (26') in height from finished ground level. (Ord. 706, 9-13-1982)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 236/318
12-4I-6: AREA REGULATIONS:
Every dwelling unit site shall have a maximum of twenty four (24) dwelling units per ninety thousand (90,000) square feet. The maximum
common area will be no less than thirty percent (30%) of the total complex area. These common areas shall include any staircases or public
walkways.
A. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty five feet (25').
B. Side Yard: There shall be a side yard on each side of the buildings of not less than fifteen feet (15').
C. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than thirty feet (30'). (Ord. 706, 9-13-1982)
D. Parking: See subsections 7-2-3E and F of this code. No more than seventy percent (70%) of the required front yard area shall be used
for off street parking. (Ord. 1068, 10-14-2002)
E. Open Space:
1. Minimum usable open space shall be provided on site in an amount equal to two hundred (200) square feet for each efficiency or one
bedroom dwelling unit, two hundred fifty (250) square feet for each two (2) bedroom dwelling unit, and three hundred (300) square
feet for each dwelling unit containing three (3) or more bedrooms.
2. Where an aggregate of two (2) or more dwelling units is constructed on any given lot, the development shall include landscaping of
the ground level usable open space, planted and maintained according to a landscaping plan approved by any group, association, or
corporate entity owning the facility.
F. Other:
1. Swimming Pools: Swimming pool locations will comply with the national electrical safety and local electric utility safety codes, and
other applicable codes.
2. Solar Rights: The height and width of the structure over twenty six feet (26') high shall fall within forty five degree (45°) angle planes
drawn from the horizontal at the mean grade along each internal boundary of the premises and each adjacent public right of way
centerline, or drainage right of way centerline. To protect solar access, a structure over twenty six feet (26') high may not exceed the
northern boundary of these forty five degree (45°) planes, but may be sited in any other direction within planes drawn at a sixty degree
(60°) angle from the same boundaries of centerline.
3. Electronic Towers: Any plans for electronic towers must be approved by any group, association or corporate entity owning the facility,
and comply with the existing wind energy conversion system (WECS) ordinance1.
4. Underground Utilities: All utilities will be installed underground. (Ord. 706, 9-13-1982)
ARTICLE J. C COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
12-4J-1: APPLICATION:
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this title and referred to in this article, are the regulations in the C
commercial district. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-4J-2: USE REGULATIONS:
A. Permitted Uses: A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
Any use permitted in the B multiple dwelling district except those uses prohibited by section 12-4J-6 of this article.
Amusement places or theaters; provided, however, that no theater shall be erected or reconstructed unless there is provided on the
same lot, or within three hundred feet (300') thereof, a space for off street parking which contains an area adequate to accommodate
one automobile for every four (4) seats in the theater.
Recreational vehicle parks, pursuant to chapter 15, article B of this title. (Ord. 1111, 6-13-2005)
B. Signs: Erection of signs shall be controlled under the sign code as adopted by the city1. (Ord. 891, 12-12-1994)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 237/318
C. Industry Or Storage, Floor Area Limitation: Any building used primarily for any of the above enumerated purposes may have not more
than forty percent (40%) of the floor area devoted to industry or storage purposes incidental to such primary use; provided, that no more
than ten (10) employees shall be engaged at any time on the premises in any such incidental use. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
D. Prohibited Uses: Subject to the provisions of section 12-4J-6 of this article and chapter 17 of this title, a building or premises may be
used for any use except the following: (Ord. 999, 7-12-1999)
Acetylene gas manufacture or storage.
Acid manufacture.
Alcohol manufacture.
Ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture.
Arsenal.
Asphalt manufacture or refining.
Auto wrecking.
Bag cleanings.
Bailer works.
Blast furnace.
Brick, tile, pottery or terra cotta manufacture, other than the manufacture of handcraft products only.
Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of Paris manufacture.
Central mining plant for cement mortar, plaster or paving materials.
Coke ovens.
Creosote manufacture or treatment.
Disinfectants manufacture.
Distillation of bones, coal or wood.
Dyestuff manufacture.
Explosives or fireworks manufacture or storage.
Fat rendering.
Fertilizer manufacture.
Forge plant.
Garbage, offal, or dead animal reduction or dumping.
Gas manufacture or storage.
Glue, size or gelatine manufacture.
Iron, steel, brass or copper foundry or fabrication plant.
Junk, iron or rags storage or baling.
Oilcloth or linoleum manufacture.
Oiled rubber goods manufacture.
Ore reduction.
Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine or varnish manufacture.
Paper and pulp manufacture.
Petroleum or its products, refining or wholesale storage of.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 238/318
Planing mills.
Rock crusher.
Rolling mills.
Rubber or gutta-percha manufacture or treatment.
Shoe polish manufacture.
Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores.
Soap manufacture other than liquid soap.
Stockyard or slaughter of animals or fowls.
Stone mill or quarry.
Tallow, grease or lard manufacture or refining from, or of, animal fat.
Tanning, curing or storage of rawhides or skins.
Tar distillation or manufacture.
Tar roofing or waterproofing manufacture.
Vinegar manufacture.
Wool pulling or scouring.
Yeast plant.
And in general those uses which may be obnoxious or offensive by reason of emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, vibration, or noise.
(Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
E. Special Uses: A use that would require higher or stricter level of review because of inherent special characteristics, possible impact on
adjacent properties, or possible impact on the integrity of the particular zone which includes, but is not limited to:
Adult amusement establishment.
Adult book or video store.
Agricultural implements sales and service.
Auction houses and flea markets.
Automobile and small and large truck sales and service.
Distribution of medical cannabis.
Heavy equipment sales and service.
Kennels.
Mobile, modular and manufactured home and office sales and service.
Motorcycle sales and service.
Open storage for landscape materials, sand, gravel or fertilizer.
Recreational vehicle sales, service and repairs, including, but not limited to, campers, fifth wheel trailers, boats, and all-terrain vehicles.
Recycling centers.
Salvage yards.
Telecommunications, radio, transmission and power towers, utility substations, and plants.
Vehicle body shops.
Vehicle paint shops.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 239/318
Vehicles for recreational use, sales and service, including, but not limited to, campers, fifth wheel trailers, boats, all-terrain vehicles.
Welding shops.
Wrecker service. (Ord. 1214, 5-9-2011)
12-4J-3: PARKING REGULATIONS:
A. Construction: Paved off street parking shall be constructed to standards approved by the public works director, or other authorized city
official.
B. Number Of Spaces Required: The number of parking spaces within a paved area shall be determined by the total area of pavement
divided by three hundred seventy five (375) square feet.
C. Apartments; Hotels: Whenever a structure is erected, converted, or structurally altered for occupancy as an apartment or for permanent
or transient sleeping quarters as a hotel, motel, or boarding house, one paved off street parking space shall be provided for each
dwelling unit or for each hotel, motel, or boarding house bedroom; said parking spaces to be provided within four hundred fifty feet (450')
of such establishment.
D. Other Permitted Uses: The number of parking spaces required for other permitted uses shall not be less than one space per each five (5)
persons, based on the building capacity or occupant load, as defined by the adopted city building code2, and as further specified
hereinafter:
REQUIRED OFF STREET PARKING
Building Occupancy
Number Of Square Feet
Of Building Per Occupant
Aircraft hangars (no repair) 500
Assembly areas, concentrated use (without fixed seats): 7
Auditoriums
Bowling alleys (assembly areas)
Churches and chapels
Dance floors
Lodge rooms
Reviewing stands
Stadiums
Assembly areas, less concentrated use: 15
Conference rooms
Dining rooms
Drinking establishments
Exhibit rooms
Gymnasiums
Lounges
Skating rinks
Stages
Auction rooms 7
Children's homes and homes for the aged 80
Classrooms 20
Dormitories 50
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 240/318
Dwellings 300
Garage, parking 200
Hospitals and sanatoriums, nursing homes 80
Kitchen, commercial 200
Library reading room 50
Locker rooms 50
Mechanical equipment room 300
Nurseries for children (daycare) 50
Offices 100
School shops and vocational rooms 50
Stores - retail sales rooms:
Basement 20
Ground floor 30
Upper floors 50
Warehouses 300
All others 100
1. When a building contains or is designed to contain more than one occupancy, the number of parking spaces required shall be
determined by the net area of each occupancy, excluding permanent partitions and walls.
2. When parking is provided by written agreement, the same parking spaces shall not be assigned to two (2) or more building
occupancies of the same type of characteristics; however, parking spaces may be assigned to two (2) or more building occupancies of
dissimilar types which have parking requirements at different times. (Ord. 540, 7-14-1975)
12-4J-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35') in height except as otherwise provided in chapter 7 of this
title. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-4J-5: AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Front Yard: Where all frontage on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets is located in the C commercial district, no front
yard shall be required. Where the frontage on one side of the street between two (2) intersecting streets is located partly in the C
commercial district and partly in a dwelling district, the front yard requirements of the dwelling district shall apply to the C commercial
district.
B. Side Yard: The side yard regulations for dwellings are the same as those in the B multiple dwelling districts. In all other cases, a side
yard is not required except:
1. On the side of a lot adjoining a dwelling district, in which case there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet (5'); provided,
however, that if a side yard is provided where not required, it shall not be less than two and one-half feet (21/2') in width.
2. On the street side of a corner lot that rears upon a dwelling district, in which case there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet
(5').
C. Rear Yard:
1. Where the lot abuts an alley, no rear yard shall be required for one-story buildings.
2. Where the lot abuts an alley, a rear yard of ten feet (10') shall be provided for the two-story parts of buildings.
3. Where the lot does not abut an alley, there shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty feet (20'), unless the lot is a lot
of record at the time this title first became effective, and is less than one hundred feet (100') in depth, in which case the rear yard need
not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 241/318
D. Interior Court: All interior courts shall have a width equal to at least the height of the highest part of the building forming the court.
E. Intensity Of Use: The intensity of use regulations shall apply to living facilities above stores or other commercial uses as well as to
residential buildings, and every lot shall provide an area of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet per family. (Ord. 252, 12-7-
1955)
12-4J-6: CERTAIN STRUCTURES PROHIBITED:
A. Prohibited Structures: The following structures are prohibited in a C commercial district:
1. Mobile or manufactured homes, as defined in New Mexico Statutes Annotated section 3-21A-2, whether for commercial, residential or
other use.
2. Trailers or recreational vehicles of all classes, whether for commercial, residential or other use.
3. Any detached or freestanding residential structure. (Ord. 992, 3-8-1999)
4. (Rep. by Ord. 1080, 11-10-2003)
5. Single-family dwellings, whether mobile homes, manufactured homes or site built homes. The provisions of section 12-5-3 of the
zoning ordinance notwithstanding, a legal nonconforming site built single-family dwelling that is damaged or destroyed, in part or in its
entirety, by fire or some other casualty, may be reconstructed, in whole or in part, as necessary, provided the reconstructed building is
no greater in floor area than the building that was damaged or destroyed, and provided that the building is constructed in the same
location or in a location that may be approved by city council. (Ord. 992, 3-8-1999; amd. Ord. 1080, 11-10-2003)
B. Exceptions: This section does not apply to:
1. The construction of multiple-dwelling units, such as apartments or condominiums, where the dwelling units are the primary use of the
property and each unit contains a floor space of not less than three hundred (300) square feet per family. (Ord. 992, 3-8-1999)
2. (Rep. by Ord. 1080, 11-10-2003)
3. The temporary use of a mobile or manufactured structure as an office for the construction site of a permanent building. Such use,
however, shall be allowed only during such time as construction at the site is active and shall not in any event exceed one year. The
requirements of subsection 12-14-3D and section 12-14-4 of this title and any other ordinances or regulations governing the
placement of such a structure apply to such use.
4. Any property not conforming to this title as of March 8, 1999, or to property for which a variance has previously been granted, except
that this section will apply to such use in the event the business on the property closes or the ownership of the property changes.
(Ord. 992, 3-8-1999)
5. Trailers or recreational vehicles will be allowed to dry camp on site in the district for up to forty eight (48) hours per week for twenty
four (24) hour retail operations provided sufficient automobile parking is always available to meet building code requirements. Property
owners are prohibited from collecting any fees associated with dry camping.
6. Trailers or recreational vehicles will be allowed to dry camp in the district for Friday and Saturday nights only for permitted flea
markets provided sufficient automobile parking is always available to meet building code requirements. Property owners are prohibited
from collecting any fees associated with dry camping.
7. Permitted seasonal fireworks stands under section 5-4-4 of this code must be attended by the operator twenty four (24) hours a day
during their permit period while inventory is on site for public safety concerns. Dry camped trailers, and recreational vehicles may be
utilized to occupy the premises to provide the twenty four (24) hour security. (Ord. 1103, 12-13-2004)
8. One dwelling unit is permitted in any commercial use building either on the first or main floor, or on any upper floor, except that in any
commercial use building located in a designated historic district more than one dwelling unit may be established on the upper floor(s),
subject to the following conditions:
a. The dwelling unit, if located on the main or first floor, be located at the rear of the building and not the front of the building.
b. The floor area of any dwelling unit shall not be less than three hundred (300) square feet, and the total floor area of all dwelling
units shall not be greater than thirty three percent (33%) of the total gross floor area of the commercial use building at the time of
application for the conditional use permit.
c. No dwelling unit shall be established anywhere else on the commercial site other than in the principal commercial building. No
accessory buildings, travel trailers, mobile home, manufactured homes, recreational vehicle or any other structure may be used as
a dwelling unit. (Ord. 1214, 5-9-2011)
ARTICLE K. C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
12-4K-1: DISTRICT ESTABLISHED:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 242/318
There is hereby established a C-1 neighborhood commercial district within the city limits. (Ord. 378, 11-2-1964)
12-4K-2: IDENTIFYING REGULATIONS:
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this title and referred to in this article, are the regulations in the C-1
neighborhood commercial district. (Ord. 378, 11-2-1964)
12-4K-3: USE REGULATIONS:
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
Any use permitted in the B multiple dwelling district.
Bakery goods or confectionery store wherein products are sold on premises and at retail.
Bank.
Barbershop, beauty shop, or other such personal service establishment.
Book or stationery store.
Clothing or shoe store, tailor or millinery shop.
Drugstore.
Dry goods store.
Florist or gift shop.
Furniture store.
Grocery or delicatessen store or meat market.
Hardware or home appliance store.
Jewelry store.
Laundry agency, but not dry cleaning establishments.
Photography studio.
Recreational vehicle parks, pursuant to chapter 15, article B of this title.
Recreational vehicle storage; provided, that no vehicle shall be used or occupied as a residence at any time, nor sold on the premises, nor
attached to any utilities, and that no recreational vehicle stored shall exceed forty five feet (45') in length.
Restaurant, cafe. (Ord. 378, 11-2-1964; amd. Ord. 664, 12-8-1980; Ord. 715, 3-14-1983; Ord. 933, 10-14-1996; 2001 Code)
12-4K-4: PARKING REGULATIONS:
The parking regulations are the same as those in the C commercial district. (Ord. 378, 11-2-1964)
12-4K-5: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
The height regulations are the same as those in the B multiple dwelling district. (Ord. 378, 11-2-1964)
12-4K-6: AREA REGULATIONS:
The yard regulations shall be the same as the B multiple dwelling district. (Ord. 378, 11-2-1964)
12-4K-7: YARDS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 243/318
The yard regulations shall be the same as in the B multiple dwelling district. (Ord. 378, 11-2-1964)
12-4K-8: INTENSITY OF USE:
The intensity of use shall be the same as in the B multiple dwelling district. (Ord. 378, 11-2-1964)
12-4K-9: EMPLOYEES:
No commercial use shall be allowed where more than three (3) employees are employed at any time on the premises. (Ord. 378, 11-2-
1964)
12-4K-10: SIGNS:
No sign shall be allowed which shall exceed more than four (4) square feet in area, and any such sign shall be attached to a permanent
building in said district. (Ord. 378, 11-2-1964)
12-4K-11: RECREATIONAL GAME MACHINES:
In any commercial business there shall be no more than two (2) recreational game machines per establishment. (Ord. 378, 11-2-1964)
12-4K-12: BUSINESS HOURS:
No neighborhood commercial establishment shall be open for business except between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. each day. (Ord. 715, 3-14-1983)
12-4K-13: SPECIAL USES:
One dwelling unit is permitted in any commercial use building either on the first or main floor, or on any upper floor, except that in any
commercial use building located in a designated historic district more than one dwelling unit may be established on the upper floor(s),
subject to the following conditions:
A. The dwelling unit, if located on the main or first floor, be located at the rear of the building and not the front of the building.
B. The floor area of any dwelling unit shall not be less than three hundred (300) square feet, and the total floor area of all dwelling units
shall not be greater than thirty three percent (33%) of the total gross floor area of the commercial use building at the time of application
for the conditional use permit.
C. No dwelling unit shall be established anywhere else on the commercial site other than in the principal commercial building. No accessory
buildings, travel trailers, mobile home, manufactured homes, recreational vehicle, or any other structure may be used as a dwelling unit.
(Ord. 1080, 11-10-2003)
12-4K-14: CERTAIN STRUCTURES PROHIBITED:
A. Prohibited Structures: All structures prohibited by subsection 12-4J-6A of the zoning ordinance, as amended by ordinance 1080, are
prohibited structures in any C-1 neighborhood commercial district.
B. Exceptions: The exceptions set out in subsection 12-4J-6B of the zoning ordinance, as amended by ordinance 1080, apply to the C-1
neighborhood commercial district. (Ord. 1080, 11-10-2003)
ARTICLE L. C-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
12-4L-1: DISTRICT ESTABLISHED:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 244/318
There is hereby established, pursuant to this title, a C-2 commercial district within the city limits. (Ord. 385, 5-3-1965)
12-4L-2: APPLICATION:
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this title and referred to in this article, are the regulations in the C-2
commercial district. (Ord. 385, 5-3-1965)
12-4L-3: USE REGULATIONS:
Use regulations of buildings or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
Any use permitted in the C commercial district or the C-1 neighborhood commercial district. (Ord. 385, 5-3-1965)
12-4L-4: PARKING REGULATIONS:
Parking regulations are the same as those in the C commercial district. (Ord. 385, 5-3-1965)
12-4L-5: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
Height regulations shall be the same as those provided in the C commercial district. (Ord. 385, 5-3-1965)
12-4L-6: AREA REGULATIONS; FRONT YARD:
Where all of the frontages provided for in this use district abut on Gold Street, also known as State Highway 11, south of Poplar Street, and
north of Florida Street, a setback from said street shall be required of at least fifteen feet (15') from the right of way line of said street. All
other area regulations shall be the same as those required in a C commercial district. (Ord. 385, 5-3-1965)
12-4L-7: SPECIAL USES:
One dwelling unit is permitted in any commercial use building either on the first or main floor, or on any upper floor, except that in any
commercial use building located in a designated historic district more than one dwelling unit may be established on the upper floor(s),
subject to the following conditions:
A. The dwelling unit, if located on the main or first floor, be located at the rear of the building and not the front of the building.
B. The floor area of any dwelling unit shall not be less than three hundred (300) square feet, and the total floor area of all dwelling units
shall not be greater than thirty three percent (33%) of the total gross floor area of the commercial use building at the time of application
for the conditional use permit.
C. No dwelling unit shall be established anywhere else on the commercial site other than in the principal commercial building. No accessory
buildings, travel trailers, mobile home, manufactured homes, recreational vehicle, or any other structure may be used as a dwelling unit.
(Ord. 1080, 11-10-2003)
12-4L-8: CERTAIN STRUCTURES PROHIBITED:
A. Prohibited Structures: All structures prohibited by subsection 12-4J-6A of the zoning ordinance, as amended by ordinance 1080, are
prohibited structures in any C-2 commercial district.
B. Exceptions: The exceptions set out in subsection 12-4J-6B of the zoning ordinance, as amended by ordinance 1080, apply to the C-2
commercial district. (Ord. 1080, 11-10-2003)
ARTICLE M. D INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
12-4M-1: APPLICATION:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 245/318
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this title when referred to in this article, are the D industrial district
regulations. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-4M-2: USE REGULATIONS:
Any building or premises may be used for any purpose not in conflict with any provision of this code regulating nuisances; provided,
however, that no building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the following uses until, and unless, the location of such use has
been approved by the city council:
Acid manufacture.
Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of paris manufacture.
Distillation of bones.
Explosives manufacture or storage.
Fat rendering.
Fertilizer manufacture.
Garbage, offal, or dead animals, reduction or dumping.
Gas manufacture.
Glue manufacture.
Milling plants.
Petroleum, or its products, refining of.
Smelting of tin, copper, zinc, or iron ores.
Stockyards or slaughter of animals.
Wholesale storage of gasoline.
Any other uses which might be objectionable to, or adversely affect, nearby residential districts because of the emission of odor, dust,
smoke, gas or noise. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-4M-3: USE RESTRICTIONS:
Residential use not allowed in the industrial areas. Existing residential use is nonconforming permitted subject to the provision of chapter 5,
"Nonconforming Uses", of this title. (Ord. 1197, 1-11-2010)
12-4M-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed three (3) stories or forty five feet (45') in height, except as otherwise provided in chapter 7 of this title and title 10,
chapter 1 of this code. (Ord. 1197, 1-11-2010)
12-4M-5: AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Front Yard: Where all the frontage on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets is located in the D industrial district, no
front yard shall be required. Where the frontage on one side of the street between two (2) intersecting streets is located partly in the D
industrial district and partly in a dwelling district, the front yard requirements of the dwelling district shall apply to the D industrial district.
B. Side Yard: The side yard regulations for dwellings are the same as in the B multiple dwelling district. In all other cases, a side yard is not
required except:
1. On the side of a lot adjoining a dwelling district, in which case there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet (5'); and
2. On the street side of a corner lot rearing upon a dwelling district, in which case there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet (5').
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 246/318
C. Rear Yard: The rear yard regulations for dwellings are the same as those in the B multiple dwelling district. In all other cases, no rear
yard is required except where the lot abuts on a dwelling district, in which case there shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty feet
(20').
D. Intensity Of Use: The intensity of use regulations are the same as in the C commercial district. (Ord. 1197, 1-11-2010)
ARTICLE N. T USE DISTRICT
12-4N-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created a T use district within the city limits. All buildings, trailers or premises located in the T use district within the city
limits shall be only for the following purposes. (Ord. 364, 11-4-1963)
12-4N-2: USE:
Any use permitted in the B multiple dwelling district or the B-1 dwelling district. (Ord. 364, 11-4-1963)
12-4N-3: REGULATIONS:
Trailer camps or courts housing only mobile trailers used or occupied as dwellings excepting necessary outbuildings for utilities and other
purposes necessary for the trailer court; provided, however, that the trailer camps or courts comply with the following regulations:
A. Area: The area for each trailer house shall be at least one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet and at least twenty five feet
(25') wide.
B. Floor Space: All house trailers located thereon shall contain a floor space of not less than two hundred fifty (250) square feet when
properly connected with utilities.
C. Spacing: Side to side spacing between trailer houses shall be at least fifteen feet (15'), and back to back spacing shall be at least ten
feet (10'). The distance between any trailer house and any building shall be at least fifteen feet (15'), and at least ten feet (10') from any
property line of the trailer court. (Ord. 364, 11-4-1963)
D. Parking: See subsection 7-2-3F of this code. There shall be at least one automobile off street parking space for each trailer house or
dwelling. (Ord. 1068, 10-14-2002)
E. Accessible Area: Any area accessible to motor vehicles shall be surfaced with gravel, oil, or other higher type paving.
F. Fence: A solid fence or wall six feet (6') high shall be maintained on any side of the site abutting, contiguous, or facing any other property
in the A, B or B-1 zone.
G. Driveway Width: Any driveway shall be at least twenty feet (20') wide.
H. Driveway Lighting: Any driveway shall be lighted, and any lights shall be so arranged to reflect away from abutting property, street or
alley.
I. Site Cleanliness: Any site shall be kept graded, drained and free of rubbish and litter.
J. Site Size: Any site shall contain at least one acre.
K. Water: Water shall be piped to all buildings containing plumbing fixtures and to trailer coach spaces.
L. Sewerage: A system of sanitary sewerage shall be provided in all trailer courts and all waste and soil lines discharging from buildings and
trailer coaches shall be connected thereto.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 247/318
M. Electric Power: Every trailer court shall be provided with electric power with outlets provided for each coach space. (Ord. 364, 11-4-
1963)
ARTICLE O. T-2 USE DISTRICT
12-4O-1: DISTRICT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a T-2 use district within the city. (Ord. 516, 7-1-1974)
12-4O-2: APPLICATION:
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this title when referred to in this article, are the T-2 use district regulations.
(Ord. 516, 7-1-1974)
12-4O-3: USE REGULATIONS:
A building or premises shall only be used for the following purposes:
Any use permitted in the A single-family dwelling use district.
Housing unit preconstructed in two (2) or more separate parts which, when assembled, shall constitute a single-family dwelling unit
constructed initially for highway transportation for delivery to a building site, which, when assembled, shall be removed from wheels or a
carrier onto a foundation as a permanent fixture, excluding piers or jacks, so as to comprise a single-family dwelling attached to basic
utilities, the measurements of which unit when assembled excluding tow tongue, roof overhang, bay window, projecting storage
compartments or screened porches or other attachments shall not be less than forty feet (40') in length nor less than twenty feet (20') in
width and shall contain at least eight hundred (800) square feet in all of habitable space. (Ord. 516, 7-1-1974)
12-4O-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
The height regulations are the same as those in the A single-family dwelling use district. (Ord. 516, 7-1-1974)
12-4O-5: AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Yards: The yard regulations shall be the same as in the A single-family dwelling district.
B. Intensity Of Use: Every lot shall have an area of not less than seven thousand feet (7,000') per family. (Ord. 516, 7-1-1974)
C. Parking: See subsection 7-2-3F of this code. There shall be at least one automobile off street parking space for each trailer house or
dwelling. (Ord. 1068, 10-14-2002)
ARTICLE P. G GOVERNMENT DISTRICT
12-4P-1: DISTRICT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a G government district within the city. (Ord. 1248, 5-12-2014)
12-4P-2: APPLICATION:
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this title when referred to in this article, are the G government district
regulations. (Ord. 1248, 5-12-2014)
12-4P-3: USE REGULATIONS:
Except as otherwise specified in this article a building or premises may be used for any purpose not in conflict with any provision of this title;
specifically as follows:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 248/318
A. Any government use, city, county, state or federal governments, or any government sponsored use that serves the general public is
permitted as a matter of right.
B. Where a nongovernmental use is proposed in any government district and such nongovernmental use is subject to a lease arrangement
or other agreement with the city or other government entity, such use shall not be permitted and no lease or other agreement ratified
until such time as a public hearing is held by the city council to consider the establishment of such nongovernmental use. Such public
hearing shall comply with the following provisions:
1. All property owners within two hundred feet (200') of the subject property shall be notified by regular first class mail of the date, time
and location of such public hearing.
2. Notice of the public hearing shall be given a minimum of fifteen (15) days prior to the date set for the public hearing.
C. City council may approve the establishment of the nongovernmental use or it may deny the establishment of the proposed
nongovernmental use. Where city council approves the establishment of the nongovernmental use it may impose any conditions it
deems appropriate, including, but not limited to, setbacks from property lines, height restrictions, building coverage, number of parking
spaces required, a security deposit to guarantee compliance with any conditions imposed, and lighting requirements. (Ord. 1248, 5-12-
2014)
12-4P-4: AIRPORT PROPERTY EXEMPTED:
The Deming Airport lands and buildings are hereby exempted from compliance with any of the provisions of this article provided that any
use proposed for the Deming Airport lands and buildings is related to the aviation industry. (Ord. 1248, 5-12-2014)
12-4P-5: USE RESTRICTIONS:
All uses listed in section 12-4M-2 of this chapter are prohibited in any G government district. (Ord. 1248, 5-12-2014)
Chapter 5
NONCONFORMING USES
12-5-1: LAND CONTAINING NO STRUCTURES:
The lawful use of land containing no buildings which does not conform to the provisions of this title shall be discontinued within five (5)
years from the time of the original approval of this title, and the use of land which becomes nonconforming by reason of a subsequent
change in this title shall also be discontinued within five (5) years from the date of the change. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-5-2: USE OF BUILDINGS:
A. Continuance Of Use: The lawful use of a building existing at the time of the original adoption of this title may be continued although such
use does not conform with the provisions hereof, and such use may be extended throughout the building; provided, no structural
alterations, except those required by law or the provisions of this code, are made therein.
B. Change To Other Nonconforming Use: If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building may be changed to
another nonconforming use of the same or more restricted classification. The foregoing provisions shall also apply to nonconforming
uses in districts hereafter changed. Whenever a nonconforming use of a building has been changed to a more restricted use or to a
conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less restricted use. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-5-3: REPAIR AND RECONSTRUCTION OF NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS:
No building in need of repairs or which has been damaged by casualty loss of more than fifty percent (50%) of its appraised value shall be
restored. Buildings in need of repair or damaged by a casualty loss of less than fifty percent (50%) of its appraised value may be restored or
reconstructed in the same floor plan and size of the original building. Changes in use shall be in conformity with the regulations of this title.
In the event of a site built residential use building that is a legally nonconforming property at the time of a casualty loss, regardless of
percent of repair costs or damage to appraised value, may be reconstructed in the same floor plan and size of the original building.
Deviations must be presented to the planning and zoning commission and approved by city council. (Ord. 1105, 2-14-2005)
12-5-4: DISCONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING USE:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 249/318
In the event that a nonconforming use of any building or premises is discontinued for a period of two (2) years, the use of the same shall
thereafter conform to the use permitted in the district in which it is located. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-5-5: ALTERATION OF STRUCTURES:
No existing building or premises devoted to a use not permitted by this title in the district in which such building or premises is located,
except when required to do so by law or the provisions of this code, shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered,
unless such use is changed to one permitted in the district in which such building or premises is located. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-5-6: PERMITTED NONCONFORMING USES:
A. Uses Allowed With Special Permit; Hearing: The city council may, by special permit after public hearing, and subject to such protective
restrictions that it deems necessary, authorize the location of any of the following buildings or uses in any district from which they are
prohibited by this title:
Airport or landing field.
Cemetery.
Community building or recreation field.
Extraction of gravel, sand or other raw materials.
Government buildings. Any public building erected and used by any department of the city, county, state or federal government.
Greenhouses; provided, that any such structures shall not be less than one hundred feet (100') from all property lines.
Hospitals, clinics and institutions, except institutions for criminals, and those for persons that are insane or have contagious diseases;
provided, however, that such buildings may occupy not over twenty five percent (25%) of the total area of the lot and will not have any
serious and depreciating effect upon the value of the surrounding property; and provided, further, that the buildings shall be set back
from all yard lines a distance of not less than two feet (2') for each foot of building height.
Industrial uses excluded from the D industrial district, to locate in the D industrial district.
Parking lots adjacent to, across a street from, or across an alley from a C commercial district, or a D industrial district.
Temporary commercial amusements or recreational development.
B. Application To Planning And Zoning Commission: Before issuance of any special permit for any of the above buildings or uses, the city
council shall refer the proposed application to the city planning and zoning commission, which commission shall be given thirty (30) days
in which to make a report regarding the effect of such proposed building or use upon the character of the neighborhood, traffic
conditions, public utility facilities and other matters pertaining to the general welfare.
C. Filing Of Commission Report: No action shall be taken upon any application for a proposed building or use above referred to until, and
unless, the report of the city planning and zoning commission has been filed; provided, however, that if no report is received from the city
planning and zoning commission within thirty (30) days, it shall be assumed that approval of the application has been given by the said
commission. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
Chapter 6
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
12-6-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of planned unit development is to:
A. Provide a viable alternative to the conventional approach to zoning to produce a more creative and innovative development than would
otherwise be possible by a strict adherence to standard zoning regulations.
B. Allow for the design of developments that are architecturally and environmentally innovative, and that achieve better utilization of land
than is possible through a strict application of standard zoning controls.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 250/318
C. Encourage land development that conserves the natural environment.
D. Provide for a diversified mix of different land uses in a compatible fashion.
E. Allow greater flexibility in achieving desired residential densities, placement of buildings, arrangement of open space, vehicular and
pedestrian circulation, off street parking facilities and other design features.
F. Provide greater choices in living environments.
G. Ensure development is compatible and congruous with adjacent developments.
H. Promote efficient use of land and infrastructure.
I. Provide consistency with the comprehensive land use plan.
J. Contribute to the general prosperity, health, safety and welfare of the community, and provide a form of development that is compatible
with the goals and objectives of the community. (Ord. 1069, 1-13-2003)
12-6-2: APPLICABILITY AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Only sites meeting the following requirements are eligible for development as a planned unit development (PUD) in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter:
1. As a general development guideline, the overall site shall consist of a minimum gross area of ten (10) contiguous acres.
2. The entire property proposed for development as a PUD shall be under common ownership or unified control to ensure unified and
orderly development.
3. As a general development guideline, the proposed PUD shall consist of no less than ten (10) residential dwelling units. (Ord. 1069, 1-
13-2003)
12-6-3: GENERAL STANDARDS:
A. A planned unit development (PUD) may be established in any residential zone.
B. A PUD may include any residential use or combination of residential uses permitted in any of the residential zones except B-1, B-2, and
T districts.
C. A maximum of ten percent (10%) of the land area in a PUD may be developed and used for commercial purposes provided that such
commercial uses are designed and located to serve primarily the residents of the proposed PUD. No land shall be developed for
commercial use until at least a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of all proposed residential units are constructed and occupied.
D. An application for a PUD and an application for subdivision approval should proceed and be considered at the same time. However, such
dual submissions, while not mandatory, are strongly recommended. Should a developer elect initially to submit an application for
subdivision approval only, and at a later date submit a PUD application, the developer may be faced with retrofit requirements which
may have been avoided had the dual submission of applications been followed.
E. If a property is not already subdivided, with an approved plat in place, the applicant shall follow the regulations set out in the city's
subdivision ordinance.
F. The city council may require the provision of easements necessary for the orderly extension of public utilities to serve future adjacent
developments.
G. City council is not obligated to approve any level of intensity of development proposed in the PUD. On the recommendation of the
planning and zoning commission, or on its own volition, city council may impose any conditions it deems necessary or appropriate to
assure the proposed PUD will be compatible with surrounding existing or proposed uses. In addition, city council on its own or on
recommendation of the planning and zoning commission may impose any conditions it deems necessary or appropriate to ensure the
compatibility of the proposed development as well as the health, safety, and welfare of the community.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 251/318
H. City council, on its own, or on recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, may change, alter, modify, vary, or waive any
residential district provision of this title, as it sees fit, to apply to a PUD. No such change, alteration, modification, variance or waiver
shall be approved unless the council finds that such change, alteration, modification, variance or waiver shall:
1. Achieve the purposes set out in section 12-6-1 of this chapter; and
2. Promote greater consistency with the objectives and policies of the comprehensive land use plan.
Any such changes shall not be viewed as precedent setting, nor do they commit the city council to apply similar changes to future PUD
applications, except as the council may deem appropriate, at its sole discretion. Each PUD application is considered unique. (Ord. 1069,
1-13-2003)
12-6-4: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. No yards or setbacks or minimum lot areas are required in a planned unit development (PUD) except as provided in subsection B of this
section.
B. The city may require a buffer strip to be provided along the outer perimeter of the PUD. Such buffer shall be left in a natural state, or it
may be landscaped in a formal manner. The buffer shall be of adequate width to maintain compatibility with adjacent existing areas
whose setbacks were based on the standards of the underlying zone. Purchasers of lands that contain the buffer area shall have a
provision in their warranty deed, or a provision in the restrictive covenants, requiring the retention and maintenance of such buffer area,
by either the homeowner or the homeowners' association.
C. The intensity of residential development in a PUD shall be established, initially, by applying the density permitted by the residential zone
category in which the PUD is to be established. These permitted densities, generally, are as follows:
Zone District
Density In Dwelling
Units Per Gross Acre
(Unless Otherwise Specified)
A single-family district 4.98 du/ac
A-1 single-family dwelling district 3.75 du/ac
A-3 single-family dwelling district 4.05 du/ac
A-4 single-family dwelling district 5.22 du/ac
A-5 use district 0.50 du/net acre
B multiple dwelling district 17.42 du/ac
B-3 use district 10.87 du/ac
The permitted density in the underlying zone/district shall act as a guide. As a general guideline, however, the planned unit development
may exceed these basic densities by as much as thirty percent (30%) in the A districts, and by as much as twenty percent (20%) in the
B and B-3 districts.
Increases in density may be allowed only if the applicant can demonstrate the following:
1. The increased density will result in a more creative or compact design that will produce a more interesting development, or will protect
some significant features of the natural environment.
2. The increased density will result in additional common open space for passive or active recreation in addition to the basic five percent
(5%) required in subsection E of this section.
3. The increased density will not place a burden on the capacity of roads, water, sewage and drainage facilities.
4. The increased density will not negatively impact adjacent developed or developing areas.
D. Building heights shall be controlled by the height limits set out in the underlying zone district.
E. A PUD shall provide a minimum of five percent (5%) of the total land area in common open space for active and passive recreation.
F. Buildings and streets shall be designed and located to take advantage of and complement the natural terrain.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 252/318
G. A PUD shall be served by the city water system.
H. A PUD shall be served by the city wastewater treatment system.
I. Individual wells and individual sewerage systems are prohibited in a PUD.
J. Storm water shall be retained on site.
K. Adequate off street parking shall be provided for each dwelling unit in quantity and in locations that do not promote the parking of
vehicles in a manner that blocks any part of a traveled road, street or a pedestrian walkway.
L. Sightlines at road or street intersections shall be maintained for the safety of both vehicular and pedestrian movement. No buildings or
other structures or vegetation shall be located so as to block sightlines at such intersections.
M. Every dwelling unit shall have access to a public or private street, via laneways, pedestrian walkways, or other access related
easements.
N. The city council or the planning and zoning commission may require a traffic impact study from the PUD applicant if in its opinion the
increased density requested is such that street capacities may be negatively affected by increased traffic or that the safety and
enjoyment of the living environment may be negatively impacted.
O. Street lighting may be required by the city council on recommendation of the planning and zoning commission.
P. The planning and zoning commission may recommend, and the city council may impose, any other development standard it deems
necessary or desirable. (Ord. 1069, 1-13-2003)
12-6-5: FINDINGS OF FACT:
The planning and zoning commission shall, after a public hearing, set out for the city council the reasons for the recommendations, and said
recommendation shall set forth with particularity the respects in which the proposed planned unit development would be in the public
interest, including, but not limited to, findings of fact of the following matters:
A. In what respects the proposed PUD is consistent with the stated purposes and intents set out in section 12-6-1 of this chapter.
B. The extent to which the proposed PUD meets the development standards set out in section 12-6-4 of this chapter.
C. The extent to which the proposed PUD is consistent with the goals and objectives of the comprehensive land use plan.
D. The extent to which the PUD will produce a development of higher quality than would otherwise be possible by a strict application of
specific zone district regulations.
E. The extent to which the PUD produces an innovative arrangement of buildings, residential uses, and open spaces to provide efficient,
attractive, flexible, creative design.
F. The extent to which the PUD will result in a development that will function as a cohesive, unified development.
G. The extent to which the PUD is compatible with adjacent existing developments or proposed developments. (Ord. 1069, 1-13-2003)
12-6-6: REQUIRED SUBMISSIONS:
An applicant requesting consideration of a planned unit development shall submit the following information to the city:
A. A completed letter of application accompanied by the required fees as set by city council from time to time.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 253/318
B. An accurate legal description of the lands to be developed as a planned unit development (PUD).
C. A site plan drawn to scale showing the following:
1. Boundaries and dimensions of the property.
2. Lot and block layout.
3. Building locations and building footprints for any proposed single-family housing, duplexes, townhousing, apartments, patio homes,
garden apartments and any cluster development involving any of these housing types. Where there is some repetition in design
layout, typical layouts may be illustrated.
4. The location of any proposed commercial buildings and their layout including parking and landscaping.
5. Building elevations if required by city staff or the planning and zoning commission.
6. Location and layout of streets, pedestrian paths or trails.
7. Proposed setbacks or building envelopes.
8. Off street parking arrangements as required.
9. Treatment of street intersections and sightlines.
10. Location of proposed common open space, including the location of buildings, recreational equipment, activity areas, and passive
areas.
11. Any proposed phasing of the PUD.
12. Any other information deemed pertinent by the city staff or the planning and zoning commission.
The above information may be shown on more than one drawing if that is more convenient and appropriate.
A minimum of five (5) sets of the plans required by this subsection and subsections D, E, F and G of this section shall be submitted by
the applicant. Two (2) sets shall be on eighteen inch by twenty four inch (18" x 24") or twenty four inch by thirty six inch (24" x 36")
standard sheets. The remaining three (3) sets may be photographic reductions provided that such reductions are readable.
D. Topographic plan showing existing contours overlying the proposed lot and block development pattern. This information may be
integrated with the site plan drawings. As a general guideline, the contour interval used on topographic plans shall be one foot (1').
E. Preliminary servicing drawings showing the location and size of water lines, sanitary sewers, and water hydrants.
F. Grading and drainage plans.
G. Street improvement plans showing right of way and pavement widths and street grades.
H. A written narrative that describes the nature of the project, its special design features, proposed housing types, and scale of
development (densities proposed, height, building coverage), special design considerations because of topographic features or specific
environmental conditions. The narrative shall address those matters set out in section 12-6-5, "Findings Of Fact", of this chapter. The
narrative should include the applicant's description of the benefits of this development to the city, and it should also address issues of
compatibility of the proposed development with adjacent existing or proposed development.
I. A table listing the acreages and percentage of land being used for residential uses, commercial uses and open space uses.
J. A table listing the density of residential development by development area or subarea, and by dwelling unit type; and, land coverage by
acreage and percentage for landscaped areas, natural open space, common open space and recreations facilities designed for the
residents, building coverage, parking areas, streets, and pedestrian walkways (trails, sidewalks).
K. The restrictive covenants proposed.
L. Any other information deemed necessary in the circumstances by the city. (Ord. 1069, 1-13-2003)
12-6-7: PROCEDURE:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 254/318
A. Preapplication Conference: The preapplication conference is mandatory and no fee is required. The purpose of the preapplication
conference is to provide the applicant with information about the city's planned unit development (PUD) procedures, and the city's goals
and objectives in the area of the proposed PUD. It is also to provide the city with the opportunity to provide the applicant with information
about planning issues, or servicing issues, or other issues that may arise. It is an opportunity for the applicant to informally discuss with
the city details of his/her concept and to obtain some preliminary comments from the city. Nothing is binding on either party at this stage
of the process. The applicant is encouraged to provide the city a concept plan showing the development proposed in advance of the
meeting.
B. Submission Of Application: The applicant shall submit a completed, signed application together with all the information required in
section 12-6-6 of this chapter. The application shall be signed by all owners (or a homeowners' association authorized representative in
the case of an existing subdivision) of the property to be developed and the principals of the development company if other than the
property owners.
C. Review Of Application And Documentation: City staff will review the application and information submitted for completeness. The
applicant will be advised if any information is missing. It is at this stage that the city staff may request additional information to more
adequately address an issue.
D. Review By City Staff: City staff will review the plans and supporting information and prepare a report for consideration by the planning
and zoning commission.
E. Review By Planning And Zoning Commission: The application for consideration of the planned unit development will be placed on the
agenda of the planning and zoning commission within forty five (45) days of the date of receipt of a complete application. The planning
and zoning commission shall solicit public input on the PUD application and property owners within two hundred feet (200') of any
boundary of the PUD shall be notified of the date and time of any meeting.
F. Planning And Zoning Commission Request For Additional Information: Based upon the review of the application by the planning and
zoning commission, and based upon the input of the public, the commission may request additional information of the applicant on
specific issues of concern. The planning and zoning commission shall consider the additional information at its next scheduled meeting
following receipt of the additional information by the city.
G. Planning And Zoning Commission Recommendation: Following the procedure in either subsection E or F of this section, the planning
and zoning commission shall recommend approval, conditional approval or denial of the application.
A recommendation for denial shall show cause and shall be based upon findings of fact as set out in section 12-6-5 of this chapter.
A recommendation for approval to city council shall set out the reasons for such recommendation based on findings of fact as set out in
section 12-6-5 of this chapter. The planning and zoning commission may recommend to city council specific conditions to the approval of
the application that it deems appropriate and the reasons for such conditions. Such conditions may include the requirement for the
applicant to enter into a development agreement with the city and may include a requirement for a performance bond or like guarantee
to ensure the applicant will perform certain works.
H. City Council Consideration: After public notice and public hearing, city council may approve or deny the PUD application as
recommended by the planning and zoning commission, or city council may alter, change, modify or waive the recommendation or any
part of the recommendation as it deems appropriate. The council may require changes to the plan or the conditions prior to granting final
approval.
I. Approval Of Ordinance By City Council: An approved planned unit development shall be adopted by an ordinance that approves the PUD
as an overlay district in the zoning ordinance, and the approved PUD plan shall be recorded as an appendix to an approved subdivision
plat, if applicable. (Ord. 1069, 1-13-2003)
12-6-8: ABBREVIATED PROCEDURE:
A. An abbreviated procedure may be allowed in dealing with applications for planned unit developments where such applications deal with
already approved plans of subdivision and where the applicant seeks to bring his subdivision into conformity with zoning regulations or
where an applicant is desirous of amending his plan of subdivision to produce a more creative and interesting development than would
be possible under existing zoning regulations.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the abbreviated procedure is not to be construed as a matter of right by a
prospective applicant. The determination of the eligibility of an existing plan of subdivision for the abbreviated PUD procedure shall be in
the sole discretion of the city council, with the advice of the planning and zoning commission. In exercising its discretion, the city council
shall consider such matters as the age of the subdivision, the amount or level of infrastructure already in place, the benefits to be
derived by the community through a planned unit development designation, and any other matter the city council deems appropriate in
the circumstances.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 255/318
C. Under this abbreviated process, the following information shall be submitted with the letter of application:
1. A site plan showing all the information set out in subsection 12-6-6C of this chapter.
2. A brief written narrative describing the project.
3. A table setting out the acreages and percentage of land being used for residential, commercial, and open space uses.
4. A table setting out the residential densities proposed in accord with subsection 12-6-6J of this chapter.
5. Any other information the city believes necessary in the circumstances.
D. The planning and zoning commission may dispense with the solicitation of public input and make a recommendation to city council. City
council shall hold a public hearing on the matter.
E. An approved planned unit development shall be adopted by an ordinance that approves the PUD as an overlay district in the zoning
ordinance, and the approved PUD plan shall be recorded as an appendix to the approved subdivision plat. (Ord. 1069, 1-13-2003)
12-6-9: CHANGES:
An approved planned unit development (PUD) shall be developed only in accordance with the approved final plan and adopting ordinance.
Changes to the adopted PUD plan may be made, after receipt of a written request by the developer, as follows:
A. Major Changes: Changes which alter the concept and intent of the planned unit development, including, but not limited to, increases in
density of ten percent (10%) or more, reductions of open space, changes in road layout or standards, changes in building heights of one
story or more, an increase in land area for commercial use beyond the ten percent (10%) permitted by subsection 12-6-3C of this
chapter; changes in the layout and design of the PUD so as to alter the original basis for approval of the PUD, including, but not limited
to, changes in land areas devoted to specific dwelling types or concepts (e.g., garden apartments) of ten percent (10%) or more. Major
changes in the planned unit development may be approved only by amendment to the original ordinance adopting the PUD which shall
require review and public hearings by both planning and zoning commission and city council. The amending ordinance shall be dated
and filed with the original ordinance and, if applicable, shall be recorded as an appendix to an approved subdivision plat.
B. Minor Changes: Minor changes shall be any change not defined as a major change as set out in subsection 12-6-8A of this chapter.
Minor revisions to the PUD plan or conditions may be recommended by the planning and zoning commission. The city council is not
required to hold a public hearing for minor changes. The city council, on the advice of the planning and zoning commission, may
determine that a requested minor change(s) when considered with previously approved minor changes may constitute a major change.
Approved minor changes shall be shown on a revised site plan or as an amended set of conditions and such approved revisions shall
be dated and filed with the original PUD documents, and, if applicable, recorded as an appendix to an approved subdivision plat.
C. Term Of Approval: The approved PUD plan shall remain in effect for two (2) years from the date of final approval. If, in the opinion of the
planning and zoning commission, no significant construction in the form of building construction, or the required or agreed to
infrastructure improvements have taken place within the two (2) year time frame, the applicant shall resubmit the plan with all supporting
documentation, updated as necessary to reflect then current PUD requirements, for approval. The approval process shall include the
solicitation of public input by the planning and zoning commission and a public hearing by city council. Previous recommendations by
the planning and zoning commission or actions taken by the city council on previous application(s) shall not necessarily affect the
resubmitted application.
Wherever the word "infrastructure" is used in this chapter it shall mean roads/streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water systems,
wastewater systems, storm water drainage facilities, fire hydrants, telephone and cable lines, natural gas lines, streetlights, and similar
facilities; but, infrastructure shall not include fences, or decorative walls or entry gates, or similar structures or facilities.
The city council, with input from the planning and zoning commission, upon formal written request of the applicant, may grant an
extension of not more than one year to the approval of the PUD plan and conditions. The applicant shall show good cause why the
extension should be granted and specify the potential impact on the city if the request is approved/disapproved. (Ord. 1069, 1-13-2003)
Chapter 7
ADDITIONAL HEIGHT, AREA AND USE REGULATIONS
12-7-1: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 256/318
The district regulations hereinafter set forth in this chapter qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the district regulations appearing
elsewhere in this title:
A. Public, semipublic or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools, when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height
not exceeding sixty feet (60'), and churches and temples may be erected to a height not exceeding seventy five feet (75'), if that part of
the building exceeding the height limit is set back from each yard line at least one foot (1') for each foot of additional building height
above the height limit otherwise provided in the district in which the building is built.
B. Single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and multiple dwellings may be increased in height by not more than ten feet (10') when the
side and rear yards are increased over the yard requirements of the district in which they are located, by not less than ten feet (10'), but
they shall not exceed three (3) stories in height.
C. Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, stacks, stage towers, or scenery lofts, tanks, water towers,
ornamental towers and spires, church steeples, radio towers, or necessary mechanical appurtenances, and farm buildings may be
erected to a height in accordance with existing or thereafter adopted provisions of this code.
D. Accessory buildings may be built in a required rear yard but such accessory buildings shall not be nearer than ten feet (10') to the main
building, nor shall any such accessory building occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
E. (Rep. by Ord. 1080, 11-10-2003)
F. For residentially used properties, every part of a required yard or interior court shall be open to the sky unobstructed, except for
accessory buildings in a rear yard, and except for the ordinary projections of skylights, sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental
features projecting not to exceed twelve inches (12"). This requirement shall not prevent the construction of fences and walls not
exceeding six feet (6') in height, except fences, hedges and walls closer than thirty feet (30') to the front lot line, which shall not exceed
four feet (4') in height and on that portion of lots within thirty feet (30') of the intersection of two (2) or more streets in which cases fences
and walls shall not be higher than three feet (3'). (Ord. 1235, 3-11-2013)
G. Open or lattice enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, and balconies opening upon fire towers projecting into a rear yard not
more than five feet (5'), and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues may be permitted by the building inspector.
H. An open unenclosed porch or paved terrace may project into a required front or rear yard for a distance not exceeding ten feet (10').
I. For the purpose of the side yard regulations, a two-family or a multiple dwelling shall be considered as one building occupying one lot.
J. No building exceeding one and one-half (11/2) stories or twenty five feet (25') shall be erected within seven hundred fifty feet (750') of any
airport or landing field. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
K. Where it is deemed that encroachment upon any required setbacks will not necessarily create a sight obstruction or significantly
compromise the continuity with regard to existing buildings, an "administrative variance" may be granted with concurrence on both by
the city administrator and the assistant city administrator:
1. Exceptions: Variance from the application of area, height, dimension, distance, parking or setback requirements of this title may be
allowed in the case of exceptionally irregular, narrow, shallow or steep lots, or other exceptional physical condition where the strict
application of the requirements of this title would result in a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship that would deprive the owner of
the reasonable use of his land or building. Practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship is not sustained when financial gain, loss or
monetary savings is the basis for the claim of hardship.
2. Notifications: The administrative variance process must include adjacent property owner notifications within one hundred feet (100')
and adhere to the protest provisions of subsection 12-11-1D and section 12-11-2 of this title.
3. Filing Fee: A nonrefundable fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid at the time the administrative variance is filed.
4. Filing Of Appeal: Appeals to the council may be filed by any person aggrieved by any decision of city officials with regard to this
administrative variance decision. Such appeal shall be in accordance with procedures as set forth in chapter 8 of this title.
5. Right Of Appeal: The right of appeal to city council shall be taken, as set forth in section 12-8-3 of this title, within a reasonable time. A
reasonable time shall be no later than sixty (60) days after a written decision is rendered to the applicant.
6. Decision Order: Administrative variances granted shall cause a decision order to be filed and recorded at the Luna County clerk's
office. (Ord. 1225, 7-9-2012)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 257/318
12-7-2: UNENCLOSED CARPORTS:
In the A single-family dwelling use district, B multiple dwelling use district and B-1 dwelling use district, the following restrictions will apply to
any unenclosed carport hereinafter constructed within said districts:
A. No carport will be permitted within thirty feet (30') in either direction from the corner of the intersecting streets.
B. Carports may be built no closer than ten feet (10') to the front property line; provided, however, carports may be closer if written consent
of the adjacent property owner or owners is obtained.
C. Carports will be permitted within two feet (2') of an interior property line, provided the construction is of a fire resistant material, and
provided written consent of the adjacent property owner is obtained. (Ord. 782, 11-9-1987)
12-7-3: STORAGE UNIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. A shipping container, cargo container, tractor trailer, or other like or similar item for use as a storage unit is prohibited upon a lot within
residential districts A, A-1, A-3, A-4, B, B-1, B-2, and T, and upon vacant commercial or industrial lots within C, C-1, C-2, and D districts.
B. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of a storage unit as described in subsection A of this section on a temporary basis during
active construction of a permanent structure. For purposes of this section, "temporary" shall mean not more than six (6) months. The
administrator, or his designee, may approve extensions to this time limit, provided the total time (including the original 6 months) does
not exceed eighteen (18) months.
C. It shall be unlawful to place a shipping container, cargo container, tractor trailer, or other like or similar item for use as a storage unit
within a C, C-1, C-2 or D district without first obtaining a permit from the building inspector.
D. Storage units may be permitted if the following criteria are met:
1. The unit must be monocolored with all logos and numbering removed.
2. The unit must be hidden from center view of the frontage address.
3. All units must be fenced with slatted chainlink materials or an approved substitute.
4. All units must be fenced with no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the unit exposed above the top rail.
5. No utilities shall be connected to the unit except alarm systems.
6. All units must be an accessory use to the primary property use and may not exceed forty percent (40%) of the floor area of the
primary property use.
7. No occupancy or live animal storage.
E. All existing shipping containers, cargo containers, tractor trailers, or other like or similar items used as storage shall conform to the
provisions of this section not later than three hundred sixty five (365) days from the date of adoption hereof. (Ord. 1117, 8-8-2005)
Chapter 8
BOARD OF APPEALS
12-8-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
A board of appeals is hereby established. The word "board" when used in this chapter shall be construed to mean the board of appeals.
The board shall consist of the city council. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-8-2: MEETINGS:
Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the mayor and at such other times as the board may determine. All meetings of the board
shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if
absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examination and other official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 258/318
12-8-3: APPEALS:
A. Filing Of Appeal: Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city
affected by any decision of the building inspector. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as shall be prescribed by the
board by general rules, by filing with the building inspector and with the board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The
building inspector shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is
taken.
B. Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the building inspector certifies
to the board after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order
which may be granted by the board or by a court of record on application or notice to the building inspector and on due cause shown.
C. Notice Of Hearing; Council Vote: The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give due notice thereof to the
parties in interest and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by
attorney. The concurring vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the members of the city council shall be required to revise any order, decision,
requirement, or determination of the building inspector or to decide a case in favor of an applicant. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
D. Filing Fee: A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid to the building inspector at the time the notice of appeal is filed for any appeals
arising from code enforcement or the building inspection, which the building inspector shall forthwith pay over to the city clerk to the
credit of the general revenue fund of the city. (Ord. 894, 12-12-1994)
12-8-4: POWERS:
The board shall have the following powers:
A. Powers Relative To Administrative Errors: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this title.
B. Powers Relative To Variations: Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property at the
time of the original adoption of the regulations, or by reason of exceptional topographical conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional
situation or condition of a specific piece of property, which condition is not generally prevalent in the neighborhood, the strict application
of this title would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner of such
property, the board is hereby empowered to authorize upon an appeal relating to such property, a variation from such strict application
so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship.
C. Powers Relative To Exceptions: Upon appeal, the board is hereby empowered to permit the following exceptions:
1. To permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a district divides a lot in single ownership as shown on record.
2. To permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming building which has been destroyed, or partially destroyed, by fire or act of God where
the board shall find some compelling public necessity requiring a continuance of the nonconforming use, but in no case shall such a
permit be issued if its primary function is to continue a monopoly.
3. To permit the erection and use of a building or the use of premises in any location for a public service corporation for public utility
purposes which the board deems reasonably necessary for the public convenience or welfare.
4. To interpret the provisions of this title where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map
fixing the several districts, which map is attached to and made a part of this title. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
Chapter 9
BUILDING INSPECTOR
12-9-1: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the building inspector to:
A. Enforce this title. The building inspector shall receive applications required by this title, issue permits and furnish the prescribed
certificates.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 259/318
B. Examine premises for which permits have been issued, and shall make necessary inspection to see that the provisions of law are
complied with.
C. Enforce all laws relating to the construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location and
maintenance of buildings and structures, except as may be otherwise provided for.
D. When requested by the mayor or city council, or when the interests of the city so require, make investigations in connection with matters
referred to in this title and render written reports on the same.
E. Issue such notices or orders as may be necessary for the purpose of enforcing compliance with law. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-9-2: INSPECTIONS:
Inspection shall be made by the building inspector or a duly appointed assistant. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-9-3: RULES:
For carrying into effect its provisions, the building inspector may adopt rules consistent with this title. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-9-4: RECORDS:
A. Certain Records To Be Kept: The building inspector shall keep careful and comprehensive records of applications, of permits issued, of
certificates issued, of inspections made, of reports rendered and of notices or orders issued. He shall retain on file copies of all papers in
connection with building work so long as any part of the building or structure to which they relate may be in existence.
B. Records Open To Inspection: All such records shall be open to public inspection at reasonable hours, but shall not be removed from the
office of the building inspector. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-9-5: COOPERATION OF OTHER OFFICIALS:
A. Request Assistance: The building inspector may request and shall receive, so far as may be necessary in the discharge of his duties, the
assistance and cooperation of authorized city officials in fixing grades, of the chief of police in enforcing orders, of the city attorney in
prosecuting violations, and of other city officials.
B. Planning And Zoning Commission, Advisory Capacity; Hearing: The planning and zoning commission shall act in an advisory capacity to
the board of appeals in any appeal taken under the provisions of this title but shall exercise no judicial or legislative authority in so doing.
For that purpose, it should be the duty of the commission to hold an open hearing on all matters appealed to the board of appeals in
advance of the hearing by such board. Each party to the appeal shall be given three (3) days' notice in writing of such hearing.
C. Statement Of Controversy: It shall be the duty of the building inspector to present a statement of the controversy being appealed to the
commission. Any person who is a party to the appeal and any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by the decision
appealed shall have the right to be heard before the commission.
D. Recommendation Of Commission: The planning and zoning commission shall have the power to promulgate rules and regulations
governing hearings held by it under this title. At the conclusion of the hearing, the board shall, by a majority vote, recommend to the
board of appeals that the action appealed from either be sustained, reversed or reversed in part. Such recommendation shall be
advisory only and may be considered by the board of appeals in considering the appeal but shall not be binding upon it.
E. Time Limit For Commission Report: Nothing herein contained shall prevent the board of appeals from hearing and determining any
appeal taken under this title without having received the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, if a report by the
commission has not been submitted to the board within fifteen (15) days from filing of the notice of appeal as provided in subsection B of
this section. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
Chapter 10
PERMITS
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 260/318
12-10-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to construct, alter, repair, remove or demolish, or to commence the construction, alteration, removal or demolition of a
building or structure without first filing with the building inspector an application in writing and obtaining a formal permit. (Ord. 252, 12-7-
1955)
12-10-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
A. Submission; Form: An application for a permit shall be submitted in such form as the building inspector may prescribe.
B. Application By Owner: Such application shall be made by the owner or lessee, or agent of either, or the architect, engineer or builder
employed in connection with the proposed work. If such application is made by a person other than the owner in fee, it shall be
accompanied by a duly verified affidavit of the owner in fee or the person making the application that the proposed work is authorized by
the owner in fee and that the person making the application is authorized to make such application.
C. Contents Of Application:
1. Such application shall contain the full names and addresses of the applicant and of the owner, and, if the owner is a corporate body,
of its responsible officers.
2. Such application shall describe briefly the proposed work and shall give such additional information as may be required by the
building inspector for an intelligent understanding of the proposed work. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-10-3: PLANS:
Application for permits shall be accompanied by such drawings of the proposed work, drawn to scale, including such floor plans, sections,
elevations and structure details as the building inspector may require. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-10-4: PLOT DIAGRAM:
There shall also be filed a plot diagram in a form and size suitable for filing permanently with the permit record, drawn to scale with all
dimensions figured, showing accurately the size and exact location of all proposed new construction, or, in the case of demolition, of such
construction as is to be demolished, and of all existing buildings and structures that are to remain. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-10-5: AMENDMENTS:
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the filing of amendments to an application or to a plan or other record accompanying same, at any time
before the completion of the work for which the permit was sought. Such amendment, after approval, shall be filed with and be deemed a
part of the original application. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-10-6: COMPLETION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS:
Nothing in this title shall require changes in the plans, construction or designated use of a building for which a lawful permit has been
heretofore issued or which has been otherwise lawfully authorized, and the construction of which shall have been actually begun within
ninety (90) days after this title first became effective and which entire building shall be completed, as authorized, within two (2) years
thereafter. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-10-7: ACTION ON APPLICATION:
A. Time Limit: It shall be the duty of the building inspector to examine applications for permits, within a reasonable time after filing.
B. Approval: If, after examination, he finds no objection to the same and it appears that the proposed work will be in compliance with the
laws and provisions of this code applicable thereto, he shall approve such application and issue a permit for the proposed work as soon
as practicable.
C. Denial: If his examination reveals otherwise, he will reject such application, noting his findings in a report to be attached to the application
and delivering a copy to the applicant. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 261/318
12-10-8: APPROVAL IN PART:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the building inspector from issuing a permit for the construction of part of a building or
structure before the entire plans and detailed statements of said building or structure have been submitted or approved, if adequate plans
and detailed statements have been found to comply with this title. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-10-9: CONDITIONS OF PERMIT:
A. Conformance To Plan: All work performed under a permit issued by the building inspector shall conform to the approved application and
plans and approved amendments thereof.
B. Location: The location of all new construction as shown on the approved plot diagram, or an approved amendment thereof, shall be
strictly adhered to.
C. Change In Area: It shall be unlawful to reduce or diminish the area of a lot or plot of which a plot diagram has been filed and has been
used as the basis for a permit, unless a revised plot diagram showing the proposed change in conditions shall have been filed and
approved, provided that this shall not apply when the lot is reduced by reason of a street opening or widening or other public
improvement. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-10-10: SIGNATURE TO PERMIT:
Every permit issued by the building inspector under the provisions of this title shall have his signature affixed thereto, but this shall not
prevent him from authorizing a subordinate to affix such signature. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-10-11: TIME LIMITATION:
A permit under which no work is commenced within one year after issuance shall expire by limitation. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-10-12: POSTING OF PERMITS:
A. A copy of the permits shall be kept on the premises open to public inspection during the prosecution of the work and until the completion
of the same.
B. The building inspector may require a certified copy of the approved plans to be kept on the premises at all times from the
commencement of the work to the completion thereof.
C. The building inspector shall be given at least twelve (12) hours' notice of the starting of work under a permit. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-10-13: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The building inspector may revoke a permit of approval issued under the provisions of this title in case there has been any false statement
or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-10-14: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
Subsequent to the original effective date of this title, no change in the use or character or occupancy of land, nor any change of use or
character of occupancy in an existing building other than for single-family dwelling purposes, shall be made, nor shall any new building be
occupied for any purpose until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building inspector. Every certificate of occupancy shall
state that the new occupancy complies with all provisions of this title. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-10-15: RECORDS OF CERTIFICATES:
A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector, and copies shall be furnished on request
to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in land or a building affected by such certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 262/318
Chapter 11
AMENDMENTS AND CHANGES
12-11-1: CITY COUNCIL ACTION; HEARING:
A. City Council Authority: The city council may, from time to time, on its own motion or on petition, after public notice and hearing, amend
the regulations and districts herein established.
B. Planning And Zoning Commission Report: Every such proposed amendment shall be referred by the city council to the planning and
zoning commission for report.
C. Failure Of Commission To Approve: Any such amendment that has failed to receive the approval of the planning and zoning commission
shall not be passed by the city council except by three-fourths (3/4) vote.
D. Protest Against Amendment:
1. If a protest against such amendment be presented, signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the land within such area
proposed to be altered, or by owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the area of the lots immediately abutting either side of the
territory included in such proposed change, or separated therefrom only by an alley or street, such amendment shall not be passed
except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the city council. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
2. If such amendment will transfer an area of less restrictive use and a protest is presented by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the
land adjacent to and within one hundred feet (100') from such area proposed to be transferred, such amendment shall require
approval by a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the city council. (Ord. 1091, 8-26-2004)
12-11-2: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION APPROVAL:
A. Compliance With Regulations Required: The planning and zoning commission shall not approve any zoning change, variance, or any
other relief regarding a specific piece of property unless the subject property is in compliance with all applicable city ordinances.
B. Determination Of Compliance: The commission may rely on the written or verbal report of a city code enforcement officer in determining
whether the property is in compliance with this code. Any disagreement among commission members as to whether a property is in
compliance with applicable codes shall be resolved by vote of the commissioners.
C. Conditions For Consideration: The planning and zoning commission may, however, consider a zoning change, variance or other relief
where: 1) the relief requested will serve to correct a code violation; and 2) the property is otherwise in compliance with city ordinances.
(Ord. 966, 2-9-1998)
Chapter 12
ENFORCEMENT, LEGAL PROCEDURE AND PENALTIES
12-12-1: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the building inspector to enforce this title. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-12-2: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this title shall be punished by a fine and/or imprisonment as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this
code. Each day's violation shall be a separate offense. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
12-12-3: LEGAL PROCEDURE:
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure
or land is used in violation of this title, the proper authorities of the city, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of
said building, structure or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises. (Ord. 252, 12-7-1955)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 263/318
Chapter 13
VARIANCE FEES
12-13-1: FEES ESTABLISHED; PAYMENT:
A. Fees Imposed: Any applicant for a change in or a variance of this title shall be required to pay the following fees at appropriate stages of
the consideration of the application: (Ord. 994, 4-13-1999)
1. A nonrefundable fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00), to be paid prior to the submission or consideration of any agenda item; (Ord.
1012, 12-13-1999)
2. A nonrefundable fee of forty dollars ($40.00), to be paid prior to the approval of any final plat submitted to the city council1; and
3. In any case in which publication or mailing or delivery of notices is required, a nonrefundable fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00), to
be paid prior to the city council authorizing publication, mailing or delivery.
B. Payment Required Before Application Consideration: Until such fees are paid, the city administrator, the planning and zoning commission
or the city council shall not consider any application for any zoning change or variance or for approval of any final plat and shall not
authorize publication, mailing or delivery of notices required for such application. (Ord. 994, 4-13-1999)
12-13-2: RECEIPTS REQUIRED:
The city administrator is hereby authorized and required to collect the fees provided for herein and to maintain such records and issue such
receipts as are required to give evidence of payment to the city council or the planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 587, 9-12-1977)
Chapter 14
MANUFACTURED HOUSING AND MOBILE HOMES
12-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
MANUFACTURED HOUSING OR MANUFACTURED HOME: Defined as set forth in New Mexico Statutes Annotated subsection A of
section 3-21A-2, which is the manufactured housing and zoning act.
MOBILE HOME: A movable or portable housing structure which does not meet the definition of manufactured housing or manufactured
home. (Ord. 786, 3-14-1988; amd. 2001 Code)
12-14-2: LOCATION OF MOBILE HOMES:
All mobile homes placed on any property within the city shall be constructed according to the national manufactured housing construction
standards act of 1974 (USC 5401 et seq.) and the regulations promulgated to enforce the act and the standards developed from time to
time by the national fire protection association. No mobile home shall be located, occupied or used for residential purposes in the city
unless it is placed within a mobile home park or mobile home park subdivision approved in accordance with applicable ordinances and
regulations. Said mobile home must be manufactured after June 15, 1976, the effective date of the act, or accompanied by documentation
certifying compliance with the above act. (Ord. 1045, 5-29-2001)
12-14-3: MANUFACTURED HOUSING:
A. Single-Family Use Allowed In District: No manufactured home shall be occupied, located or used for residential purposes in any zoning
district in which single-family, site-built housing is not an allowable use or on any lot in which single-family, site-built housing is not
allowed as a right.
B. Historic District: No manufactured home shall be occupied, located, or used for residential purposes in any historic district unless the
manufactured home meets all requirements that single-family, site-built housing must meet in order to comply with the applicable historic
zoning ordinance and regulations.
C. Compliance With Requirements: No manufactured home shall be occupied, located or used for residential purposes unless it meets all
requirements applicable to single-family, site-built housing in that zone, except that any requirements regulating original construction of
single-family, site-built housing shall not be applicable to manufactured housing.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 264/318
D. Aesthetic Review Permit Requirement: In addition, no manufactured home shall be occupied, located, or used for residential purposes
unless an aesthetic review permit has been obtained pursuant to the provisions of section 12-14-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 786, 3-14-1988)
12-14-4: AESTHETIC REVIEW PERMIT:
A. Purpose: The purpose of the aesthetic review permit is to preserve the property values of residential neighborhoods and protect the
public's general welfare by assuring that certain minimum aesthetic standards are met before manufactured homes are occupied,
located, or used for residential purposes. (Ord. 786, 3-14-1988)
B. Permit Required: No manufactured or mobile home shall be occupied, placed or used for residential purposes in a zone in which singlefamily,
site-built housing is a permitted use, unless the owner or proposed occupant of the manufactured home has received an
aesthetic review permit.
C. Application For Permit: Each application for an aesthetic review permit shall include:
1. A site plan showing the manner in which the manufactured or mobile home will be placed on the lot.
2. A drawing showing the appearance of the manufactured or mobile home from all streets and neighboring properties.
3. A landscaping plan. (Ord. 853, 6-8-1992)
D. Placement Permit And Utility Connections: No person or entity shall be issued a permit for the placement of a mobile home, or allowed
new municipal utility connections, on any property upon which exists a violation of any zoning, building or public health and safety
provision of this code (titles 4, 11 and 12) or of state building codes or regulations.
E. Discontinuance Of Utility Service: The public works director or his designee shall discontinue any existing municipal utility services to any
property upon which exists a violation of any zoning, building or public health and safety provision of this code (titles 4, 11 and 12) or of
state building codes or regulations, until the violation is corrected. (Ord. 1061, 6-10-2002)
F. Conditions For Issuance: No application for an aesthetic review permit shall be granted unless:
1. The manufactured or mobile home is placed on the lot within the applicable setbacks.
2. The manufactured home is oriented so that the front of the manufactured home is approximately parallel to the front of the lot.
Regarding corner lots, the owner or occupant of the manufactured home may choose which street the front of the home will be parallel
to, unless the lot dimensions parallel to the two (2) streets are more than twenty feet (20') different. In such a case, the front of the
manufactured home shall be oriented so that it is approximately parallel to the longer of the two (2) lot dimensions.
3. The manufactured or mobile home will be skirted, if necessary, with material similar in color and texture to the exterior of the
manufactured or mobile home so that the home will, to the extent possible, look like a home site built on a foundation. In no case shall
there be a gap visible between the bottom of the manufactured or mobile home and the ground. (Ord. 853, 6-8-1992; amd. Ord. 1061,
6-10-2002)
4. The applicant agrees to appropriately landscape the lot within six (6) months of the issuance of the aesthetic review permit, pursuant
to an approved landscaping plan. The landscaping plan shall provide appropriate shrubs or other foliage to camouflage the tongue of
the manufactured mobile home, or remove the tongue when possible. (Ord. 881, 6-13-1994; amd. Ord. 1061, 6-10-2002)
5. If appropriate landscaping is not planted and maintained, as required by the landscaping plan, then the aesthetic review permit may
be revoked upon not less than ten (10) days' notice to the occupant of the manufactured or mobile housing. Upon revocation, the
manufactured or mobile home shall be removed.
G. Skirting: Any new installation of a manufactured or mobile home must have skirting, required by this section, within three (3) months from
the date of installation of the home, and all existing manufactured or mobile homes must have skirting required by this section within one
year of the adoption of this section. (Ord. 853, 6-8-1992; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 1061, 6-10-2002)
H. Application Fee: An aesthetic review fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid before the aesthetic review application will be processed.
(Ord. 1052, 12-10-2001; amd. Ord. 1061, 6-10-2002)
12-14-5: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable, upon conviction, pursuant to section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 786, 3-14-1988)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 265/318
Chapter 15
MOBILE HOME PARKS; RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS
12-15-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to assure that future developments of mobile home parks and recreational vehicle parks are suitable for the
intended purpose and to ensure that future developments of this type are harmonious with the development of the city to create conditions
favorable to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Deming. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESS STREET: Street used for the entry and exit to the mobile home park or RV park from a public street.
CROSSWALK: A right of way, city or privately owned, which cuts across a block to furnish access for pedestrians to adjacent streets or
properties.
EASEMENT: A right granted to use certain land for a special purpose not inconsistent with the general property rights of the owner.
FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAN: A plan prepared for recording by a registered engineer or surveyor.
MOBILE HOME: A movable or portable housing structure that exceeds a width of eight feet (8') or a length of forty feet (40') or a minimum
size equal to or in excess of five hundred (500) square feet, constructed to be towed on its own chassis and designed so as to be installed
without a permanent foundation for human occupancy as a residence. It may include one or more components that can be retracted for
towing purposes and expanded for additional capacity, or two (2) or more units separately towable but designed to be joined into one
integral unit, as well as a single unit. This definition does not include recreational vehicles as defined in this section, or modular or
prefabricated homes built to uniform building code standards1 and designed to be permanently affixed to real property.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A tract of land of undivided ownership on which are located for habitation purposes two (2) or more mobile homes
or spaces for the same.
PRELIMINARY PLAN: A plan prepared by a registered engineer or surveyor or a qualified site planner, showing existing features of the land
and proposed street, utility and lot layout within and adjacent to the park.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A self-contained motorized or towable vehicle designed for use as temporary living quarters with less than five
hundred (500) square feet.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: A tract of land of undivided ownership on which lots are located for habitation by two (2) or more
recreational vehicles, or spaces for the same, or a mobile home park with lots or spaces to accommodate one or more recreational vehicles
for business purposes or commercial profit.
SETBACK LINE: A line generally parallel to the street line, beyond which the vertical wall of a building may not project. (Ord. 933, 10-14-
1996; amd. Ord. 961, 12-8-1997)
12-15-3: VARIANCES:
A. Hardship: Where the city council finds that hardships may result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may vary the regulations
so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided, that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying
the intent and purpose of the community plan on these regulations.
B. Conditions: In granting variances and modifications, the city council may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure
substantially the objectives and standards of requirements so varied or modified. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15-4: APPLICABILITY:
A. Enforcement: These regulations shall be binding upon and enforceable against all mobile home and recreational vehicle parks in
existence upon the date of enactment of these regulations, against all parks under construction at the time of enactment of these
regulations and against all parks begun after enactment of these regulations, except as specifically exempted below.
B. Exemptions: The following parks are exempt from compliance with these regulations:
1. All parks in existence upon the date of enactment of these regulations are exempt in the condition they were in as of November 1,
1995;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 266/318
2. Any improvements or expansions to parks in existence upon the date of enactment of these regulations completed after November 1,
1995, but pursuant to written plans of development that were properly approved or in the process of obtaining approval as of
November 1, 1995;
3. Any improvements of upgrades to parks existing as of the date of enactment of these regulations where the improvements or
upgrades consisted solely of improving or upgrading the quality of existing spaces, lots or buildings;
4. Any construction in existing parks begun after November 1, 1995, where the construction consisted solely of repairing or replacing
spaces, lots or buildings existing as of November 1, 1995, and damaged after November 1, 1995, including damage incurred at any
time after enactment of these regulations.
C. Existing Parks: For the purpose of this section only the term "existing parks" is defined as any area that is fenced, is designated as part
of the park or is within the boundaries of the park; provided, that the area in question is a fully developed and operational part of the
park. Specifically excluded from this definition are fenced areas that consist of unimproved or raw land, or land that has merely been
cleared of rubbish or native vegetation. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
ARTICLE A. MOBILE HOMES
12-15A-1: PARK SIZE; MOBILE HOME SIZE AND AGE:
A. Park Size: Mobile home parks shall be at least two (2) acres in size.
B. Mobile Home Size: No mobile home with less than five hundred (500) square feet shall be allowed in any mobile home park.
C. Mobile Home Age: There are no prohibitions regarding the age of mobile homes allowed in mobile home parks; however, prior to
placement in a mobile home park, each unit must pass all applicable health and safety regulations. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15A-2: SETBACK DISTANCES:
A. Front And Back: All lots must allow for front and back setback distances of ten feet (10'), measured from the lot line to any point on the
mobile home, not including the tongue.
B. Sides: All lots must have one side setback of five feet (5'), measured from the side lot line to any point on the mobile home. The other
side must be set back twenty feet (20'), measured from the side lot line to any point on the mobile home, to allow for off-street parking.
C. Corner Lots: All corner lots must have setbacks of at least ten feet (10') from all lot lines with street frontage in addition to satisfying the
twenty foot (20') side setback mentioned in subsection B of this section.
D. Lot Size: The minimum allowable lot size that complies with the setback requirements is thirty five feet (35') wide and seventy feet (70')
deep for a ten foot (10') wide and fifty foot (50') long mobile home. Larger units will require larger lots. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15A-3: PARKING:
A. Required; Location: Off-street parking is required for all mobile home parks. The off-street parking shall be located on the side of the
mobile home which is set back twenty feet (20') measured from the side lot line to any point on the mobile home.
B. Driveway Width: The driveway shall be at least fifteen feet (15') wide.
C. On-Street Parking: On-street parking shall not be allowed, except on a temporary basis and for visitors. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15A-4: ACCESS STREETS:
Access streets for mobile home parks shall be at least forty feet (40') wide. Access streets shall be either paved or gravel. No sidewalks
shall be required. However, the planning and zoning commission reserves the right to require sidewalks where it is determined that the
potential volume of pedestrian traffic, vehicular traffic or safety considerations requires them. Speed limits shall be posted. (Ord. 933, 10-14-
1996)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 267/318
12-15A-5: FENCING:
A. Height: The perimeter of the mobile home park shall be fenced with a minimum height of four feet (4').
B. Construction Materials: Fences must be of chain link or other acceptable substances. No tires or tin fences shall be allowed.
C. Specifications: All fence specifications must comply with other applicable ordinances and regulations. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15A-6: LIGHTING:
The park perimeter must be adequately lighted. Each occupied individual space must have a light. The overall lighting plan must be
included in the plans submitted to the planning and zoning commission for approval. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15A-7: PARK RULES:
The park owner must comply with all applicable city ordinances and regulations and ensure compliance by tenants. The park owner is
responsible for the enforcement of park rules. Park rules must be distributed to each tenant. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15A-8: FIRE PROTECTION:
The number and location of fire hydrants must comply with applicable fire codes and regulations and is subject to approval by the planning
and zoning commission or its designee. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15A-9: ADDRESSES:
A. Street Address; Space Numbers: The street address for the mobile home park must be displayed at each entrance to the park. Each
space must be numbered visibly to be in compliance with city code.
B. Included With Plan: Street names, addresses or space numbers must be included on the plan submitted to the planning and zoning
commission for approval. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15A-10: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
A. Approval Required: Site-built accessory buildings are allowed but must be included in the plans submitted to the planning and zoning
commission for approval. Additional buildings, not included on said plans, must be approved by the planning and zoning commission or
its designee before construction begins.
B. Laundry; Office; Entertainment: Buildings will be allowed for an on-site laundry facility, offices, entertainment, and maintenance and
storage. The plan may also allow for individual storage units for each space or lot. Site-built structures for living quarters shall not be
allowed whether they are freestanding or built as attachments or add-ons to a mobile home. Decks, porches and awnings shall be
allowed.
C. Compliance With Regulations; Aesthetic Review Permit: All on-site buildings must comply with applicable ordinances and regulations,
including setback, and must obtain an aesthetic review permit. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15A-11: LAUNDRY FACILITIES:
A. Use By Tenants: On-site laundry facilities may be coin-operated, but must be limited to tenants. No commercial laundromat may be
operated for the benefit of or be open to the general public.
B. Compliance With Local, State And Federal Regulations: The laundry facility must comply with applicable federal, state and local laws,
including those relating to discharge of gray water. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15A-12: STANDARDS FOR MOBILE HOMES:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 268/318
All mobile homes must meet or exceed health and safety code and fire code standards. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15A-13: ZONING:
Mobile home parks shall be allowed in B-1 and T zoned areas of the city, or as otherwise designated by the city council. (Ord. 933, 10-14-
1996)
12-15A-14: LANDSCAPING:
Each plan submitted for approval to the planning and zoning commission must include a landscaping plan. At a minimum, the plan must
provide that each lot within the mobile home park be uniform in appearance. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15A-15: COMMON AREAS:
Common areas may by designated and maintained in the discretion of the developer or park owner, but are not required. Any designated
common areas must be shown on the plan to be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for approval. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15A-16: PHASES:
A. Size: Each phase or addition to the mobile home park as described by the plan submitted and approved by the planning and zoning
commission must be a minimum of five (5) trailers or twenty five percent (25%) of the total land area of the mobile home park, whichever
is greater.
B. Permit Fee; Extension: The plan for the proposed phase must be submitted to the planning and zoning commission with a fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) in accordance with the procedures established herein. The phase must be completed within one year after a
permit approving the phase is issued. A one-time ninety (90) day extension may be granted within which to complete the phase. If not
completed within that time frame, a new fee and application must be filed and a permit must be issued to continue.
C. Renewal Or Issuance Of New Phase Permit: Each renewal or new issuance of a phase permit subjects the entire project to the mobile
home park regulations then in effect and any deficiencies or noncompliance must be addressed in addition to completing the new phase.
(Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15A-17: PERMITS; FEES:
Each plan, whether for a new park or an additional phase to an existing park, must be submitted to the planning and zoning commission
along with a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fee. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15A-18: PROCEDURE:
A. Compliance Required: In planning and developing a park, the owner or developer or his agent shall comply with the principles and
requirements set forth in this article.
B. Meet With Planning And Zoning Commission: In order that a general agreement may be reached prior to any considerable investment in
land planning, the owner or developer shall meet with the planning and zoning commission or its designated representatives prior to
formal application to discuss his plans, and shall prepare suitable sketches and plans sufficient to give a general understanding of his
proposal.
C. Information From Commission: The planning and zoning commission shall inform the owner or developer as to the general suitability of
the plans, and as to any modification it deems desirable and shall express its reasons for any required modification, and indicate the
areas that appear to be acceptable for development.
D. Preliminary Plan: On reaching conclusions as recommended above regarding the general program objectives, the owner or developer
shall prepare and submit a preliminary plan together with the improvement plans and other supplementary material as required. This
plan shall cover the entire tract of land concerned unless the planning and zoning commission authorizes a lesser area. The preliminary
plan with specified supplementary material shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission with written application for
conditional approval at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 269/318
E. Notify Adjacent Landowners: The owner or developer shall ascertain, according to the latest available tax list, the names and addresses
of the owners of all parcels of land which are located within the lesser of three hundred feet (300') or one block of the park. The planning
and zoning commission shall notify such owners by mail of the application to develop the property concerned and of the meeting at
which the application is to be considered.
F. Review Of Plan By Commission: The planning and zoning commission shall review the preliminary plan and other materials submitted to
determine compliance with this chapter and other applicable ordinances and regulations. The planning and zoning commission may
consult the city engineer or any other officials or departments deemed necessary.
G. Commission Approval Or Disapproval: Within forty (40) days of the submission or resubmission of a plan for approval, the planning and
zoning commission shall act thereon as submitted, stating either its approval, conditional approval (including conditions), or disapproval
(including objections) to the plan.
H. Authorization Of Submission Of Final Plan: The planning and zoning commission may authorize the submission of a final plan covering
only part of the area included in the preliminary plan and may designate portions acceptable for such development.
I. Copies Of Preliminary Plan Distributed: The action of the planning and zoning commission shall be noted on three (3) copies of the
preliminary plan, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One copy shall be returned to the owner or developer, one
delivered to the city engineer, or other designated official, and the third shall be retained by the planning and zoning commission.
J. Guide For Preparation Of Final Plan: Approval of the preliminary plan shall not constitute approval of the final plan, but rather an
expression of approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plan as a guide to the preparation of the final plan which shall be
submitted for the approval of the planning and zoning commission upon satisfaction and compliance with the provisions of this chapter
and all other applicable ordinances and regulations.
K. Application For Approval Of Final Plan: Upon completion of the modifications required by the planning and zoning commission, the owner
or developer may apply for approval of the final plan. Such application shall be made within twelve (12) months after approval of the
preliminary plan; otherwise, unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the planning and zoning commission, such
approval shall be null and void. The application for approval of the final plan shall be submitted in writing to the planning and zoning
commission at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. Drawings and information accompanying such
application shall be as described herein.
L. Review Of Final Plan: The planning and zoning commission shall review the final plan for conformance with the approved or conditionally
approved preliminary plan and all other requirements of this chapter.
M. Approval Or Disapproval Of Final Plan: Within thirty five (35) days of submission of complete information required for approval of the
final plan, the planning and zoning commission shall approve or disapprove said plan, stating in writing its objections and reasons for
disapproval, if any.
N. Recording Final Plan With County: After final approval, the owner or developer shall file or record the final plan, within ninety (90) days,
with the Luna County clerk and so notify the planning and zoning commission by providing the planning and zoning commission with a
certified copy of the filed plan. Should the owner or developer fail to record the plan within such period, said approval shall be deemed
revoked and the owner or developer must reapply and pay the fee and seek renewed approval. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15A-19: DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. Unsuitable Land: Land deemed by the planning and zoning commission to be unsuitable for human habitation because of health, safety,
sanitary or other problems shall not be planned for residential occupancy, nor for such other uses as may pose a danger to health, life or
property, but such land within the plan shall be set aside for such uses as are appropriate to conditions existing.
B. Conformance With Official Map: The development plan shall conform to the official city map.
C. Street Layout: The street layout shall be logically related to the topography of the land, especially with the relation to grades and storm
runoff.
D. Continuation Of Existing Streets: Proposed streets shall provide for appropriate continuation or completion of any existing streets that
come to the boundary line of the adjoining property unless otherwise recommended by the planning and zoning commission.
E. Nonlocal Traffic: Local residential streets shall be so planned as to discourage use by nonlocal traffic.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 270/318
F. Center Line Of Street: The center line of a street opening into another street shall either intersect or be separated by at least one hundred
twenty five feet (125').
G. Local And Secondary Streets: Intersecting local and secondary streets shall not empty onto the same side of a major thoroughfare at an
interval less than three hundred feet (300'). Access streets as defined herein are excluded from this requirement.
H. Intersections: Streets ordinarily shall intersect as nearly at right angles as is practical.
I. Access: Suitable access and street openings for adjacent undeveloped land shall be provided.
J. Cul-De-Sacs: For cul-de-sac streets, five hundred feet (500') shall be considered the desirable maximum length unless topography or
other factors justify a greater distance. Such streets shall be provided with a turnaround having a minimum property line radius of fifty
feet (50') and T or L alley chord lengths of twenty five feet (25') on the center line.
K. Multiple Intersections: Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two (2) streets shall be avoided.
L. Avoid Traffic Hazard: Where any street intersection will involve topographic features of existing vegetation inside any corner lot that might
create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility, such ground or vegetation shall be cut in conjunction with the grading of the public right of way
to the extent deemed necessary to provide adequate sight distance and vision clearance area at the corner lot for a distance of thirty
feet (30') back from the corner which shall be kept clear of all structures and vegetation exceeding a height of thirty inches (30").
M. Dead-End Roads: Any roads or alleys temporarily dead-ended because of authorized stage development shall be provided with a
suitable, all-weather turnaround on the property of the owner. The use of such turnaround is to be guaranteed to the public until such
time as the road is extended.
N. Half Streets: When adjoining undeveloped property, a half street may be dedicated.
O. Horizontal Curves: The minimum radius at the center line for horizontal curves shall be five hundred feet (500') for primary streets, three
hundred feet (300') for secondary streets and one hundred fifty feet (150') for local streets.
P. Sight Distance: Adequate sight distance should be provided with respect to both horizontal and vertical alignment. Measured along the
center line, it should be four hundred feet (400') for primary roads, two hundred feet (200') for secondary roads and one hundred fifty
feet (150') for local roads.
Q. Street Width: The width shall not be less than forty feet (40') for access streets. All other streets must comply with the provision in the
subdivision regulations1.
R. Alleys: Alleys shall be required unless this requirement is expressly waived by the planning and zoning commission. If alleys are not
required, adequate access must be provided for all utility easements. However, if alleys are provided, they must be a minimum of twenty
feet (20').
S. T Or L Alleys: A chord length of twenty five feet (25') shall be required on T or L alleys.
T. Additional Widths: Additional widths may be required by the planning and zoning commission or its designee as deemed necessary.
U. Reserve Strips: The creation of reserve strips, prohibiting access to lots or streets, shall not be permitted.
V. Street Names: The developer or owner may choose his own street names subject to the approval of the planning and zoning
commission. No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets except for an
extension of an existing street.
W. Street Cross Sections: Street cross sections shall be designed by the city engineer or other designated person and approved by the
planning and zoning commission.
X. Street Right Of Way: Every lot shall abut on a street or other right of way as may be approved by the planning and zoning commission.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 271/318
Y. Corner Lots: Corner lots shall be sufficiently wide to allow the required setback on both street frontages.
Z. Blocks: All parks with more than one hundred (100) lots shall have blocks with a minimum length of three hundred feet (300') and a
maximum of nine hundred feet (900').
AA. Drainage: Adequate provision shall be made for drainage or containment of storm water subject to approval of the city engineer or other
designated person. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15A-20: UTILITY EASEMENTS:
Utility easements to provide for sewer, water, gas mains or power lines shall have a minimum width of ten feet (10'). It is required that all
final plans presented to the planning and zoning commission be accompanied by evidence that all utilities concur that easements indicated
on the plan are suitable for their servicing area or that no easements are required. The decision of the planning and zoning commission as
to such easements shall be final. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15A-21: DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS FOR PUBLIC USE:
A. Dedication Or Payment In Lieu: In all instances where the total area of the park shall be ten (10) acres or more in size, the owner or
developer shall provide areas comprising or constituting ten percent (10%) of the total area to be developed and dedicated by such
owner or developer to the city for recreation, park or playground purposes. In all such instances said owner or developer shall dedicate
the needed portion of the developed area for such purposes indicated on the park plans. Provided, however, that upon the election by
the owner or developer and in lieu of the dedication for public use, the owner or developer may pay to the city a sum to be computed on
the total front footage within the park at the rate of one dollar ($1.00) per front foot per lot for the purpose of acquisition by the city of
land for public use.
B. Payment: In all instances where the total area of the park shall be less than ten (10) acres, the owner or developer shall not dedicate any
area for public use, but shall pay the city the sum of one dollar ($1.00) per front foot as provided above at the time of approval of the
final plan by the city council. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15A-22: DEDICATION OF STREETS:
All streets and public ways open for public use, and not specifically marked "Not Offered For Dedication" shall be irrevocably offered for
dedication or recording on the final plan. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15A-23: SEWER FACILITIES:
A. Connection To Public System: Where public sewer is available or definitely planned, sanitary sewers shall be designed providing a
connection to each lot. Sewers connecting to public systems shall be designed according to the standards of the city engineer. No storm
water shall be allowed to enter sanitary sewers.
B. Project Sewer Systems: Where public sewer is not available, owners and developers are urged to consider project sewer systems. Onthe-
lot sewage disposal systems are generally unsatisfactory even when carefully designed and constructed and given the best of
maintenance. Poor design, inadequate construction or poor maintenance can result in conditions dangerous to health and generally
obnoxious to the senses.
C. State Approval Of Plans: Project systems shall be designed by a registered engineer, shall provide a six inch (6") connection for each lot,
and shall have an adequate sewage disposal plan with suitable arrangements for the operation thereof. Plans shall be approved by the
New Mexico environment department.
D. On-The-Lot Systems: On-the-lot systems shall conform, at a minimum, to environment department standards and specifications. Both
the water supply and sewage, if either are to be on-the-lot systems, shall be shown on the plan and approved by the local health officer
and the environment department. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15A-24: WATER SUPPLY AND FIRE HYDRANTS:
A. Supply Available: Where public or approved central water supply is available, a system shall be designed to furnish an adequate supply
of water to each lot, with adequate main sizes and fire hydrant locations to meet the association of fire underwriter's specifications for a
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 272/318
protected area. Such systems shall be approved by the city engineer or other designated person. The owner or developer shall inquire
with the city council regarding the extension of city facilities at the time the project is approved.
B. Supply Not Available: Where no public or approved central water supply is available, water systems shall be designed by a registered
engineer, shall be approved by the city engineer or other designated person and shall meet the requirements of city and state authorities
having jurisdiction.
C. Plans: All water systems shall be shown on the plans submitted to the planning and zoning commission for approval. (Ord. 933, 10-14-
1996)
12-15A-25: PRELIMINARY PLAN:
A. Purpose: The preliminary plan of a park is not intended to be recorded. Its purpose is to show graphically all facts needed to enable the
planning and zoning commission to determine whether the proposed layout of land in question is satisfactory from the standpoint of
public interest. The preliminary plan should be designed by a qualified technician, trained and experienced in the layout of subdivisions
or mobile home and RV parks, and shall comply with the standards listed herein.
B. Sketch Of Future Development: Where the preliminary plan submitted covers only a part of the owners' or developers' property, a sketch
of the prospective future development, including future streets in the undeveloped property shall be furnished. The street system of the
undeveloped parts will be considered in the light of adjustments and connections with future streets in the undeveloped property.
C. Required Information: The owner or developer shall submit three (3) copies of the information listed below to the planning and zoning
commission, with all prints to be in blue line or black and white.
1. A vicinity sketch shall be submitted with the preliminary plan, at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') showing the
relationship of the plan to its general surroundings and showing the following details:
a. All existing or mapped streets within one hundred feet (100') of the park;
b. All proposed streets with the connections to existing or mapped streets;
c. Proposed direction of flow for storm water in relation to natural drainage channels; and
d. City boundaries within one thousand feet (1,000') of the park.
2. A layout plan of the park at a minimum scale of one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') on a sheet size eighteen inches by
twenty nine inches (18" x 29") (standard border) showing the following information:
a. Items pertaining to title (to be grouped if possible);
b. Proposed name of the park;
c. Name and address of the owner or developer, the engineer and any other professionals assisting in preparation of the plan;
d. Scale;
e. North point; and
f. A statement vacating or revoking prior plans.
3. Existing site conditions affecting the plan, including:
a. Tract boundaries, as surveyed and certified by a registered surveyor or engineer, to be a closed traverse. The error of closure shall
not be greater than one foot (1') in three thousand feet (3,000'). All congressional townships and lines of incorporated areas shall be
shown;
b. Existing buildings and watercourses, culverts and drains;
c. Existing streets, alleys and easements within one hundred feet (100') of the park;
d. The names of all subdivisions or parks immediately adjacent, intersecting points of adjacent lots, and the names of owners of
record of adjacent acreage;
e. The locations and sizes of any existing sewers, water lines, fire hydrants and gas mains, on or within one hundred feet (100') of the
tract, with pipe sizes and grades indicated and invert elevations where necessary;
f. Contours, with vertical intervals of two feet (2') for land with average natural slope of four percent (4%) or less, at vertical intervals of
five feet (5') for more steeply sloping land. Such information is to be related, where practical, to USGS benchmarks or other datum
as established by the city engineer;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 273/318
g. Significant tree masses and isolated trees;
h. The location and widths of any streets, public ways, sewer or water lines, the location and size of parks, or other public places,
shown upon an official plan adopted by the planning and zoning commission and the location of any improvements on the site
shown on the official city map; and
i. Zoning boundary lines, if any.
4. Proposed improvements, including:
a. Location and width of all proposed streets, roads, alleys and utility easements;
b. Parks, playgrounds, and other public areas proposed for dedication;
c. Proposed street names and lot numbers;
d. Lot lines and approximate dimensions of lots and number of lots;
e. Designation of streets, rights of way, easements, and other areas proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public use, together with
the conditions of such dedications or reservations;
f. General drainage plan for storm water;
g. Proposed use and proposed setback lines;
h. The plans and profile of proposed sanitary sewers, with manholes, invert elevations, grades and sizes indicated on plans and
proposed location of on-the-lot sewage disposal facilities;
i. A plan of the proposed water distribution system, showing pipe sizes and location of valves and fire hydrants or a plan showing the
location of individual wells; and
j. Copies of any proposed protective covenants to be included in the deed shall be attached to the plan.
5. Surface drainage plan, including:
a. A map at the same scale as the layout plan;
b. Park boundaries, contour intervals, proposed streets, lot lines, and proposed major changes in grade; and
c. All proposed drainage courses. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15A-26: FINAL PLAN:
A. Information Required: The final plan shall be of mylar, in conformity with the county clerk's requirements and shall be recorded with the
county clerk and include the following:
1. Preliminary control points described, and ties to regular park lines, to which all dimensions, angles, bearing and similar data on the
plan shall be referred;
2. Park boundary lines, rights of way, lines of streets, easements and other rights of way and property lines of all lots, blocks and alleys;
3. Accurate dimensions, bearing and deflection angles and radii, arcs and center lines of all curbs;
4. Names of streets, block numbers and signature of owners. The lots and blocks within the park shall be numbered and lettered in a
manner satisfactory to the planning and zoning commission; and
5. The approval and signature of the owner or developer, appropriate officials of the planning and zoning commission, the mayor and
city clerk and the certificate from a licensed engineer or surveyor, and of the county clerk upon recording.
B. Additional Information: The final plan for the planning and zoning commission shall, in addition to the information required herein, also
include the following:
1. Curb and gutter grades, proposed sewer grades, proposed water lines, proposed sewer lines, proposed gas lines and protective
covenants attached, and such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements and dedications as may be required by the planning and
zoning commission in the enforcement of these regulations;
2. A legend for all utility lines and corresponding sizes;
3. Title shall be displayed in the lower right-hand corner, and all appended material shall refer to the same title; and
4. A suitable border having a margin of not less than one-half inch (1/2") on all sides. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 274/318
12-15A-27: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
A. List Of Improvements: The following is a complete list of the required improvements to be installed by the owner or developer of a park
with one hundred (100) or more lots in all phases of the project. In the event the city council shall, by resolution, indicate their intention to
install any part of such improvements, the planning and zoning commission may relieve the owner or developer of liability for such
portion of the installations.
B. Curb And Gutter: The owner or developer of said park who is requesting approval shall be liable for and shall install at his own expense
the necessary curb and gutter and shall cause the grade of any street to be set or established in accordance with the specifications as
prescribed by the city engineer or other designated person within one hundred eighty (180) days after filing the final plan of the park or
any part thereof with the county clerk.
C. Approval Of Preliminary Plan: The planning and zoning commission may approve the preliminary plan as to such entire park or any part
thereof. In the event stage or block development is desired, the planning and zoning commission may approve the final plan for the
particular block or area development of such park or any part thereof. The owner or developer shall be required to install such
prescribed improvements within ninety (90) days from the date of sale of any lot or portion thereof, within the particular block of such
park, or within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance of a proper building permit by the city for construction upon any such lot or
portion thereof. In no case shall the owner or developer construct the prescribed improvements within such parks for less than one block
in extent.
D. Performance Bond: In lieu of the actual and immediate installation of such prescribed improvements for the entire park or any part
thereof, the owner or developer may post with the city a good and sufficient performance bond in an amount to be fixed and approved by
the planning and zoning commission. Said bond to enure to the city's benefit and so conditioned to assure the installation of such
prescribed improvements at a cost per linear front foot or such other cost as may be customary and proper. Such bond shall be posted
and delivered to the city before acceptance and approval by the planning and zoning commission of the final plan of such park or any
part thereof. Said planning and zoning commission within its discretion may from time to time release the owner or developer from his
obligation upon such bond as to such prescribed improvements so constructed, completed and approved within the particular block or
other area of stage development.
E. Monument Location: All monuments shown on the preliminary plan shall be located and installed under the direction of a registered
engineer or surveyor.
F. Specifications For Monuments: Permanent reference monuments shall be of concrete or a durable stone at least six inches in diameter
by twenty four inches in depth (6" x 24") with a metal center point.
G. Corner Markers: All lot corner markers shall be permanently located and shall be at least a one-half inch (1/2") metal pin with a minimum
length of sixteen inches (16") located in the ground surface to existing grade.
H. Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be installed as indicated on the preliminary plan.
I. Street Name Signs: Street name signs, according to standards established by the city, shall be installed at each street intersection on
locations approved by the city engineer.
J. Sewer Facilities: Sewer facilities shall be installed as shown on the preliminary plan. Sewers connected or proposed for connection with
established sewer systems shall be inspected and certified by the proper city department.
K. Water Mains; Fire Hydrants: All water mains, lines and fire hydrants shall be installed from each lot in the park to, and connected with,
the public supply or approved central system as indicated on the preliminary plan. And the installation shall be inspected and certified by
the city engineer or other designated person.
L. Wells, Septic Tanks: No wells, cesspools or septic tanks shall be constructed in any rights of way intended for public use. (Ord. 933, 10-
14-1996)
ARTICLE B. RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
12-15B-1: PARK SIZE; RV AGE, SIZE, ACCESSIBILITY:
A. Park Size: Recreational vehicle (RV) parks shall be at least one acre in size with a maximum density of eighteen (18) spaces per gross
acre. Each space shall have a minimum of one thousand six hundred fifty (1,650) square feet.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 275/318
B. RV Size: No RV or park model mobile home in excess of five hundred (500) square feet shall be allowed in any RV park.
C. RV Age: There are no prohibitions regarding the age of RVs allowed in RV parks, however, all RVs in an RV park must be roadworthy
and be properly licensed. The park must comply with all applicable rules and regulations of the city and state.
D. Accessibility: Each RV space shall be directly accessible from one side by emergency vehicles. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15B-2: PARKING:
Sufficient parking for residents' automobiles shall be made available so as to avoid obstruction of ingress and egress to and from the park
and emergency access. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15B-3: STREETS:
A. Accessibility: All spaces in the RV park shall be accessible from either the front or back of the space by an access street. Such streets
shall be wide enough to allow access to emergency vehicles when all spaces are occupied, but shall not be less than twenty feet (20')
wide.
B. Driveway Exits: No more than two (2) entry or exit driveways or streets shall be allowed for every three hundred feet (300') of frontage.
(Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15B-4: FENCING:
A. Height: The perimeter of the RV home park shall be fenced on at least three (3) sides with a minimum height of six feet (6').
B. Construction Materials: Fences must be of chain link or other acceptable substances. No tires or tin fences shall be allowed.
C. Specifications: All fence specifications must comply with other applicable ordinances and regulations. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15B-5: LIGHTING:
The park perimeter must be adequately lighted. The overall lighting plan must be included in the plans submitted to the planning and zoning
commission for approval. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15B-6: PARK RULES:
A. Compliance Required: The park owner must comply with all applicable city ordinances and regulations and ensure compliance by
tenants. The park owner is responsible for the enforcement of park rules. Park rules must be distributed to each tenant.
B. Submitted With Plans: The park rules must be attached to the plans submitted to the planning and zoning commission for approval. (Ord.
933, 10-14-1996)
12-15B-7: FIRE PROTECTION:
The number and location of fire hydrants must comply with applicable fire codes and regulations and is subject to approval by the planning
and zoning commission or its designee. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15B-8: ADDRESSES:
The street address for the RV park must be displayed at each entrance to the park. Each space must be conspicuously numbered. (Ord.
933, 10-14-1996)
12-15B-9: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 276/318
A. Approval Required: Site-built accessory buildings are allowed but must be included in the plans submitted to the planning and zoning
commission for approval. Additional buildings, not included on said plans, must be approved by the planning and zoning commission or
its designee before construction begins.
B. Laundry, Office, Entertainment: Buildings will be allowed for an on-site laundry facility, offices, entertainment, and maintenance and
storage. The plan may also allow for individual storage units for each space or lot. Site-built structures for living quarters shall not be
allowed whether they are freestanding or built as attachments or add-ons to a mobile home.
C. Compliance With Regulations; Aesthetic Review Permit: All on-site buildings must comply with applicable ordinances and regulations,
including setback and aesthetic review permit. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15B-10: LAUNDRY FACILITIES:
A. Use By Tenants: On-site laundry facilities can be provided and may be coin-operated, but must be limited to tenants. No commercial
laundromat may be operated for the benefit of or be open to the general public.
B. Compliance With Local, State And Federal Regulations: The laundry facility must comply with applicable federal, state and local laws,
including those relating to discharge of gray water. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15B-11: ZONING:
RV home parks shall be allowed in C zoned areas of the city, or as otherwise designated by the city council. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15B-12: LANDSCAPING:
Each plan submitted for approval to the planning and zoning commission must include a landscaping plan. The landscaping plan must also
be approved and receive an aesthetic review permit. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15B-13: COMMON AREAS:
Common areas may by designated and maintained in the discretion of the owner or developer, but are not required. Any designated
common areas must be shown on the plans submitted to the planning and zoning commission for approval. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15B-14: PHASES:
A. Size: Each phase or addition to the RV park as described by the plan submitted and approved by the planning and zoning commission
must be a minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the total land area of the RV park.
B. Permit Fee; Extension: The plan for the proposed phase must be submitted in accordance with the provisions herein to the planning and
zoning commission with a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). The phase must be completed within one year after a permit approving
the phase is issued. A one-time ninety (90) day extension may be granted within which to complete the phase. If not completed within
that time frame, a new fee and application must be filed and a permit must be issued to continue.
C. Renewal Or Issuance Of New Phase Permit: Each renewal or new issuance of a phase permit subjects the entire project to this chapter
then in effect and any deficiencies or noncompliance must be addressed in addition to completing the new phase. (Ord. 933, 10-14-
1996)
12-15B-15: PERMITS; FEES:
Each plan, whether for a new park or an additional phase to an existing park, must be submitted to the planning and zoning commission
along with a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fee. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15B-16: UTILITIES:
A. Water, Sewer, Electrical: RV parks shall provide individual water, sewer and electrical connections for each space, unless water is
available within one hundred feet (100') of each lot, and there are at least two (2) sanitary dump facilities for each five (5) acres, or each
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 277/318
fraction thereof, of the park.
B. Gas: Natural gas or LPG connections to individual lots are prohibited.
C. Easements: When necessary, utility easement shall be provided and shall have a minimum width of ten feet (10'). All final plans must
include utility easements when deemed necessary and evidence must be presented that all utilities concur in the planned easements.
The decision of the planning and zoning commission as to such easements shall be final. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15B-17: TOILET FACILITIES:
All RV parks shall provide the following facilities:
A. Water flush toilets and urinals shall be located within three hundred feet (300') of each lot which does not have an individual sewer
connection.
B. Toilets: A minimum of four (4) toilets shall be provided for the first twenty nine (29) spaces in the park. For each additional twenty five
(25) spaces, or fraction thereof, not provided with sewer connections, an additional toilet shall be provided.
C. Sink: One sink or lavatory shall be provided for the first six (6) toilets and one additional sink or lavatory shall be provided for each two
(2) additional toilets, or fraction thereof.
D. Separate Facilities: Separate facilities shall be provided for men and women. Urinals shall be acceptable for up to one-third (1/3) of the
toilets required in the men's facilities, except that one urinal may be used to replace one of the four (4) minimum toilets as described in
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15B-18: PROCEDURE:
A. Compliance Required: In planning and developing a park, the owner or developer or his agent shall comply with the general principles
and requirements set forth in this article.
B. Meet With Planning And Zoning Commission: In order that a general agreement may be reached prior to any considerable investment in
land planning, the owner or developer shall meet with the planning and zoning commission or its designated representatives prior to
formal application to discuss his plans, and shall prepare suitable sketches and plans sufficient to give a general understanding of his
proposal.
C. Information From Commission: The planning and zoning commission shall inform the owner or developer as to the general suitability of
the plans, and as to any modification it deems desirable and shall express its reasons for any required modification, and indicate the
areas that appear to be acceptable for development.
D. Preliminary Plan: On reaching conclusions as recommended above regarding the general program objectives, the owner or developer
shall prepare and submit a preliminary plan together with the improvement plans and other supplementary material as required. This
plan shall cover the entire tract of land concerned unless the planning and zoning commission authorizes a lesser area. The preliminary
plan with specified supplementary material shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission with written application for
conditional approval at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered.
E. Notify Adjacent Landowners: The owner or developer shall ascertain, according to the latest available tax list, the names and addresses
of the owners of all parcels of land which are located within the lesser of three hundred feet (300') or one block of the park. The planning
and zoning commission shall notify such owners by mail of the application to develop the property concerned and of the meeting at
which the application is to be considered.
F. Review Of Plan By Commission: The planning and zoning commission shall review the preliminary plan and other materials submitted for
compliance with this chapter and other applicable ordinances and regulations. The planning and zoning commission may consult the city
engineer or any other officials or departments deemed necessary.
G. Commission Approval Or Disapproval: Within forty (40) days of the submission or resubmission of a plan for approval, the planning and
zoning commission shall act thereon as submitted, stating either its approval, conditional approval (including conditions) or disapproval
(including objections).
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 278/318
H. Authorization Of Submission Of Final Plan: The planning and zoning commission may authorize the submission of a final plan covering
only part of the area included in the preliminary plan and may designate portions acceptable for such development.
I. Copies Of Preliminary Plan Distributed: The action of the planning and zoning commission shall be noted on three (3) copies of the
preliminary plan, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One copy shall be returned to the owner or developer, one
delivered to the city engineer or other designated person and the third shall be retained by the planning and zoning commission.
J. Guide For Preparation Of Final Plan: Approval of the preliminary plan shall not constitute approval of the final plan, but rather an
expression of approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plan as a guide to the preparation of the final plan which shall be
submitted for the approval of the planning and zoning commission upon satisfaction and compliance with the provisions of this chapter
and all other applicable ordinances and regulations.
K. Application For Approval Of Final Plan: Upon completion of the modifications required by the commission, the owner or developer may
apply for approval of the final park plan. Such application shall be made within twelve (12) months after approval of the preliminary plan,
otherwise, unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the planning and zoning commission, such approval shall be null
and void. The application for approval of the final plan shall be submitted in writing to the planning and zoning commission at least ten
(10) days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. Drawings and information accompanying such application shall be as
described herein.
L. Review Of Final Plan: The planning and zoning commission shall review the final plan for conformance with the approved or conditionally
approved preliminary plan and all other requirements of this chapter.
M. Approval Of Disapproval Of Final Plan: Within thirty five (35) days of submission of complete information required for approval of the final
plan, the planning and zoning commission shall approve or disapprove said plan, stating in writing its objections and reasons for
disapproval.
N. Recording Final Plan With County: After final approval, the owner or developer shall file the final plan within ninety (90) days with the
Luna County clerk, and so notify the planning and zoning commission by completing the files of the planning and zoning commission
with a certified copy of the filed plan. Should the owner or developer fail to record the plan within such period, said approval shall be
deemed revoked and the owner or developer must reapply and pay the fee and seek renewed approval. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15B-19: DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. Unsuitable Land: Land deemed by the planning and zoning commission to be unsuitable for human habitation because of health or
sanitary or other problems shall not be planned for residential occupancy, nor for such other uses as may involve danger to health, life or
property, but such land within the plan shall be set aside for such uses as are appropriate to conditions existing.
B. Conformance With Official Map: The development plan shall conform to the official city map.
C. Street Layout: The street layout, if any, shall be logically related to the topography of the land, especially with the relation to grades and
storm runoff.
D. Continuation Of Existing Streets: Proposed streets, if any, shall provide for appropriate continuation or completion of any existing streets
that come to the boundary line of the adjoining property unless otherwise recommended by the planning and zoning commission.
E. Intersections: Streets, if any, ordinarily shall intersect as nearly at right angles as is practical.
F. Street Names: In the event streets are to be included in the park, the developer or owner may choose his own street names subject to the
approval of the planning and zoning commission. No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of
existing streets except for an extension of an existing street.
G. Cross Sections: Street cross sections, if any, shall be designed by the city engineer or other designated official, and approved by the
planning and zoning commission.
H. Drainage: Adequate provision shall be made for drainage or containment of storm water subject to approval of the city engineer or other
designated person. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15B-20: SEWER FACILITIES:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 279/318
Where public sewer is to be made available or definitely planned, sanitary sewers shall be designed providing a connection to each lot.
Sewers connecting to public systems shall be designed according to the standards of the city engineer or other designated person. No
storm water shall be allowed to enter sanitary sewers. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15B-21: WATER SUPPLY AND FIRE HYDRANTS:
A. Provide Adequate Supply: In RV parks intended for long term occupancy, the developer or owner is encouraged to provide a system to
furnish an adequate supply of water to each lot, with adequate main sizes and fire hydrant locations to meet the association of fire
underwriter's specifications for a protected area. Such systems shall be approved by the city engineer, or other designated official. The
owner or developer shall inquire with the city council regarding the extension of city facilities at the time the project is approved.
B. Compliance With Local And State Regulations: Where no public or approved central water supply is available, water systems shall be
designed by a registered engineer, shall be approved by the city engineer or other designated person and shall meet the requirements
of city and state authorities having jurisdiction.
C. Central Location: In the event that water is not furnished to each lot, water shall be furnished in adequate amounts to supply all park
residents, at full occupancy, from a central location.
D. Shown On Plan: All water systems shall be shown on the plan submitted to the planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15B-22: PRELIMINARY PLAN:
A. Purpose: The preliminary plan of a park is not intended to be recorded. Its purpose is to show graphically all facts needed to enable the
planning and zoning commission to determine whether the proposed layout of land in question is satisfactory from the standpoint of
public interest. The preliminary plan should be designed by a qualified technician, trained and experienced in the layout of RV parks,
and shall comply with the standards listed herein.
B. Sketch Of Future Development: Where the preliminary plan submitted covers only a part of the owners' or developers' property, a sketch
of the prospective future development, including future streets, if any, in the undeveloped property shall be furnished. The street system
of the undeveloped parts, if any, will be considered in the light of adjustments and connections with future streets in the undeveloped
property.
C. Required Information: The owner or developer shall submit three (3) copies of the following information to the planning and zoning
commission, with all prints to be in blue line or black and white.
1. A vicinity sketch shall be submitted with the preliminary plan, at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') showing the
relationship of the plan to its general surroundings and showing the following details:
a. All existing or mapped streets within one hundred feet (100') of the park boundaries;
b. All proposed streets, if any, with the connections to existing or mapped streets;
c. Proposed direction of flow for storm water in relation to natural drainage channels;
d. Municipal boundaries within one thousand feet (1,000') of the park; and
e. Park boundaries.
2. A layout plan of the park at a minimum scale of one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') on a sheet size eighteen inches by
twenty nine inches (18" x 29") (standard border) showing the following information:
a. Items pertaining to title (to be grouped if possible);
b. Proposed name of the park;
c. Name and address of the owner or developer, the engineer and any other professionals assisting in preparation of the plan;
d. Scale;
e. North point; and
f. A statement vacating or revoking prior plans.
3. Existing site conditions affecting the plan, including:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 280/318
a. Tract boundaries as surveyed and certified by a registered surveyor or engineer to be a closed traverse. The error of closure shall
not be greater than one foot (1') in three thousand feet (3,000'). All congressional townships and lines of incorporated areas shall be
shown;
b. Existing buildings and watercourses, culverts and drains;
c. Existing streets, alleys and easements within one hundred feet (100') of the park;
d. The names of all subdivisions or parks immediately adjacent, intersecting points of adjacent lots, and the names of owners of
record of adjacent acreage;
e. The locations and sizes of any existing sewers, water lines, fire hydrants and gas mains, on or within one hundred feet (100') of the
tract, with pipe sizes and grades indicated and invert elevations where necessary;
f. Contours, with vertical intervals of two feet (2') for land with average natural slope of four percent (4%) or less, at vertical intervals of
five feet (5') for more steeply sloping land, such information to be related where practical, to USGS benchmarks or other datum as
established by the city engineer;
g. Significant tree masses and isolated trees;
h. The location and widths of any streets, public ways, sewer or water lines, the location and size of parks, or other public places;
shown upon an official plan adopted by the planning and zoning commission and the location of any improvements on the site
shown on the official city map; and
i. Zoning boundary lines, if any.
4. Proposed improvements, including:
a. Location and width of any proposed streets, roads, alleys and utility easements;
b. Parks, playgrounds, and other public areas proposed for dedication, if any;
c. Proposed street names, if any, and space numbers;
d. Space lines and approximate dimensions of spaces and number of spaces;
e. Designation of streets, rights of way, easements, and other areas proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public use, if any,
together with the conditions of such dedications or reservations;
f. General drainage plan for storm water;
g. Proposed use and proposed setback lines, if any;
h. The plans and profile of proposed sanitary sewers, with manholes, invert elevations, grades and sizes, if any, indicated on plans
and where required, proposed location of on-lot sewage disposal facilities;
i. A plan of the proposed water distribution system, showing pipe sizes and location of valves and fire hydrants or a plan showing the
location of individual wells; and
j. Copies of any proposed protective covenants to be included in the deed shall be attached to the plan.
5. Surface drainage plan, including:
a. On a map at the same scale as the layout plan;
b. Park boundaries, contour intervals, proposed streets, if any, space lines, and proposed major changes in grade; and
c. All proposed drainage courses. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15B-23: FINAL PLAN:
A. Information Required: The final plan shall be of mylar, in conformity with the county clerk's requirements and shall be recorded with the
county clerk and include the following:
1. Preliminary control points described, and ties to regular park lines, to which all dimensions, angles, bearing and similar data on the
plan shall be referred;
2. Park boundary lines, rights of way, lines of streets, easements and other rights of way, lines of all lots, blocks and alleys, if any;
3. Accurate dimensions, bearing and deflection angles and radii, arcs and center lines of all curbs, if any;
4. Names of streets, block numbers, signature of owners, if any. The blocks within the park, if any, shall be numbered and lettered in a
manner satisfactory to the planning and zoning commission; and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 281/318
5. The approval and signature of the owner or developer, appropriate officials of the planning and zoning commission, the mayor and
city clerk and the certificate from a licensed engineer or surveyor, and of the county clerk upon recording.
B. Additional Information: The final plan for the planning and zoning commission shall, in addition to the information required herein, also
include the following:
1. Curb and gutter grades, proposed sewer grades, proposed water lines, proposed sewer lines, proposed gas lines and protective
covenants attached, if any, and such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements and dedications as may be required by the planning
and zoning commission in the enforcement of these regulations;
2. A legend for all utility lines and corresponding sizes;
3. Title shall be displayed in the lower right-hand corner, and all appended material shall refer to the same title; and
4. A suitable border having a margin of not less than one-half inch (1/2") on all sides. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
12-15B-24: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
The following is a complete list of the required improvements to be installed by the owner or developer of a park with ninety (90) or more
spaces in all phases of the project. In the event the city council shall, by resolution, indicate their intention to install any part of such
improvements, the planning and zoning commission may relieve the owner or developer of liability for such portion of the installations.
A. The owner or developer of said park who is requesting approval shall be liable for and shall cause the grade of any street to be set or
established in accordance with the specifications as prescribed by the city engineer within one hundred eighty (180) days after recording
the final plan of the park or any part thereof with the county clerk.
B. The planning and zoning commission may approve the preliminary plan as to such entire park or any part thereof. In the event stage or
block development is desired, the planning and zoning commission may approve the final plan for the particular block or area
development of such park or any part thereof. The owner or developer shall be required to install such prescribed improvements within
ninety (90) days from the date of sale of any lot or portion thereof, within the particular block of such park, or within ninety (90) days from
the date of issuance of a proper building permit by the city for construction upon any such lot or portion thereof. In no case shall the
owner or developer construct the prescribed improvements within such park for less than one block in extent.
C. In lieu of the actual and immediate installation of such prescribed improvements for the entire park or any part thereof, the owner or
developer may post with the city a good and sufficient performance bond in an amount to be fixed and approved by the planning and
zoning commission, such bond to enure to the city's benefit and so conditioned to assure the installation of such prescribed
improvements at a cost per linear front foot or such other cost as may be customary and proper. Such bond shall be posted and
delivered to the city before acceptance and approval by the planning and zoning commission of the final plan of such park or any part
thereof. Said planning and zoning commission within its discretion may from time to time release the owner or developer from his
obligation upon such bond as to such prescribed improvements so constructed, completed and approved within the particular block or
other area of stage development.
D. All monuments shown on the preliminary plan shall be located and installed under the direction of a registered engineer or surveyor.
E. Permanent reference monuments shall be of concrete or a durable stone at least six inches (6") in diameter by twenty four inches (24") in
depth with a metal center point.
F. Any corner markers shall be permanently located and shall be at least a one-half inch (1/2") metal pin with a minimum length of sixteen
inches (16") located in the ground surface to existing grade.
G. Sidewalks, if any, shall be installed as indicated on the preliminary plan.
H. Street name signs, if streets are included, according to standards established by the city, shall be installed at each street intersection on
locations approved by the city engineer.
I. Sewer facilities, if any, shall be installed as shown on the preliminary plan. Sewers connected or proposed for connection with established
sewer systems shall be inspected and certified by the proper city department.
J. Any water mains, lines and fire hydrants shall be installed from each lot in the park to, and connected with, the public supply or approved
central system as indicated on the preliminary plan. And the installation shall be inspected and certified by the city engineer or other
designated official.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 282/318
K. No wells, cesspools or septic tanks shall be constructed in any rights of way intended for public use. (Ord. 933, 10-14-1996)
Chapter 16
FENCES AND WALLS
12-16-1: RESIDENTIAL:
A. Construction Standards: All residential fences and walls shall be constructed only of materials allowed by the city's municipal design
standards for fences and walls as it may be amended from time to time by the city building department. The city's municipal design
standards for fences and walls is incorporated herein by reference and a copy may be obtained from the city clerk at the Deming
municipal building for a nominal charge for the cost of copies. (Ord. 991, 2-8-1999)
B. Compliance With Zoning Laws: No fence or wall shall be constructed in violation of any applicable zoning laws. (Ord. 984, 11-9-1998)
C. Height Limitation: No fence, hedge or wall closer than thirty feet (30') to the front lot line shall exceed a height of four feet (4') above
ground level. No fence, hedge or wall, exceeding six feet (6') above ground level shall be allowed. (Ord. 1227, 10-8-2012)
D. Near Intersection: No fence or wall shall be higher than three feet (3') above ground level on that portion of any lot which is within thirty
feet (30') of the intersection of two (2) or more streets.
E. Public Right Of Way: No fence or wall shall be allowed on any public right of way.
F. Swimming Pools: All residential swimming pools or yards containing swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a wall or fence of at
least four feet (4') in height.
G. Barbed Wire; Sharp Materials: No barbed or razor wire, broken glass or any other sharp or hazardous materials shall be used on
residential fences or walls. (Ord. 984, 11-9-1998)
12-16-2: COMMERCIAL:
A. Construction Standards: All commercial fences and walls shall be constructed only of materials allowed by the city's municipal design
standards for fences and walls as it may be amended from time to time by the city building department. The city's municipal design
standards for fences and walls is incorporated herein by reference and a copy may be obtained from the city clerk at the Deming
municipal building for a nominal charge for the cost of copies. (Ord. 991, 2-8-1999)
B. Compliance With Zoning Laws: No fence or wall shall be constructed in violation of any applicable zoning laws.
C. Height Limitation: No fence or wall with a height exceeding eight feet (8') above ground level shall be allowed.
D. Public Right Of Way: No fence or wall shall be allowed on any public right of way.
E. Swimming Pools: Except as provided in subsection 12-16-4B of this chapter, all swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a wall
or fence of at least six feet (6') in height.
F. Barbed Wire; Sharp Materials: No barbed or razor wire, broken glass or any other sharp materials shall be used on commercial fences or
walls unless the bottom of the wire, glass or sharp material is at least six feet (6') above ground level. (Ord. 984, 11-9-1998)
12-16-3: RETAINING WALLS:
Any retaining wall of four feet (4') or more in height shall be designed by a professional engineer licensed by the state. No building permit
for such a fence or wall shall be issued without such design by a professional engineer as evidenced by the engineer's signature or stamp
on the engineer's plan or drawing. (Ord. 984, 11-9-1998)
12-16-4: EXCEPTIONS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 283/318
A. Tennis Courts: Tennis courts may have fences or walls with a height of up to sixteen feet (16') above ground level, provided the courts
are located in the side or rear yard and are set back at least seven feet (7') from any property line.
B. Swimming Pools: Swimming pools at hotels, motels, recreational vehicle parks and all places of lodging shall be completely enclosed
with a fence or wall of at least four feet (4') in height. Gates shall be self-closing, with an interior latch.
C. Variance Approval Process: For aesthetic or safety reasons, any residential or commercial landscaping, courtyard, entrance, patio fence
or wall exceeding the maximum height requirements herein may be approved by the building inspector. Appeal of any decision of the
building inspector hereunder shall be made to the planning and zoning commission as a variance request. (Ord. 984, 11-9-1998)
Chapter 17
SPECIAL USE PERMITS
12-17-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A special use is a use that is not permitted by right in a zoning district. It is an approved use with conditions requiring a special use permit. A
special use permit requires a public hearing, review, and approval by the planning and zoning commission to determine the impacts on the
surrounding area. (Ord. 1000, 7-12-1999)
12-17-2: PROCEDURES:
A. Applications: Applications for a special use shall include the following information:
1. Application and fees.
2. Comprehensive statement indicating the reasons for the request, the use of the property and a list of all improvements to be made.
3. Site plan to include:
a. Locations of existing and proposed structures including dimensions;
b. Property boundary;
c. Setbacks;
d. Parking requirements;
e. Zoning of applicant property and adjacent property within two hundred feet (200');
f. Width of rights of way, access easements and paving widths;
g. Existing and proposed vehicle traffic patterns. Circulation patterns to storage areas, service areas, loading areas and major points
of access;
h. Utility easements;
i. Existing and proposed landscaping. Proposed buffer areas and open spaces;
j. Exterior and site lighting;
k. Signage;
l. List of all property owners and mailing addresses within two hundred feet (200') of the applicant property;
m. Location of proposed drainage structures;
n. Upon request of the planning and zoning commission, a drainage study and/or any other studies as may be recommended. (Ord.
1000, 7-12-1999)
12-17-3: PUBLIC NOTICE, HEARINGS AND APPROVAL:
A. Public Notice:
1. The planning and zoning commission shall notify all property owners within two hundred feet (200') of the applicant property by
certified mail of the request for special use permit and the meeting date, time and location at which the application is to be considered.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 284/318
2. Public notice shall be in accordance with public notice policy as set by the city council.
3. Signs conforming to city requirements shall be posted facing each means of public access bordering the applicant property. Signs
shall be posted and maintained by applicant. Notarized certification of signs being posted continuously for twenty one (21) days prior
to a planning and zoning commission meeting shall be provided by the applicant.
B. Public Hearings:
1. The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing for all special use permits.
2. A representative of the applicant must be present at the planning and zoning commission meeting for review of the application to
proceed. (Ord. 1000, 7-12-1999)
C. Approval:
1. The planning and zoning commission may recommend the approval of a special use permit, and may recommend that approval be
granted under such conditions necessary to carry out the intent of this chapter and to protect the health, welfare and safety of persons
and the value of property within the city.
2. All improvements to be made to property pursuant to a special use permit shall be approved only in accordance with the city's then
existing development standards for the zoning district in which the subject property is located.
3. The planning and zoning commission is an advisory body, and the approval or disapproval of special use permits and variances
related thereto will be determined by the city council. (Ord. 1010, 11-8-1999)
12-17-4: TERM OF PERMITS:
A. The planning and zoning commission may impose a time limit on the special use permit.
B. A special use permit shall be required to be resubmitted for approval should ownership of property change. Should a change of
ownership occur with a special use permit in place, the resubmission of the special use permit shall be reviewed under the requirements
in place at the time that the existing permit was approved.
C. Upon expiration of a special use permit, a new application for special use permit shall be required. The application shall be reviewed
under the special use requirements in existence at the time of the new application. (Ord. 1000, 7-12-1999)
12-17-5: REVOCATION:
A. If a certificate of occupancy is not issued and/or business registration within two (2) years of the special use permit, the special use
permit may be revoked by official action.
B. If a special use is discontinued for one year, the special use permit shall be revoked.
C. The city shall not be required to notify the landowner of any pending revocation or the change in status of the property due to action as
referenced in subsections A and B of this section.
D. The property owner shall bear sole responsibility for reapplying, renewing or maintaining the special use permit in good standing. (Ord.
1000, 7-12-1999)
12-17-6: REVISIONS TO SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
A. Minor Revisions:
1. Minor revisions staff shall recommend approval or denial to the city administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Additional parking or landscaping.
b. Minor revisions to parking, landscaping, lighting and signage.
c. Minor revisions to size and orientation of structures.
2. The city administrator may approve with staff recommendation minor revisions to the site plan.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 285/318
B. Major Revisions:
1. Major revisions to the special use permit shall require a public hearing and are subject to approval under the special use requirements
in existence at time of submission for approval of revisions.
2. Major revisions shall include, but not limited to:
a. Any change in land use or intensity.
b. Modifications of traffic volumes or patterns.
c. Increase in size of subject property.
d. Change in location, size or configuration of structures. (Ord. 1000, 7-12-1999)
12-17-7: RECORDING OF SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
A. Upon approval by the planning and zoning commission, the special use permit shall be issued by staff and shall include all conditions,
information, reference to site plan and all other provisions of the special use permit.
B. Staff shall indicate location of all special use permits on the official city zoning map by noting property with an "SU" designation and
reference date of expiration if applicable. Special uses are not considered a zone change. (Ord. 1000, 7-12-1999)
12-17-8: ADDITIONAL SPECIAL USE REQUIREMENTS:
A. General Conditions:
1. Access streets to applicant property shall be paved.
2. Access to applicant property shall be by primary streets or streets shown to be of principal service to commercial properties.
3. Parking areas shall be paved.
4. Municipal utilities shall be in place or extended to serve property.
5. A six foot (6') high visual barrier with twenty five foot (25') buffer area shall be required along any boundary common with residential
or multi-family property.
6. Buildings and structures shall not exceed the height limits as established in sections 12-4J-4 and 12-7-1 of this title.
7. Transmission and power towers shall have one additional foot of setback from lot lines in excess of the established setback for zoning
district for each foot of structure above thirty five feet (35'). (Ord. 1000, 7-12-1999)
8. Where a dwelling unit is proposed in a commercial building, evidence shall be provided to the city showing that the special use can
meet all building code, fire code and plumbing code requirements, including, but not limited to, such matters as fire separations,
access, exits, ventilation, and adequate water and sanitary sewer connections. (Ord. 1080, 11-10-2003)
B. Adult Bookstore/Video Store:
1. Such use shall have a property line a minimum of one thousand feet (1,000') from the property line of a:
a. School.
b. Church.
c. Nursery/daycare center.
d. Public park or recreation facility.
e. Residential zoning district.
2. Such use shall have a property line a minimum of five hundred feet (500') from the property line of a liquor establishment.
3. The operator/owner shall affix a sign to the exterior wall nearest the primary entrance warning in two inch (2") letters that the business
within is sexually oriented.
C. Adult Amusement Establishment:
1. Such use shall have a property line a minimum of one thousand feet (1,000') from the property line of a:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 286/318
a. School.
b. Church.
c. Nursery/daycare center.
d. Public park or recreation facility.
e. Residential zoning district.
2. Such use shall have a property line a minimum of five hundred feet (500') from the property line of a liquor establishment.
3. The operator/owner shall affix a sign to the exterior wall nearest the primary entrance warning in two inch (2") letters that the business
within is sexually oriented.
D. All Vehicle Service Areas: All facilities that shall be used for storage of vehicle parts, wrecked vehicles, or vehicles partially dismantled
for repair or salvage, shall be required to have a eight foot (8') high visual barrier around these areas.
E. Kennels: Kennel structures shall be a minimum of one thousand feet (1,000') from any residential zoning district.
F. Painting Shops:
1. Such uses shall have a property line a minimum of one hundred feet (100') from any residential zoning district.
2. Approval granted by fire department.
G. Welding Shops:
1. Such uses shall have a property line a minimum of five hundred feet (500') from any residential zoning district.
2. Approval granted by fire department.
3. All facilities that shall be used for storage of materials shall be required to have a six foot (6') high visual barrier around these areas.
H. Wrecker Service: Storage of vehicles or vehicle parts is not permitted. (Ord. 1000, 7-12-1999)
12-17-9: APPLICABILITY:
These regulations shall be binding upon all usages herein referenced except for those properties with usages established by a valid
business license at time of implementation of this chapter. Usages in existence by valid business license at time of implementation shall be
allowed to continue as per application of sections 12-17-4, 12-17-5 and subsection 12-17-6A of this chapter. Application of subsection 12-
17-6B of this chapter shall require business and/or property to be brought into compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 1000, 7-12-1999)
Chapter 18
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND DESIGN GUIDELINES
12-18-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The development standards and design guidelines articulate community design principles, standards and guidelines for development within
the city of Deming, in order to assist planners, designers and developers in understanding the city's minimum development and design
standards. These development standards and design guidelines are intended to enhance the city's overall value and appearance, and to
achieve creative, well designed and interesting projects. In addition, these standards are explicitly intended to promote water conservation
measures through the requirement of low water use and drought tolerant plant material. The standards and guidelines set out herein are
minimum requirements and, therefore, are not intended to restrict creative alternate solutions. (Ord. 1086, 6-14-2004)
12-18-2: LANDSCAPE STANDARDS:
A. Purpose And Intent: These standards are intended to be applied throughout the city as specified in the subsections that follow. These
standards are provided for the general health and welfare of the citizens of Deming through the conservation of water, reduction of air
pollution, and public safety. The intent is to achieve a high quality of appearance, to assure design compatibility, to promote character
and form, to promote water conservation, and to enhance the overall value of development to the community.
The conservation of water is deemed to be a key purpose to be achieved through the application of these landscape standards. The
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 287/318
standards set out in this section are designed to encourage the preservation of desirable native vegetation and the use of low water use
and drought tolerant plant material.
B. Applicability:
1. All City Development: The landscape standards specified in this section, unless otherwise excepted, shall apply to all development in
all use districts in the city of Deming.
2. New Uses, Buildings And Additions: Unless otherwise excepted, all new land uses, developments, buildings, structures, and all
additions to land uses, developments, buildings or structures of twenty five percent (25%) or more in terms of additional dwelling units,
gross floor area, building perimeter, either with a single addition or cumulative additions subsequent to the effective date hereof, shall
meet the requirements of this section.
3. Government Development: The landscape standards specified in this section do not apply to any government development and/or
uses.
4. Variance, Waiver: The city council, with the advice of the planning and zoning commission or city staff, may vary or waive any of the
standards set out in this section.
C. General Design Standards:
1. Landscape Plans:
a. Required; Specifications: Landscape plans are required by the city building inspector for parking areas and for all street landscape
borders, all interior landscape borders, and all vehicular entrances, as described in the subsections that follow, unless specifically
excepted by the planning and zoning commission or the city council. When required, the landscape plan submitted shall be drawn
at a legible scale, satisfactory to the city building inspector. The plan shall clearly describe the location, type, size and spacing of all
plant materials. The plan shall also indicate the height and canopy size of trees at maturity, and the height and spread of shrubs at
maturity. Other landscape features such as walls, fences, and pedestrian or bicycle walkways or trails shall also be shown.
Landscape plans are not required for individual single-family or two-family lots.
b. Land Devoted To Plant Material: The landscape plan shall clearly set out the area of a lot or block or other division of land that will
be devoted to plant material, such as turf, that is not a low water use/drought tolerant plant according to the "Low Water
Use/Drought Tolerant Plant List", published by the Arizona department of water resources-Tucson active management area (March
2002, or any later edition), and the plants listed for New Mexico climate area 3-south, in the publication entitled "The Enchanted
Xeriscape" available from the office of the state engineer, New Mexico (no date specified, but most recent edition is to be used).
c. Grading Information: Dependent upon the size and complexity of the proposed project and its potential impact upon neighboring
land uses, the city building inspector, or the planning and zoning commission, or the city council may require that the landscape
plan include necessary grading information such as, but not limited to:
(1) Grade changes across the site indicated at one foot (1') intervals;
(2) Percent slope across the site and the direction of the slope of paved areas;
(3) Existing grades on adjacent rights of way or site (where possible). If an adjacent right of way or site is under construction, the
proposed finished grades are to be shown.
2. Landscaping:
a. Water Conservation: All landscape plant material shall be low water use and drought tolerant except as specified in subsections D2,
D3 and E2 of this section. The following documents will be used by the city of Deming as accepted guidelines for low water
use/drought tolerant plants:
(1) "Low Water Use/Drought Tolerant Plant List", Arizona department of water resources-Tucson active management area, (March
2002 or any later editions).
(2) "The Enchanted Xeriscape, A Guide To Water-Wise Landscaping In New Mexico", office of the state engineer (no date specified,
but most recent edition at time of application of the provisions in this section is to be used).
b. Prohibited Plants: The following plants are prohibited in all developments in the city of Deming:
(1) European olive trees, all fruiting varieties.
(2) Fruitless mulberry trees.
(3) Salt cedar.
(4) Any plant listed on the "New Mexico Noxious Weed List" (September 20, 1999, as amended from time to time), published by the
New Mexico department of agriculture.
c. Installation: All required or proposed landscaping shall be installed as soon as practical and as soon as permitted by standard
seasonal planting practices.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 288/318
d. Additional Landscaping Required By Building Inspector: The city building inspector, in approving plans for development, may
require additional landscaping in specific situations when additional landscaping is necessary to maintain an established pattern
created by other existing landscaping in the surrounding area, or is necessary to provide a buffer between land uses or parts of land
uses, or is necessary to promote aesthetically pleasing, orderly, and harmonious development of the city.
e. Additional Landscaping Required By Planning And Zoning Commission: The city planning and zoning commission, when
considering a zoning ordinance amendment or variance, or a plan of subdivision, may recommend to city council, with the advice of
city staff, any additional landscaping it believes is necessary to maintain an established pattern created by other existing
landscaping in the surrounding area, or is necessary to provide a buffer between land uses or parts of land uses, or is necessary to
promote aesthetically pleasing, orderly, and harmonious development of the city.
3. Turf: Turf areas are generally prohibited in public street medians and boulevards. Turf is prohibited in street landscape borders
(subsections D5, E4 and F3 of this section), and in any required interior landscape border (subsections D6, E5 and F4 of this section).
Turf is prohibited as a landscape material in all new commercial and industrial developments and in any commercial or industrial
development where there is proposed an addition of twenty five percent (25%) or more in terms of gross floor area of buildings or
structures, and/or building perimeter, including additions that increase the total number of required parking spaces by twenty five
percent (25%) or more, either with a single addition or cumulative additions subsequent to the effective date hereof.
4. Irrigation:
a. Dependent upon the size and complexity of the proposed project and its potential impact on neighboring properties, an irrigation
plan may be required along with any landscape plan, required in subsection C1 of this section. The irrigation plan may include, but
shall not be limited to, such matters as:
(1) Type, size, and location of piping;
(2) Type, size, and location of irrigation heads;
(3) Type and location of backflow prevention devices, valves and controllers;
(4) Source of irrigation water, whether potable or reclaimed; and
(5) Calculations demonstrating the matching of application rates with infiltration rates as required in subsection C4d of this section.
b. An automatic irrigation system is required for all planting areas.
c. All irrigation water shall be retained on site.
d. The design of irrigation systems and irrigation schedules shall attempt to match application rates with infiltration rates in order to
minimize runoff and reduce evaporation.
e. Rain sensing and moisture sensing devices are encouraged.
5. Vehicle Parking Areas: All parking areas, excluding parking structures, with twenty five (25) or more parking spaces associated with
new construction, and all additions of twenty five (25) or more parking spaces to existing parking areas, excluding parking structures,
in all developments in all use districts shall be landscaped. Industrial developments may be exempted by application of the developer,
unless required by the city council.
a. Minimum Number Of Trees Required: All parking areas as described in this subsection C5 shall provide a minimum of one
deciduous or evergreen shade tree, six (6) to eight feet (8') in height with a minimum trunk caliper of one inch (1") for every ten (10)
uncovered parking spaces or any fraction thereof. Trees must be evenly distributed throughout the parking area. Figure 1 of this
section illustrates how the trees may be arranged.
b. Landscape Islands: Landscape islands are required at the end of each and all parking rows and each island shall contain a
minimum of one shade tree per island pair with specifications as set out in subsection C5a of this section. Fifty percent (50%) of the
trees provided in such islands can be counted toward the minimum tree requirement. The length of the planter island shall be equal
to the length of the adjacent parking space. All planter islands shall be contained by concrete curbing a minimum of six inches (6")
above the elevation of the final layer of surrounding asphalt. Figure 1 of this section illustrates calculations for tree requirements
using the islands.
c. Ground Cover And/Or Rock Mulch Required: In addition to the shade trees required in subsection C5b of this section, all landscape
islands shall be landscaped as follows:
(1) A two inch (2") layer of low water use and drought tolerant ground cover, or rock mulch, or both.
d. Planter Islands Or Boxes: Where planter islands or planter boxes are used to separate two (2) rows of parking, or to separate a row
of parking from an aisle or driveway, the length of the planter shall be equal to the length of the parking row. Landscape planters
shall have a minimum width of five feet (5'). Such planter islands or planter boxes shall comply with the minimum number of trees
required in subsection C5a of this section, and shall include a two inch (2") layer of low water use and drought tolerant ground cover
or rock mulch. See figure 1 of this section.
e. Wheel Stops: Except as provided in subsection C5f of this section, wheel stops shall be used at every parking space that fronts a
landscape area or a pedestrian walkway. Wheel stops shall be installed a minimum of two and one-half feet (2.5') from the face of
any curb and shall be securely anchored to the surface of the parking area.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 289/318
f. Location Of Trees: Parking spaces may be designed so that the front of a vehicle overhangs into the planter island separating two
(2) rows of parking. In such cases, the required trees shall be located at the edge and between vehicle spaces such as the common
corner of four (4) perpendicular parking spaces that face each other. For a sample illustration of this, see figure 1 of this section.
g. Drip Irrigation: Parking lot planter islands and planter boxes shall be irrigated with drip irrigation only.
6. Existing Plant Materials:
a. The preservation and retention of existing plant material within vehicle parking areas, street landscape borders, interior landscape
borders, planting islands, and on site landscaping is encouraged provided such plant material is material specified in the guideline
documents described in subsection C2a of this section, and provided such plant material is not prohibited material as described in
subsection C2b of this section.
b. Credit for the preservation and retention of existing plant material may be given, at the sole discretion of city staff, the planning and
zoning commission or the city council, as appropriate. Credit may be given on an equal one to one basis for shade trees, shrubs,
and ground cover.
c. In order that city staff may make an informed decision with respect to giving a credit for the retention of existing plant material, the
landscape plan required by subsections C1a and C1b of this section shall include the type, location, size, and an opinion as to the
general health of the plants to be retained. Such opinion is to be provided by a person acceptable to city staff.
7. Storm Water Detention/Retention Ponds:
a. A storm water detention/retention pond is required for any new development, and for all plans of subdivision, or any addition or
expansion to any existing development that creates a need for a storm water detention/retention pond. The proponent of the
development shall be required to have a professional engineer, licensed by the state of New Mexico, prepare, submit to and have
approved by the planning and zoning commission a drainage study, and based on that study, the said professional engineer shall
prepare, submit to, and have approved by the planning and zoning commission the drainage plan and the design for any
detention/retention pond.
b. The drainage study referenced in subsection C7a of this section shall comply with the requirements of subsections 13-5-1B5 and
B6 of this code.
c. A drainage study and a drainage plan are required for all proposed plans of subdivision. The requirements for the drainage study
and the drainage plan are set out in subsections 13-5-1B5 and B6 of this code.
d. Upon completion of construction, the proponent shall have his/her professional engineer certify that the work was done in
accordance with the approved design.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 290/318
e. Where an on site detention/retention pond is to be used as part of a recreational space for a project, or where such pond is to be
located adjacent to and/or is visible from a public street, or where there is risk of soil erosion, the city may require that on site
detention/retention basins be landscaped. The proponent shall be required to prepare or have prepared a landscape plan that shall
be acceptable to city council, or the planning and zoning commission and/or the city building inspector. Some or all of the following
matters may be considered:
(1) To the extent possible, existing vegetation shall be retained, provided such vegetation is not plant material prohibited by
subsection C2b of this section.
(2) All plant material shall be low water use and drought tolerant and shall be plants listed in the guideline documents specified in
subsection C2a of this section.
(3) Credit for existing plant material shall be allowed in accordance with the provisions of subsections C6a through C6c of this
section.
(4) Ground cover may be required where the basin has slide slopes equal to or greater than two to one (2:1) (horizontal to vertical
distance), in order to minimize erosion.
8. Maintenance:
a. Maintenance of all required landscaping shall be the responsibility of the owner, lessee, heirs, assigns, agent, homeowners'
association, or other liable entity of the property, and shall consist of regular watering, pruning, mowing (where turf is allowed),
fertilizing, weed removal, and maintenance of the irrigation system and any landscape architectural features such as walls, fences,
planter boxes, and planter island curbs, and any seating areas. Such maintenance shall include landscaping that may be approved
for any part of a public right of way.
b. Dead vegetation shall be promptly replaced based on standard seasonal planting practices with healthy living plants in all required
landscaping areas.
D. Landscape Design Standards For Single-Family And Two-family Dwelling Developments: All new single-family and/or two-family
developments shall comply with the following standards:
1. Plant Material: Each new single-family or two-family dwelling lot shall employ only low water use and drought tolerant plant material
as specified in the guideline documents described in subsection C2a of this section.
2. Turf On Single- Or Two-Family Lot: Turf is permitted as a landscape material on any single-family or two-family lot, provided no more
than fifty percent (50%) of the remaining lot area (excluding concreted areas), to a maximum of three thousand (3,000) square feet is
planted in turf.
3. Turf On Common Areas: Where a common area (clubhouse, swimming pool or other recreational activities) is provided for use of all
residents in a plan of subdivision, a maximum of fifteen percent (15%) of the area actually devoted to the common area may be in turf.
4. Purchaser Notification Of Landscape Requirements: The landscape plans and grading information specified in subsections C1a, C1b,
and C1c of this section, and the irrigation plan specified in subsection C4 of this section are not required for individual lots in singlefamily
and two-family developments; however, the owner or subdivider of land proposed for subdivision shall be required to include in
any agreement of purchase and sale for any lot in the subdivision, a clause notifying the purchaser of the landscaping requirements of
subsections D1 and D2 of this section.
5. Street Landscape Borders: Street landscape borders are required for all new subdivisions or for any replat of existing subdivisions.
The following provisions shall apply:
a. Street landscape borders are required adjacent to urban principal arterial streets, or urban minor arterial streets or urban collector
streets, as designated by the city of Deming for all single-family and/or two-family developments in all new plans of subdivision, and
in existing plans of subdivision, where through an amendment to the subdivision plan and/or the zoning ordinance there is an
increase in the number of dwelling units of twenty five percent (25%) or more, either with a single increase or a cumulative increase
subsequent to the effective date hereof.
b. The street landscape border minimum width is ten feet (10') (see figure 2 of this section). The street landscape border is to be
located on site and measured from the street property line. Covered parking canopies or other structural canopies shall not
overhang into the street landscape border.
c. Within the street landscape border, deciduous or evergreen shade trees shall be provided in number equal to or greater than an
average of one shade tree per fifty (50) lineal feet, on center, of the site frontage length along the street. See figure 2 of this section.
d. All plant material shall be low water use and drought tolerant and such material shall be taken from the guideline documents listed
in subsection C2a of this section.
e. All shade trees shall be six (6) to eight feet (8') in height with a minimum trunk caliper of one inch (1"). Clustering of trees is allowed.
Figure 2 of this section illustrates one possible clustering alternative.
f. A minimum of two (2) shrubs per each required shade tree is recommended in the street landscape border.
g. The street landscape border area shall contain a two inch (2") layer of low water use and drought tolerant ground cover, or rock
mulch, or both.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 291/318
h. Existing drought tolerant material within the street landscape border area may be used to fulfill the landscape requirements in
accordance with the provisions of subsection C6 of this section.
i. Street landscape borders shall be irrigated with drip irrigation only.
6. Interior Landscape Border: An interior landscape border may be required by the city along the outer perimeter of a subdivision. The
width of such area shall be such that it maintains compatibility with existing adjacent area setbacks, and such that it provides
adequate separation between different land uses. Where such an interior landscape border is required it shall comply with the
requirements of subsections D5c through and including D5i of this section. Turf may be permitted in any interior landscape border.
E. Landscape Design Standards For Multiple Dwelling, Mobile Home Parks, Recreational Vehicle Parks, Tourist Or Trailer Camps, And
Institutional Developments:
1. Plant Material; Minimum Landscape Area: All multiple-dwelling developments, either in a plan of subdivision or on a parcel of land
outside of a plan of subdivision, all mobile home parks, all recreational vehicle parks, all tourist or trailer camps, and all institutional
developments shall employ only low water use and drought tolerant plant material in accordance with the guideline documents
specified in subsection C2a of this section. All of the aforementioned developments shall landscape a minimum of twenty five percent
(25%) of their lot or site area.
2. Turf On Lots: Turf is permitted as a landscape material provided that no more than twenty percent (20%) of the remaining lot area
(excluding concreted and paved areas) is planted in turf.
3. Turf On Common Areas: In addition to the provisions of subsection E2 of this section, where a common area (clubhouse, swimming
pool or other recreational activities) is provided for use of all residents in a multiple-family development, a maximum of fifteen percent
(15%) of the area actually devoted to the common area may be in turf.
4. Street Landscape Borders:
a. Street landscape borders are required adjacent to urban principal arterial streets, or urban minor arterial streets or urban collector
streets as designated by the city of Deming, for all multiple-dwelling developments, either in a new plan of subdivision or a replat of
an existing subdivision, or on a parcel of land outside of a plan of subdivision, all mobile home parks, all recreational vehicle parks,
all tourist or trailer camps, and all institutional developments, and all additions to foregoing developments, of twenty five percent
(25%) or more in terms of additional dwelling units, gross floor area, building perimeter, mobile home park spaces, recreational
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 292/318
vehicle spaces, tourist or trailer camp spaces, either with a single addition or cumulative additions subsequent to the effective date
hereof.
b. The street landscape border shall have a minimum width of ten feet (10'). The street landscape border is to be located on site and
measured from the street property line. Covered parking canopies or other structural canopies shall not overhang into the street
landscape border. See figure 3 of this section.
c. Within the street landscape border, deciduous or evergreen shade trees shall be provided in number equal to or greater than an
average of one shade tree per forty (40) lineal feet, on center, of the site frontage length along the street. See figure 3 of this
section.
d. All plant material shall be low water use and drought tolerant and such material shall be taken from the guideline documents listed
in subsection C2a of this section.
e. All shade trees shall be six (6) to eight feet (8') in height with a minimum trunk caliper of one inch (1"). Clustering of trees is allowed.
Figure 3 of this section illustrates one possible clustering alternative.
f. A minimum of two (2) shrubs per each required shade tree is recommended in the street landscape border.
g. The street landscape border area shall contain a two inch (2") layer of low water use and drought tolerant ground cover, or rock
mulch, or both.
h. Existing drought tolerant material within the street landscape border area may be used to fulfill the landscape requirements in
accordance with the provisions of subsection C6 of this section.
i. Street landscape borders shall be irrigated with drip irrigation only.
j. Where a row of parking in a vehicle parking area abuts the street landscape border, the landscape requirements of subsections E4b
through E4i of this section shall govern.
5. Interior Landscape Borders:
a. Interior landscape borders are not mandatory for multiple-dwelling developments, mobile home parks, recreational vehicle parks,
tourist or trailer camps, and institutional developments, but may be required by city council with the advice of the planning and
zoning commission or the city staff in situations where adjacent land uses may be impacted negatively by a proposed multipledwelling
development, mobile home park, recreational vehicle park, tourist or trailer camp, and institutional developments, or where
some landscape screening is deemed necessary. Where an interior landscape border is required, such borders shall be provided in
accordance with the following standards:
(1) Figure 3 of this section shall serve only as an example and recommendation of the manner in which interior borders might be
landscaped with regard to spacing of trees, clustering of trees, width of the border where adjacent land uses are the same, and
width of the border where adjacent land uses are different.
(2) Where interior landscape borders are required, such borders shall comply with the provisions of subsections E4d and E4f
through E4i inclusive of this section shall apply.
(3) All shade trees shall be six (6) to eight feet (8') in height with a minimum trunk caliper of one inch (1").
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 293/318
F. Landscape Design Standards For Commercial And Industrial Development:
1. Minimum Landscape Area; Plant Material: All commercial and industrial development shall landscape a minimum of twenty percent
(20%) of their lot or site area. All commercial and industrial development shall use only low water use and drought tolerant plant
material in accordance with the guideline documents described in subsection C2a of this section.
2. Turf: Turf is not a permitted landscape material for any commercial or industrial development.
3. Street Landscape Borders:
a. A street landscape border shall be provided by all commercial development and all industrial development, and all additions to
commercial or industrial developments of twenty five percent (25%) or more in terms of gross floor area, building perimeter, either
with a single addition or cumulative additions subsequent to the effective date hereof, adjacent to any urban principal arterial
streets, or urban minor arterial streets, or urban collector streets as designated by the city of Deming.
b. The street landscape border shall have a minimum width of ten feet (10'). The street landscape border is to be located on site and
measured from the street property line. Covered parking canopies or other structural canopies shall not overhang into the street
landscape border. See figure 4 of this section.
c. Within the street landscape border, deciduous or evergreen shade trees shall be provided in number equal to or greater than an
average of one shade tree per thirty five (35) lineal feet, on center, of the site frontage length along the streets. See figure 4 of this
section.
d. All plant material shall be low water use and drought tolerant and such material shall be taken from the guideline documents listed
in subsection C2a of this section.
e. All shade trees shall be six (6) to eight feet (8') in height with a minimum trunk caliper of one inch (1"). Clustering of trees is
permitted. Figure 4 of this section illustrates one possible clustering alternative.
f. A minimum of two (2) shrubs per each required shade tree is recommended in the street landscape border.
g. The street landscape border area shall contain a two inch (2") layer of low water use and drought tolerant ground cover, or rock
mulch, or both.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 294/318
h. Existing drought tolerant material within the street landscape border area may be used to fulfill the landscape requirements in
accordance with the provisions of subsection C6 of this section.
i. Street landscape borders shall be irrigated with drip irrigation only.
j. Where a row of parking in a vehicle parking area abuts the street landscape border, the landscape requirements of subsections F3b
through F3i of this section shall govern.
4. Interior Landscape Borders:
a. Interior landscape borders for commercial and industrial development are not mandatory, but may be required by city council with
the advice of the planning and zoning commission or city staff in situations where adjacent land uses may be impacted negatively
by a commercial or industrial development, or by additions to commercial or industrial developments, or where some landscape
screening is deemed necessary. Where an interior landscape border is required, such borders shall be provided in accordance with
the following provisions:
(1) Figure 4 of this section shall serve only as an example and recommendation of the manner in which interior borders may be
landscaped with regard to spacing of trees, clustering of trees, and the width of the border.
(2) Where interior landscape borders are required, such borders shall comply with the provisions of subsections F3d and F3f
through F3i inclusive of this section.
(3) All shade trees shall be six (6) to eight feet (8') in height with a minimum trunk caliper of one inch (1").
5. Vehicular Entrance Standards:
a. Generally, there shall be no design standards applicable to vehicular entrances for commercial or industrial developments. Such
design requirements shall only be considered for commercial or industrial developments with a gross floor area of twenty five
thousand (25,000) square feet or greater, or where any addition to existing commercial or industrial uses either a single addition or
cumulative additions subsequent to the effective date hereof results in a gross floor area of twenty five thousand (25,000) square
feet or more. In this situation, city council, on the advice of the planning and zoning commission, or city staff, may require the
application of design standards where some degree of compatibility with adjacent developments is desirable, or where such
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 295/318
standards will help implement an established or desired development theme, or where it is deemed necessary or desirable in the
public interest. Where it is determined that such vehicular design standards are necessary, the following provisions and
considerations may be used as general design guidelines:
(1) A landscaped median shall be provided for the full length of the vehicular entrance and driveway.
(2) Figure 4 of this section shall serve only as an example of the manner in which commercial and industrial vehicular entrances
may be designed with regard to median location, provision of a tapered median with suggested length and width. The spacing of
trees as suggested for the interior borders on figure 4 of this section may be considered for the landscaping of the vehicular
entrances.
(3) All shade trees should be six (6) to eight feet (8') in height and one inch (1") in caliper. The provisions of subsections F3d and
F3f through F3i inclusive of this section may be considered for the landscape treatment of the entrance.
G. Modification Procedure: If an owner, authorized agent of the owner, or any other legal entity believes that strict conformance to the
landscape standards cannot be met because of some unique or unusual hardship or circumstance, the owner, authorized agent or other
legal entity may apply, in writing, to the city council for a waiver, or submit an alternative design. The owner, authorized agent or other
legal entity must demonstrate clearly and satisfactorily to the city council why compliance is not possible and how the proposed
alternative meets the intent of the regulations. Financial hardship shall not be considered a reason to waive the landscape standards.
The city council may seek the advice of the planning and zoning commission and/or city staff. The city council may deny, approve, or
approve with conditions or modifications, in writing, the request for waiver within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the request by the city.
(Ord. 1086, 6-14-2004)
Title 13
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
13-1-1: PURPOSE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of these regulations is to assure sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation; to provide for the
harmonious development of the city; to provide adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light and air; and to provide proper
distribution of population, in order to create conditions favorable to health, safety and general welfare of the citizens.
B. Applicable Laws: Authorization for the planning and zoning commission to adopt subdivision regulations is given in New Mexico Statutes
Annotated section 3-19-5 et seq.
C. Applicability Of Regulations: These regulations shall apply to subdivisions within the limits of incorporation for the city. (Ord. 989, 2-8-
1999)
13-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of these regulations, the terms stated in this title shall have the meanings indicated, together with the following additional
terms:
CITY: The city of Deming, New Mexico.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The plan, or a part thereof, which may consist of several maps, data, etc., adopted by the city, indicating the
general locations recommended for major motorways, parks and other open spaces, public building sites, routes for public utilities and
zoned districts.
CUL-DE-SAC: A residential street with one end open for public vehicular and pedestrian access and the other end terminating in a vehicular
turnaround.
DECIDUOUS SHADE TREE: A tree that sheds all its leaves every year at a certain season.
DROUGHT TOLERANT PLANTS: Low water use plants that, after they are established, can survive with little or no supplemental watering.
EASEMENT: A right granted to use certain land for a special purpose not inconsistent with the general property rights of the owner.
EROSION: The detachment and movement of soil particles or fragments by water, wind, ice, and/or gravity.
EVERGREEN TREE: A tree, either broadleaf or conifer, which maintains at least a portion of its leaves or needles throughout the year.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 296/318
FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT: An approved plan prepared for recording by a professional surveyor licensed in the state of New Mexico.
GROUND COVER: Plants grown for their low spreading capabilities for the protection of soils, to prevent growth of weeds, and for aesthetic
purposes.
LANDSCAPING: The combination of elements such as trees, shrubs, ground covers, vines and other organic material for the express
purpose of creating an attractive and pleasing environment. Plazas, patios, art, decorative courtyards, decorative walkways, decorative
lighting and decorative furniture may also be considered landscape elements.
OFFICIAL MAP: An official map, adopted by the city council showing existing and proposed streets.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: A plan submitted for comment and approval by a professional surveyor licensed in the state of New Mexico showing
existing features of the land and proposed street, utility and lot layout within and adjacent to a subdivision.
RESUBDIVISION: The replatting of any lot or parcels, or group of lots or parcels, by a clear and understandable description of the legal
boundaries of such lot(s), which results in the division of land into two (2) or more tracts, by any means including changes in property lines
for the purpose of: a) leasing of property; b) transferring of title; or c) conveying the use of property to another person.
RIGHT OF WAY: A general term denoting land, property, or interest therein usually in a strip, acquired for, devoted to or dedicated for
transportation purposes and municipal utility purposes.
RUNOFF: Irrigation water that is not absorbed by the soil to which it is applied and which flows onto other areas. Runoff may result from
water that is applied at too great a rate (application exceeds infiltration rates) or where a severe slope exists.
SETBACK OR BUILDING LINE: A line, generally parallel to the street line, beyond which the vertical wall of a building may not project and
beyond which no part of the building or structure may overhang more than eighteen inches (18").
SOIL: All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of whatever origin that overlies bedrock and can be readily excavated.
STORM WATER DETENTION: A system, method or facility used for the on site temporary storage of storm water runoff for subsequent
release, at controlled rates, into downstream conveyance systems.
STORM WATER RETENTION: A system, method, or facility for the on site storage of storm water runoff which is not subsequently
discharged into a downstream conveyance system; but, rather may be consumed by evapotranspiration, domestic reuse, or drained into the
subsurface through infiltration.
STREET: A public way, which has been dedicated or reserved by plat, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to
abutting property. Streets are classified by function as follows:
A. Local Street: A street intended to serve and provide access exclusively to the properties abutting thereon and not connecting with
other streets in such a manner as to encourage through traffic.
B. Secondary Street: A street connecting local residential streets to each other, to community facilities and to primary or major
thoroughfares, serving primarily neighborhood traffic.
C. Primary Or Major Thoroughfares: A street with considerable continuity connecting district centers which serve or will eventually serve,
large volumes of traffic.
SUBDIVIDER: A person who is the registered owner or authorized agent of the registered owner, of land proposed for subdivision.
SUBDIVISION: A. For the area of land within the corporate boundaries of Deming, the division of land into two (2) or more parts by platting
or by metes and bounds description into tracts for the purposes set forth in subsection C of this definition.
B. For the area of land within the planning and platting jurisdiction of the city of Deming as defined by New Mexico Statutes Annotated
section 3-19-5, the division of land into two (2) or more parts by platting or by metes and bounds description into tracts for the
purposes set forth in subsection C of this definition.
C. The division of land for the purpose of:
1. Sale for building purpose;
2. Laying out a municipality or any part thereof;
3. Adding to a municipality;
4. Laying out of lots;
5. Resubdivision.
TURF: Any grassy area maintained by frequent mowing, fertilization and watering used for lawns and playing fields.
WATER HARVESTING: A system, and/or facilities for the collection of rain and storm water for reuse for domestic purposes.
XERISCAPE: A creative method of landscaping that emphasizes water conservation. This is accomplished by following sound landscaping
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 297/318
practices such as planning and design, soil improvements, limited turf areas, use of mulches, use of low water demand plants, efficient
irrigation, and appropriate and regular maintenance. When combined, these practices can produce an attractive, efficient, sustainable
landscaping arrangement for all residential, commercial, industrial, public and institutional developments. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999; amd. Ord.
1089, 6-14-2004)
Chapter 2
PROCEDURES
13-2-1: SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
In planning and developing a subdivision, the subdivider shall comply with the general principles and requirements set forth in these
regulations. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
13-2-2: PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURE:
A. Meet With Planning And Zoning Commission: In order that general agreement may be reached prior to any considerable investment in
land planning, the subdivider shall meet with the planning and zoning commission or its designated representatives prior to formal
application to discuss his plans, and shall prepare suitable sketches and plans sufficient to give a general understanding of his proposal.
B. Information From Commission: The planning and zoning commission or its designated representatives shall inform the subdivider as to
the general suitability of the plans, and as to any modification it deems desirable and shall express its reasons for any required
modifications and indicate areas that appear to be acceptable for phased development. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
13-2-3: APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT:
A. Submission Of Plat And Supplementary Materials: On reaching conclusions as recommended above regarding general program
objectives, the subdivider shall prepare and submit a preliminary plat together with improvement plans and other supplementary material
as specified in section 13-5-1 of this title. The preliminary plat with specified supplementary material shall be submitted to the planning
and zoning commission with written application for approval at least twenty one (21) days prior to the meeting at which it is to be
considered.
B. Notification Of Adjacent Landowners: The subdivider shall ascertain, according to the latest available tax list, the names and addresses
of the owner of all parcels adjacent to the subdivision. The planning and zoning commission shall notify such owners by certified mail
and public notice of the application to subdivide the property concerned and of the meeting at which the application is to be considered.
C. Review: The planning and zoning commission shall review the preliminary plat and other material submitted, for conformity with these
regulations, covering the requirements of these regulations point-by-point and shall consult with the city engineer and officials of any
other department concerned.
D. Action:
1. Within the time frame of two (2) normally scheduled meetings of submission or resubmission, the planning and zoning commission
shall act thereon as submitted, stating its approval, conditional approval or disapproval.
2. The action of the planning and zoning commission shall be noted on three (3) copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and attached
to any conditions determined. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider, one delivered to the city engineer and the third retained by
the planning and zoning commission.
E. Nature Of Approval: Approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat, but rather an expression of approval of
the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final plat. The final plat will be submitted for the approval
of the planning and zoning commission upon fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
13-2-4: APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT:
A. Application: Upon completion of any required modifications required by the planning and zoning commission, the subdivider may apply
for approval of the final subdivision plat. Such application shall be made within twelve (12) months after approval of the preliminary plat;
otherwise, unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the planning and zoning commission, such approval shall become
null and void. Application for approval of the final plat shall be submitted in writing to the planning and zoning commission at least twenty
one (21) days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. Drawings and information accompanying such application shall be as
described in section 13-5-2 of this title.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 298/318
B. Review: The planning and zoning commission shall review the final plat for conformance with the approved, or conditionally approved,
preliminary plat, and all other requirements of these rules and regulations.
C. Action: Within the time frame of two (2) normally scheduled meetings of submission of complete information required for approval of the
final plat, the planning and zoning commission shall approve or disapprove the plat.
D. Filing With County: Upon fulfillment of the requirements per chapter 6 of this title, the subdivider shall file the final plat with the Luna
County clerk and so notify the planning and zoning commission by completing the files of the planning and zoning commission with a
certified copy of the filed plat. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
Chapter 3
DESIGN STANDARDS
13-3-1: SCOPE OF PROVISIONS:
A. Unsuitable Land: Land deemed by the planning and zoning commission to be unsuitable for human habitation because of health or
sanitary or other problems shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for such other uses as may involve danger to health, life or
property, but such land within the plat shall be set aside for such uses as are appropriate to existing conditions.
B. Conformance With This Code, Other Codes: Design standards for subdivisions shall conform to the provisions of this code, and any and
all applicable codes, rules, regulations and standards.
C. Most Restrictive Or Higher Standard Provisions Apply:
1. When conflict between two (2) or more provisions of these subdivision regulations exists, the most restrictive provision shall apply.
2. Conflict with any local, state or federal code or law that which imposes a greater duty, standard, or requirement than those contained
herein shall supersede the provisions of these subdivision regulations. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
13-3-2: STREETS AND ROADS:
A. General Requirements:
1. The development plan shall conform to the official map.
2. The street layout shall be logically related to the topography of the land, especially with the relation to grades and storm runoff.
3. Proposed streets shall provide for appropriate continuation or completion of any existing streets that come to the boundary line of
adjoining property unless otherwise recommended by the planning and zoning commission.
4. Local residential streets should be so planned as to discourage use by nonlocal traffic.
5. Centerline of streets opening into opposite side of another street shall either intersect or be separated from each other by at least one
hundred twenty five feet (125').
6. Intersecting local and secondary streets shall not empty into the same side of a major thoroughfare at intervals less than three
hundred feet (300').
7. Streets ordinarily shall intersect as nearly at right angles as is practical.
8. Suitable access and street openings for the subdivision of adjacent unsubdivided land shall be provided.
9. For cul-de-sac streets, five hundred feet (500') shall be considered desirable maximum length unless topography, density or other
factors justify a greater distance. Such streets shall be provided with a turnaround having a minimum property line radius of fifty feet
(50').
10. Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two (2) streets shall be avoided.
11. Where any street intersection will involve topographic features of existing vegetation inside any lot corner that might create a traffic
hazard through limiting visibility, such ground and/or vegetation shall be cut in conjunction with the grading of the public right of way to
the extent deemed necessary to provide adequate sight distance and vision clearance area created at the lot corner for a distance of
thirty feet (30') back from the corner which shall be kept clear of all structures and vegetation exceeding a height of thirty inches (30").
12. Any roads or alleys temporarily dead-ended because of authorized stage development shall be provided with a suitable, all-weather
turnaround on the property of the owner, the use of such turnaround to be guaranteed to the public until such time as the road is
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 299/318
extended.
B. Street Alignment, Horizontal And Vertical:
1. The minimum radius at the center line for horizontal curves shall be:
Primary streets 500 feet
Secondary streets 300 feet
Local streets 150 feet
2. Adequate sight distances should be provided with respect to both horizontal and vertical alignment. Measured along the center line,
this should be:
CREST (K) SAG (K)
Primary streets 46 45
Secondary streets 32 35
Local roads 25 29
C. Street And Alley Right-Of-Way Widths:
1. Street and alley right-of-way widths shall not be less than as follows:
Type Of Street Right Of Way
Local 50 feet
Secondary 80 feet
Primary 100 feet
2. Alleys will be required. Alleys at the rear of commercial zoned areas shall be a minimum of twenty five feet (25') in width. Alleys in
residential zoned areas shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') in width.
3. A minimum radius of twenty five feet (25') shall be required at the edge of alley surface material at all intersections with other alleys or
streets. This edge radius shall align with back of curb at street intersections.
4. The planning and zoning commission for parking in commercial or multi-family residential areas may require additional street width.
5. The platting of alleys at the edges of a new subdivision, adjoining unsubdivided land, shall be not less than twenty feet (20').
D. Controlled Access Provisions: Whenever primary streets are designated as controlled access on the official plan, the subdivision layout
shall be designed and deeds restricted so as to limit access to the highway as follows: lots should front on a service drive paralleling the
primary street and entering it at intervals, or front on a parallel street and back onto the highway with no access rights. If industrial,
commercial, or multi-family developments are planned fronting on such highways, the lot width should be not less than five hundred feet
(500'), there should be only one access point and egress point per lot from the highway, and the plot plan shall be approved by the
planning and zoning commission.
E. Reserve Strips: Creation of reserve strips, prohibiting access to lots or streets, shall not be permitted.
F. Street Names: The subdivider may choose street names subject to the approval of the planning and zoning commission. No street names
shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets except for an extension of an existing street. The
use of given and surnames shall not be acceptable, except when used in historical reference.
G. Street Cross Section, Curbing, And Paving Standards; General Design:
1. Local And Secondary Streets: Street cross sections for local and secondary streets shall be in accordance with the typical city
standard cross sections. Where there are alternatives, the planning and zoning commission may designate the cross section to be
used on the advice of the city engineer. All details of the cross section, including crown, curb, pavement, subgrade and roadside
ditches, shall conform to the designated cross section.
2. Primary Streets: Street cross sections for primary streets shall be designed by the city engineer and approved by the planning and
zoning commission. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 300/318
13-3-3: SIDEWALKS:
Sidewalks shall be required. Sidewalks on individual lots may be constructed at the time of lot development. All curb returns and alley
accesses shall be constructed in conjunction with street construction.
A. Location: Sidewalks shall be on the rights of way and, where conditions permit, adjacent to the edge thereof. Sidewalk width and
location, within a block, shall be consistent and align with existing sidewalks.
B. Width: Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet (4') in width on streets designated as local, a minimum of five feet (5') on all other street
designations, and shall provide a minimum of three feet (3') access through obstacles.
C. Thickness: Sidewalks shall be of Portland cement concrete and a minimum of four inches (4") thick, except that they should be six
inches (6") thick at driveway crossings.
D. Corners: All corners shall have handicapped ramps installed per latest requirements.
E. Entrances: All alley entrances and driveways shall be handicapped accessible.
F. Crosswalks: All crosswalks shall be handicapped accessible. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
13-3-4: LOTS AND BLOCKS:
A. Size And Width Of Lots:
1. Proportions: Where practical, the depth of a lot shall not exceed three (3) times the width. This provision shall be strictly applied in
relation to lots not restricted to use for single-family residences. Lots too shallow for building shall likewise be avoided.
2. Minimums: Lot size and width shall be as controlled by the provisions of zoning regulations. In no case shall a lot frontage in
residential areas be less than fifty feet (50').
B. Access To Streets: Every lot shall abut on a street or other right of way as may be approved by the planning and zoning commission.
C. Side Lot Lines: Side lot lines shall normally be approximately at right angles or radial to the street line.
D. Corner Lot; Extra Width: Corner lots shall be sufficiently wide to allow the required setback on both street frontages.
E. Double Frontage: Double frontage lots shall ordinarily be prohibited. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
13-3-5: INTERSECTION DISTANCES ON LOCAL STREETS:
The length between intersections on local streets shall have a minimum length of three hundred feet (300') with a maximum length of nine
hundred feet (900'). Modifications of the above requirements may be authorized in multiple-family, commercial and industrial developments.
(Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
13-3-6: DRAINAGE STUDY AND DRAINAGE PLAN:
A drainage study and a drainage plan dealing with storm water drainage are required for all proposed subdivisions in the city of Deming.
The drainage study and drainage plan shall be submitted at the preliminary plat stage to the planning and zoning commission. Dependent
upon the size and complexity of the subdivision, this requirement may be waived, modified or varied by the planning and zoning
commission or the city council. Requests to waive or vary or modify this requirement shall be made in writing by the subdivider or his/her
authorized agent, and shall set out the reasons in support of the request. (Ord. 1089, 6-14-2004)
13-3-7: STREETLIGHTS:
Streetlights shall be installed per city requirements. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 301/318
Chapter 4
GENERAL PROVISIONS
13-4-1: BUILDING LINES AND UTILITY EASEMENTS:
A. Building Lines: The building setback line shall not be less than required in the zoning regulations.
B. Utility Easements: Utility easements shall be a minimum width of ten feet (10'). All final plats presented to the planning and zoning
commission shall be accompanied with evidence provided by the subdivider that all utilities concur that easements indicated on the plat
are suitable for their servicing the area or that no easements are required. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
13-4-2: DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS FOR PUBLIC USE:
The subdivider shall pay to the city a sum to be calculated upon the total front footage of the lots within the subdivision at the rate of one
dollar ($1.00) per foot for the purpose of the acquisition by the city of land for public recreation or park purposes, prior to the filing of the final
plat with the county clerk. Where the total area of the subdivision is seventy (70) acres or more in size, the subdivider shall have, upon
approval of the city, the option to provide areas comprising or constituting three percent (3%) of the total area to be subdivided, to be
dedicated to the city for use as recreation, park, or playground purposes. The city shall reserve the right to accept dedication of lands in lieu
of financial payment. The subdivider shall dedicate the needed portion of this area being subdivided for such purposes indicated upon the
final plat. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
13-4-3: DEDICATIONS OF STREETS AND WAYS:
All streets and rights of way shall be irrevocably offered for dedication by recording of the final plat. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
13-4-4: SEWER FACILITIES:
A. Installation Required: All subdivision development shall be required to install a sanitary sewer system, designed by a professional
engineer licensed in the state, that shall be connected to the city sanitary sewer system. The city engineer shall approve such systems.
B. Storm Water Prohibited: No storm water shall be allowed to enter sanitary sewers. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
13-4-5: WATER SUPPLY AND FIRE HYDRANTS:
A system shall be designed by a professional engineer licensed in the state to furnish an adequate supply of water to each lot, with
adequate main sizes and fire hydrant locations to meet the association of fire underwriters' specifications for a protected area. The city
engineer shall approve such systems. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
13-4-6: SUMMARY SUBDIVISIONS:
A. Definition; Authority: A "summary subdivision" is a subdivision that does not increase the number of lots or parcels in an existing
subdivision and includes combining two (2) or more lots or parcels into a single lot or parcel, and the division of a lot or parcel for the
purpose of combining with other lots or parcels. Approval of proposed summary subdivisions may be made by the city administrator or
his designee.
B. Preapplication Procedure:
1. To minimize expenditures by a subdivider on a summary subdivision which may or may not be approved, no application for approval
of a subdivision as a summary subdivision shall be made without a prior meeting between the subdivider and the city administrator or
his designee. In determining whether to grant approval of a summary subdivision application, the city administrator or designee may
require the subdivider to submit sketches and plans sufficient to allow an analysis of the proposed subdivision.
2. The city administrator or designee may require modifications to the subdivision proposal. The city administrator or designee shall
provide the subdivider with the reasons for rejection of the proposal or for any required modifications.
C. Application Requirements: The submission of a summary subdivision plat to the city administrator shall constitute application for approval
of the summary subdivision plat. The plat shall be labeled as a replat of an existing subdivision and comply with subsections 13-5-2A1,
A2, A4, B1, B2, B3, B4, B6, B8, B9 and B10 of this title and shall include all of the following:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 302/318
1. Legal description of parcels included in the summary subdivision;
2. Name of the existing subdivision from which the summary subdivision is to be made;
3. Dated and notarized signatures of the owners of the property;
4. Dated signature of the city administrator;
5. Signed certification of a professional surveyor licensed by the state of New Mexico;
6. Signature of the Luna County clerk upon filing;
7. Reference to the county clerk's reception or book and page numbers of the final plat of the existing subdivision and the most recent
replat of that subdivision, if any.
D. Required Improvements: A summary subdivision shall comply with all zoning and setback requirements in effect at the time the summary
subdivision is approved, and shall comply with all improvement standards and requirements in effect at the time the existing subdivision
was approved. (Ord. 1035, 11-13-2000)
13-4-7: ALTERNATIVE SUBDIVISIONS:
A. Definition: An "alternative subdivision" is the division of one lot into two (2) lots through the use of variances granted by the city council.
B. Application: An application for an alternative subdivision shall be made to the planning and zoning commission for review and
recommendation to the city council.
C. Required Improvements: No alternative subdivision application shall be made to the planning and zoning commission without a
statement by the city administrator or designee as to whether the existing infrastructure on the site is adequate for the proposed level of
development. The city administrator or designee may require the subdivider to submit sketches and plans sufficient to allow an analysis
of the proposed subdivision. (Ord. 1035, 11-13-2000)
13-4-8: VARIANCES:
A. Findings By Commission: Where the planning and zoning commission finds that hardships may result from strict compliance with these
regulations, the planning and zoning commission may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public
interest secured. Provided that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the city's master plan, zoning
regulations, subdivision regulations, and any other applicable ordinances or regulations; or have adverse financial impact upon the city.
B. Conditions: In granting variances and modifications, the planning and zoning commission may require such conditions as will, in their
judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the city's master plan, zoning regulations, subdivision regulations, and any other
applicable ordinances or regulations. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
13-4-9: FULL DISCLOSURE PROVISIONS:
A. Full Disclosure To Potential Buyers: It shall be unlawful for the owner/seller of any real estate within the city limits of the city of Deming, to
fail to disclose in writing to the purchaser, within three (3) business days of the signing of any contract or agreement to purchase real
property, the following information:
1. All protective covenants, if applicable to the real property purchased, which are effective as of the date such contract or agreement is
signed.
2. All applicable zoning for the real estate to be purchased and all applicable zoning of contiguous land surrounding the real property
that is to be purchased; except for real estate to be purchased within a subdivision, then the owner/seller shall provide all applicable
zoning of contiguous land surrounding the subdivision and information as to where a prospective buyer can receive additional
information about zoning within the city of Deming.
3. Landscape requirements from subsections 12-18-2D1, D2, and D3 of this code in force and effect as of the date of the signing of any
contract or agreement to purchase real property.
Purchaser(s) shall have up to five (5) business days after the date written disclosure to purchaser(s) shall be disclosed to rescind the
contract or agreement to purchase said real estate.
B. Exceptions To Full Disclosure Provisions:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 303/318
1. Purchaser(s) may exempt seller from any and all requirements of subsections A1 and/or A2 of this section by expressing said
intention by written agreement; or
2. The owner(s)/seller(s) and the purchaser(s) of real property within the city limits of the city of Deming may waive the disclosure
requirements contained in subsections A1 and/or A2 of this section upon execution of a stipulated mutual agreement, executed in
writing by both the owner/seller and the purchaser, waiving the disclosure requirements of subsections A1 and/or A2 of this section.
C. Definition Of Owner(s)/Seller(s): "Owner/seller" includes, but is not limited to, owners or sellers of real property, developers of
subdivisions, builders or any other designation of owner/seller, including persons or entities who are validly empowered by an executed
power of attorney to act as attorney in fact for an owner/seller, any contracted agent for the owner/seller, or any attorney retained on
behalf of an owner/seller.
D. Definition Of Business Days: "Business days" are defined as Monday through Friday and exclude Saturday, Sunday and any legal
holiday observed by the state of New Mexico.
E. Full Disclosure Form: Exhibit A is a "full disclosure form", which may be used by the owner/seller and purchaser, and meets the
requirements of this section:
EXHIBIT A
FULL DISCLOSURE FORM
INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE TO SECTION 13-4-9
OF THE CODE OF MUNICIPAL ORDINANCES
NOTICE TO OWNER/SELLER & PURCHASER
All Owner(s)/Seller(s) and Purchaser(s) of the herein described real property shall sign this completed Full Disclosure Form
PRIOR to signing any contract or agreement to purchase the real property defined herein. (City of Deming Code, Section 13-
4-9.)
Each Disclosure Item of this form must contain at least one entry in order for this Disclosure Form to be considered
complete.
Purchaser(s) should sign only a fully completed form and should read and understand the contents of this form BEFORE
signing it. Verbal assurances that may have been made may have no standing if at variance with the contents of this form.
Legal council should be obtained before signing this form if there is any information not understood by the Purchaser(s).
ITEM 1: The Owner/Seller provides the following legal description of the real property to be conveyed:
(Enter the legal description in this space. If additional space is required, continue the description on a separate sheet with sufficient
identification to relate it to this description on this particular disclosure form. Also indicate in this space if a continuation sheet is
attached.)
ITEM 2: Protective Covenants information was disclosed by Owner/Seller as follows:
(Owner(s)/Seller(s) & Purchaser(s) initial the appropriate box below)
(Owner/Seller)(Purchaser)
a. Purchaser HAS RECEIVED a copy of all protective covenants in force/effect and applicable to the above-described real
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 304/318
property as of the date this Disclosure Form is signed.
b. Purchaser HAS NOT received a copy of protective covenants because the Owner/Seller certifies there are no protective
covenants in force/effect or applicable to the above-reference real property as of the date of this Disclosure Form is signed.
c. Purchaser DECLINES to have owner/seller provide any protective covenant information concerning the above referenced
real property and Owner/ Seller is exempted from the requirements of Section 13-4-9A1.
d. Purchaser and Owner/Seller have stipulated by written agreement that Owner/Seller is exempted from the requirements
of Section 13-4-9A1.
e. Owner Seller agrees to provide a copy of all protective covenants in force /effect and applicable to the above described
real property within three business days of the date this form is signed by Purchaser
NOTICE TO PURCHASER: It is the Purchaser's responsibility to verify information concerning any protective covenants
prior to closing the real estate transaction. Verification may be obtained from the Luna County Clerk's office at 700 South
Silver Street, Deming, NM, 88030.
ITEM 3: Owner/Seller has identified the above-described real property as zoned within one of the following:
(Owner/Seller must initial the appropriate block below)
Zoning Classification Zoning Definition
a.ASingle Family Dwelling
b.A-1Single Family Dwelling
c.A-3Single Family Dwelling
d.A-4Single Family Dwelling
e.A-5Use District
f.BMulti-Family Dwelling
g.B-1Multi Family Dwelling
h.B-2Multi-Family Dwelling
i.CCommercial
j.C-1Commercial
k.C-2Commercial
l.DIndustrial
m.TMobile Home Park
n.T-2Mobile Home Park
o.Planned Unit DevelopmentPlanned Unit Development
ITEM 4: Owner/Seller certifies, by their initials in blocks "a" and "b" below, that he/she has identified or will identify, within three business
days, to the Purchaser, in an enclosed or attached sketch, the current zoning as of the date this disclosure is signed, of all parcels of
land surrounding the above-described real property within 360 degrees of said real property. The identification of such zoning utilizes the
Zoning Classification Codes listed in Item 3 immediately above. If the parcel of land purchased is within a subdivision, then the
Owner/Seller certifies by their initials in the appropriate block below that he or she has identified or will identify, within three business
days, to the purchaser, in an enclosed attached sketch all parcels of land contiguous to and surrounding the subdivision within 360
degrees of the subdivision.
If Purchaser(s) so agrees, Purchaser(s) certifies/certify by his/her/their initials in block "c" that owner/seller need not provide
purchaser(s) with any information regarding zoning of all parcels of land surrounding the real property to be sold or if in a subdivision
any information regarding all parcels of land surrounding the subdivision.
a.The real property described above IS NOT located in a development/subdivision, and only those parcels immediately adjacent
to the parcel being purchased are identified.
b.The real property described above IS located in a development/subdivision, and the current zoning of all parcels not in the
development/subdivision, but adjacent and/or contiguous to the development/subdivision (excluding public right of way {streets &
alleys}) have been identified.)
c.By his/her initials appearing immediately to the left of this Item 4.c, purchaser(s) signify that he/she/they do not desire to
receive any zoning information concerning the property described above.
(Enter the required sketch in the space immediately below. If additional space is required, attach the sketch to this disclosure form
with sufficient identification to relate the sketch to this particular disclosure form. If the sketch is attached to this form, so state in the
space immediately below.)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 305/318
NOTICE TO THE PURCHASER: Each purchaser is on notice that additional information and definitions concerning zoning
can be found in the City of Deming Code of Ordinances. The Code of Ordinances which further define the zoning noted
above can be viewed at the Deming City Hall, Planning Department, 309 South Gold Avenue, Deming, NM 88030. The Code
of Ordinances is also available online at www.cityofdeming.org.
ITEM 5: By the entry of their initials in the space(s) provided below, Purchaser(s) certify that he/she/they have read and agree to the
landscape requirements listed below, as they apply to new uses, buildings, and/or additions erected after June 14, 2004.
Purchaser initials:
City of Deming Code of Ordinances:
Subsection 12-18-2
D. Landscape Design Standards for Single-family and Two-family Dwelling Developments: All new single-family and/or two-family
developments shall comply with the following standards:
1. Plant Material: Each new single-family or two-family dwelling lot shall employ only low water use and drought tolerant plant material
as specified in the guideline documents described (in subsection C2a of this section) and attached hereto.
2.Turf on Single- Or Two-Family Lot: Turf is permitted as a landscape material on any single-family or two-family lot, provided no more
than fifty percent (50%) of the remaining area (excluding concreted areas), to a maximum of three thousand (3,000) square feet), is
planted in turf.
3.Turf On Common Areas: Where a common area (clubhouse, swimming pool or other recreational activities) is provided for use of all
residents in a plan of subdivision, a maximum of fifteen percent (15%) of the area actually devoted to the common area may be in turf.
PURCHASER BEWARE: Do not sign below unless you have become fully informed concerning City of Deming Ordinance and
all of the disclosure requirements of the owner/seller contained therein.
Both Owner(s)/Seller(s) and Purchaser(s) certify by their signatures below that the information contained in this form was or
will be fully disclosed by owner/ seller within three business days after any contract or agreement to purchase the real
property described above was/is signed by purchaser(s). Further, Purchaser(s) has/have five business days from the date
disclosure is due to purchaser(s) to rescind any contract or agreement for the sale of real property. Failure by
owner(s)/seller(s) to provide the above disclosure information within the three day period may, at the purchaser(s) discretion,
nullify any contract/agreement to purchase said property. Should purchaser(s) elect to rescind said contract or agreement
because of Owner(s)/Seller(s) failure to disclose or because of the contents of said disclosure, he/she/they must do so, in
writing, BEFORE the end of the fifth business day after the date Purchaser should have received or received said disclosure. If
purchaser(s) elect to rescind said contracts/agreements because of failure to deliver said disclosures or because of the
contents of said disclosures, no penalties of any kind shall accrue to the purchaser(s).
Both the owner/seller and the purchaser(s) further certify the purchaser(s) has/have received this document on the date
indicated next to the purchaser(s) signature(s).
Purchaser Date Signed Purchaser Date Signed
Owner/Seller Date Signed Owner/Seller Date Signed
F. Effective Date: The aforementioned disclosure requirements shall be effective as of the date herein. This section shall be applicable to all
forms of conveyance of real property including passing of title in fee simple, absolute, or with restrictions, the equitable passing of title
through a real estate contract or the passing of title by contract through a deed of trust, within the city limits of the city of Deming. (Ord.
1145, 8-14-2006)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 306/318
Chapter 5
PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLATS
13-5-1: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
A. General:
1. Purpose: The preliminary plat of a subdivision is not intended to be recorded. Its purpose is to show graphically all facts needed to
enable the planning and zoning commission to determine whether the proposed design of the subdivision is satisfactory. The
preliminary plat shall be designed by a professional surveyor licensed in the state and shall comply with the standards listed in chapter
3 of this title.
2. Public Notice:
a. City Policy: Notice shall be in accordance with public notice policy as set forth by the city council upon review and approval of such
policy.
b. Posting Of Signs: Signs per city requirements shall be posted facing each means of public access bordering applicant property.
Signs shall be posted and maintained by subdivider. Notarized certification of signs being posted continuously for twenty one (21)
days prior to planning and zoning commission meeting shall be provided by the subdivider.
3. Representative At Commission Meeting: A representative of the subdivider must be present at the planning and zoning commission
meeting for review of the subdivision to proceed.
B. Submission Of Information: The subdivider shall submit three (3) copies of the following information to the planning and zoning
commission, with all prints to be in blue line or black and white.
1. Vicinity Sketch: A vicinity sketch, at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') showing the relationship of the plat to its
general surroundings and showing the following details:
a. Existing or mapped streets within one hundred feet (100') of the subdivision.
b. Proposed streets with connections to existing or mapped streets.
c. Municipal boundaries within one thousand feet (1,000') of the tract.
2. Layout Plan: A plan of the subdivision at a minimum scale of one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200'), on a sheet size eighteen
inches by twenty four inches (18" x 24") showing the following information:
a. Items pertaining to title.
b. Proposed name of subdivision.
c. Name and address of the developer and surveyor.
d. Graphic scale.
e. Date prepared.
f. North point.
3. Existing Site Conditions Affecting Subdivision:
a. Tract boundaries as surveyed and certified by a registered surveyor to be a closed traverse. Bearings shall be in degrees, minutes,
and seconds. Distances shall be shown in feet and hundredths. Curve data shall include sufficient data to re-establish curve on the
ground, including chord, bearing and distance. The error of closure shall not be greater than one foot (1') in three thousand feet
(3,000'). All congressional townships and lines of incorporated areas shall be shown.
b. Existing rights of way, streets, alleys and easements within one hundred feet (100') of the subdivision.
c. Existing buildings.
d. The names of all subdivisions immediately adjacent, intersecting points of adjacent lots, and the names of owners of record of
adjacent acreage with date of filing, book and page.
e. The locations and sizes of any existing sewers, water lines, fire hydrants, and gas mains, on or within one hundred feet (100') of the
subdivision, with pipe sizes and grades indicated and invert elevations where necessary.
f. Contours, with vertical intervals of two feet (2') for land with average natural slope of four percent (4%) or less, at vertical intervals of
five feet (5') for more steeply sloping land, such information to be related where practical, to USGS benchmarks or other datum as
established by the city engineer.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 307/318
g. Significant tree masses and isolated trees.
h. The location and widths of any streets, public ways, sewer or water lines, the location and size of parks, or other public places;
shown upon an official plan adopted by the planning and zoning commission and the location of any improvements on the site
shown on the city's official map.
i. Zoning boundary lines, zoning of applicant property, and zoning of adjacent properties within two hundred feet (200').
4. Proposed Improvements:
a. Location and width of all proposed streets, roads, alleys and utility easements.
b. Parks, playgrounds, and other public areas proposed for dedication.
c. Block designations and lot numbers.
d. Proposed street names.
e. Lot lines and approximate dimensions of lots. Number of lots.
f. Designation of streets, rights of way, easements, and other areas proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public use, together with
the conditions of such dedications or reservations.
g. Building setback lines.
h. Copies of any proposed protective covenants to be included in the deed. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
5. Drainage Study: A technical drainage study is required. The study shall discuss in detail the existing site hydrologic conditions and the
proposed drainage plan to accommodate or modify these site drainage conditions for the development of the site. The study shall
include, but not be limited to, the following information:
a. Location And Description Of The Development: The following information shall be provided:
(1) A description of the property including: general location map, legal description, area in acres, existing site conditions (vegetation,
drainage facilities, buildings, etc.), topography, any existing drainage facilities (ditches, culverts, streams, etc.), project
description, and the nature of adjacent neighboring development.
b. Identification And Description Of Drainage Basins: Identification and description of the drainage basin(s) in which the development
is located. The following information shall be included:
(1) Information on off site flows which enter the subject property at both discrete and nondiscrete points;
(2) A discussion on existing and proposed land uses, by type, and intensity of development;
(3) A description of any natural and manmade conveyances in the drainage basin;
(4) Historic on site drainage patterns;
(5) Historic drainage patterns of upstream runoff; and
(6) Historic discharge points at downstream property lines.
c. Identification Of Previous Drainage Studies: Identify any previous drainage studies for the site, or any previous drainage studies
that might affect the subject site.
d. Runoff Analysis: Runoff analysis based on soil conservation services method (SCS) which is outlined in a publication entitled "Peak
Rates Of Discharge For Small Watersheds, Chapter 2 (Revised 2/85 For New Mexico), Engineering Field Manual For Conservation
Practices". The following limitations shall apply:
(1) Minimum initial time: Five (5) minutes;
(2) Time of concentration equal to the sum of initial time and gutter/pipe flow time. The minimum time of concentration is ten (10)
minutes;
(3) Overland flow portions of time of concentrations are to be calculated for a maximum reach length of five hundred feet (500'); and
(4) Design storm requirements shall be initial design storm of 10-year rainfall and return major storm period of 100-year rainfall.
e. Calculations For Off Site Peak Flow: Calculations for peak flow from all off site drainage areas.
f. Calculations For On Site Peak Flow: Calculations for peak flow within the proposed development for areas larger than twenty (20)
acres.
g. Analysis Of 100-Year Floodplain: Analysis of 100-year floodplain and drainageways.
h. Analysis Of Downstream Facilities: Analysis of downstream drainage facilities.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 308/318
i. Analysis Of Anticipated Problems And Solutions: Analysis of drainage problems and solutions which are anticipated within the
subject development. Indicate areas and show calculations that may be of concern for hydraulic jump in curb and gutter.
6. Detention/Retention Pond And Drainage Plan Required:
a. Detention/Retention Pond: A detention/retention pond is required for any new subdivision in order to control and manage storm
water and drainage for the subdivision. Dependent upon the size and complexity of the subdivision, this requirement may be
waived, modified or varied by the planning and zoning commission or the city council. Requests to waive or vary or modify this
requirement shall be made in writing by the subdivider or his/her authorized agent, and shall set out the reasons in support of the
request.
b. Drainage Plan: A detailed drainage plan(s) for the site shall be submitted with the technical drainage study. The plan(s) shall be at a
legible scale (1 inch = 20 feet to 1 inch = 200 feet is recommended). A reference to all hydraulic calculations shall be shown on the
plan. The following information shall be shown on the plan, except that the off site drainage basin boundaries may be shown at an
appropriate legible scale on a separate plan or a key plan.
(1) The subject property and the proposed platting.
(2) Property lines and streets, including right of way widths within one hundred feet (100') of the subject property.
(3) Existing contours and proposed elevations sufficient to analyze drainage patterns extending one hundred feet (100') past the
subject property lines.
(4) Any existing drainage facilities and structures including ditches, channels, street flow directions, and culverts. All pertinent
information including material, size, shape, slope and location shall be shown on the plan(s).
(5) Limits of existing floodplains and floodways. The federal emergency management agency (FEMA) floodplain map is to be
included.
(6) Existing topography per the requirements of subsection B3f of this section.
(7) Location of all streets and rights of way.
(8) Proposed street and ditch flow paths and slopes.
(9) Identification of drainage basins within the proposed development and tributary to the proposed development.
(10) Proposed on site drainage system plan, with layout and design. Information is to include the on site drainage system outlet to
downstream facilities or structures.
(11) The location and design of the pond(s) (size, depth, side slopes, capacity, outlet, and control mechanisms for controlling rate of
water discharge from the pond), and any other information required by the planning and zoning commission. The design of the
drainage system to convey water to the pond(s) shall be shown on the drainage plan.
(12) Details of any proposed system designed to harvest and distribute storm water for domestic use within the subdivision shall be
shown on the drainage plan(s).
7. Compliance With Approved Drainage Plan: The subdivider shall implement the drainage plan as approved by the city council as
recommended by the planning and zoning commission. All required drainage works shall be carried out under the supervision of the
subdivider's professional engineer who shall be licensed in the state of New Mexico. All required drainage works shall be carried out
to the satisfaction of the city staff. The subdivider's professional engineer shall provide supervision and inspection during construction
of drainage facilities. The subdivider's professional engineer, upon completion of the drainage works, shall provide written certification
to the city staff that all drainage work was constructed in accordance with the approved drainage plan(s). The subdivider, or
homeowners' association, or individual homeowners through a provision in their deeds, or other legal and liable entity shall maintain
the drainage facilities thereafter so that it(they) is(are) remains functional as designed.
8. Landscaping Of Detention/Retention Pond(s): Storm water detention/retention ponds are required. The city may require that on site
detention/retention ponds be landscaped when an on site detention/retention pond is to be used as part of a recreational space for a
project, or where such pond is to be located adjacent to and/or is visible from a public street, or where there is risk of soil erosion. The
proponent shall be required to prepare or have prepared a landscape plan that shall be acceptable to city council, or the planning and
zoning commission and/or the city building inspector, as appropriate. All of the following matters may be considered by the planning
and zoning commission in recommending approval of the landscape plan:
a. Landscape Plans: Where the city requires landscaping of a detention/retention pond, the proponent shall be required to prepare or
have prepared a landscape plan that shall be acceptable to city council with a recommendation of the planning and zoning
commission. The plat shall be drawn at a legible scale satisfactory to city staff. The plan shall clearly describe the location, type,
size and spacing of all plant materials. The plan shall also indicate the height and canopy size of trees at maturity, and the height
and spread of shrubs at maturity. Other proposed landscape features such as walls, fences, and pedestrian or bicycle walkways or
trails shall also be shown.
b. Existing Plant Material: To the extent possible, existing vegetation shall be retained, provided such vegetation is not prohibited by
subsection B8f of this section.
c. Low Water Use And Drought Tolerant Plant Material Required: All plant material shall be low water use and drought tolerant and
shall be plants listed in the following documents which shall be used as guidelines by the city of Deming:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 309/318
(1) "Low Water Use/Drought Tolerant Plant List", Arizona department of water resources-Tucson active management area, (March
2002 and later editions).
(2) "The Enchanted Xeriscape, A Guide To Water-Wise Landscaping In New Mexico", office of the state engineer (no date specified,
but most recent edition at time of application of the provisions in subsection B8 of this section is to be used).
d. Credit For Existing Plant Material: Credit for existing plant material shall be allowed in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) The preservation and retention of existing plant material within the defined pond basin (pond and side slopes and adjacent areas
as designated on the drainage plan(s)), is encouraged provided such plant material is material specified in the guideline
documents listed in subsection B8c of this section, and provided such plant material is not prohibited material as described in
subsection B8f of this section.
(2) Credit for retained material may be given, at the sole discretion of the city council on the recommendation of the planning and
zoning commission. Credit may be given on an equal one to one basis for shade trees, shrubs, and ground cover, provided that
the retained trees, shrubs and ground cover are not prohibited by subsection B8f of this section.
(3) In order that city officials may make an informed decision with respect to giving a credit for retained existing plant material, the
landscape plan required by subsection B8a of this section shall include the type, location, size, and an opinion as to the general
health of the plants to be retained. Such opinion is to be provided by a person acceptable to the city staff or the planning and
zoning commission.
e. Ground Cover: Ground cover shall be provided where the basin has slide slopes equal to or greater than two to one (2:1)
(horizontal to vertical distance), in order to minimize erosion. Rock, stone or cobble may be used as a ground cover in such
situations.
f. Prohibited Plant Material: The following plants are prohibited in all developments in the city of Deming:
(1) European olive trees, all fruiting varieties.
(2) Fruitless mulberry trees.
(3) Salt cedar.
(4) Any plant listed on the "New Mexico Noxious Weed List" (September 20, 1999, as amended from time to time), published by the
New Mexico department of agriculture.
9. Supplemental Material:
a. Application.
b. Fees. (Ord. 1089, 6-14-2004)
13-5-2: FINAL PLAT1:
A. General:
1. The final plat shall be designed by a professional surveyor licensed in the state and shall comply with the standards listed in chapter 3
of this title.
2. The final plat shall be submitted, drawn in permanent ink or produced by a photographic process, on polyester (Mylar) film.
3. The final plat shall be consistent with the required and approved information provided by the subdivider during the preliminary plat
process.
4. The final plat shall conform to the filing requirements of the county clerk.
5. Notice shall be in accordance with public notice policy as set forth by the city council upon review and approval of such policy.
6. A representative of the subdivider must be present at the planning and zoning commission meeting for review of the subdivision to
proceed.
B. Submission Of Information: The subdivider shall submit three (3) copies of the following information to the planning and zoning
commission, with all prints to be in blue line or black and white.
1. Control points described, ties to existing subdivision lines, (to which) all dimensions, angles, bearings, and similar data.
2. Tract boundary lines, right of way lines of streets, easements and alleys. Property lines of all lots and blocks.
3. Accurate dimensions, bearings and deflection angles and radii, arcs of all boundaries and lot lines.
4. Names of streets and block numbers. The lots and blocks within the subdivision shall be numbered and lettered in a manner
satisfactory to the planning and zoning commission.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 310/318
5. The final plat shall bear the notarized signatures of the owners and dates, signatures of appropriate officials of the planning and
zoning commission. Signatures of the mayor and city clerk and the signed certification of a professional surveyor licensed in the state
and the signature of the county clerk upon filing.
6. Zoning of applicant property.
7. The final plat to be submitted to the planning and zoning commission shall contain the information required in subsections A and B of
this section.
8. Protective covenants attached, and such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements and dedications as may be required by the
planning and zoning commission in the enforcement of these regulations.
9. Title shall be shown in the lower right hand corner, and all appended material shall be referred to the same title.
10. A suitable border having a margin of not less than one-half inch (1/2") on all sides shall be provided on all plats. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
Chapter 6
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
13-6-1: LIABILITY OF SUBDIVIDER:
A subdivider requesting approval shall be liable for and shall install at his own sole cost and expense the required improvements. The
following sections of this chapter are the minimum required improvements to be installed by the subdivider. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
13-6-2: SCHEDULE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Time Limit: The subdivider shall, within the time frame of three (3) years, initiate and complete the improvements as required for
acceptance of the construction by the city.
B. Resubmission For Approval: If improvements are not initiated per the subdivision approval within three (3) years, the subdivider shall be
required to resubmit the subdivision for approval under the subdivision requirements in existence at the time of resubmission. (Ord. 989,
2-8-1999)
13-6-3: MONUMENTS:
A. Direction Of State Surveyor: All monuments shown on the final plat shall be located and installed under the direction of a professional
surveyor licensed in the state.
B. Plot And Block: Permanent reference monuments shall be of concrete at least six inches (6") in diameter by twenty four inches (24") in
depth with metal center point.
C. Lot Corners: All lot corner markers shall be permanently located and shall be at least a one-half inch (1/2") metal pin with a minimum
length of sixteen inches (16") located in the ground surface to existing grade. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
13-6-4: SITE GRADING:
Grades shall be established per approved engineering drawings. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
13-6-5: STREET CONSTRUCTION:
A. Grading Requirements:
1. All streets shall be graded to the grades shown on the street plan and profile and construction grading plan.
2. Finished subgrade shall be firm and stable. All materials added to raise the grade level shall be compacted in a manner satisfactory to
the city engineer.
3. Finished grading shall be inspected and approved by the city engineer.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 311/318
B. Base Course And Pavement:
1. The subgrade shall be inspected prior to spreading the base course material. The base course shall be inspected during and after
preparation and certified by the subdivider's engineer. The subdivider shall provide testing per city requirements. The city engineer
shall be provided with test results.
2. A base course of approved material shall be installed according to the specifications on the approved engineering drawings. The
subdivider shall provide testing per city requirements. The city engineer shall be provided with test results.
3. Pavement shall be installed by the subdivider between the curb and gutter of all streets of the subdivision of an HMAC mix design as
approved by the city engineer.
4. The subdivider shall provide an HMAC mix design for approval prior to installation. The subdivider shall test HMAC during installation
per city requirements. The city engineer shall be provided with test results.
C. Sidewalk Installation: Sidewalks shall be installed as indicated on the approved engineering drawings. The subdivider shall provide
testing per city requirements. The city engineer shall be provided with test results.
D. Curb And Gutter: Curb and gutter and required street drainage structures shall be constructed per approved engineering drawings. The
subdivider shall provide testing per city requirements. The city engineer shall be provided with test results.
E. Street Name Signs: Street name signs, according to standards established by the city, shall be installed by the subdivider at each street
intersection at locations approved by the city engineer.
F. Testing Lab: The city engineer shall designate the testing lab. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
13-6-6: SANITARY SEWER FACILITIES:
A. Approved Engineering Drawings: Sanitary lines and facilities shall be installed as shown on approved engineering drawings.
B. Inspection: Sewers connecting or proposed for connection with established sewer systems shall be inspected and accepted by the city
utilities department. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
13-6-7: WATER AND FIRE HYDRANTS:
A. Public Water Supply: All water mains and lines shall be installed from each lot in the subdivision to, and connected with, the public supply
or approved central system as indicated on the approved engineering drawings. The installation shall be inspected and accepted by the
city utilities department.
B. Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be located at street intersection when possible and shall not exceed three hundred feet (300') in
spacing. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
13-6-8: STREET LIGHTS:
A. City Approval: The city engineer or appropriate city department shall approve fixtures, closures, arms, masts and any required installation
and equipment.
B. City Requirements: Street lights shall be placed per city requirements. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
13-6-9: RECORDING OF SUBDIVISION:
No subdivision or phase of a subdivision shall be recorded at the county clerk's office until:
A. Completion Of Construction: Construction has been completed, inspected, and accepted by the city; or
B. Security: The subdivider provides security by means of certificate of deposit, irrevocable letter of credit, or bond that has been accepted
by the city. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 312/318
13-6-10: REVOCATION OF SECURITY:
A. Liquidation Of Security: Should a subdivider provide security and file a subdivision plat with the county clerk, and should construction
begin on said subdivision and not be completed within three (3) years of approval by the planning and zoning commission, the city shall
liquidate the security and complete the construction of the subdivision.
B. Additional Costs: Should additional costs for construction, construction management, or other appropriate items arise above the original
security amount deposited, these costs shall be recovered by the city by means of liens against sales of lots. (Ord. 989, 2-8-1999)
Chapter 7
THREE MILE PLANNING AND PLATTING JURISDICTION
13-7-1: PURPOSE:
A. Purpose: The purposes of this chapter are: to clearly recognize and codify the city's authority to exercise its planning and platting
authority within three (3) miles of its boundary; to ensure development within the planning and platting jurisdiction is compatible with city
objectives and standards; to provide adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light and air; to manage distribution of population; and,
to create conditions favorable to the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens.
B. Applicable Law: Authorization for the city's planning and platting authority three (3) miles beyond the city boundary and for the
regulations contained in this chapter is given in sections 3-19-1 through 3-19-8 inclusive, New Mexico Statutes Annotated, 1978; and,
sections 3-20-1 through 3-20-16 inclusive, New Mexico Statutes Annotated, 1978. (Ord. 1244, 1-13-2014)
13-7-2: JURISDICTION AND APPROVING ENTITIES:
A. Platting Jurisdiction: The city's planning and platting jurisdiction includes all lands within the city boundary as extended from time to time,
and all lands within three (3) miles of the city's boundary as extended from time to time. However, for purposes of this chapter, the
planning and platting jurisdiction is that area of Luna County lying within three (3) miles of the city boundary as extended from time to
time. A map showing the current three (3) mile planning and platting jurisdiction beyond the city boundary shall be available for viewing
in the city planner's office in the city administration building during normal business hours.
B. Applicability: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the city's planning and platting jurisdiction three (3) miles beyond the city
boundary as extended from time to time.
C. Approving Authorities:
1. The Deming city council is the planning authority for the city's three (3) mile planning and platting jurisdiction and it is the approval
authority for all subdivisions within the city's platting jurisdiction.
2. The city planning and zoning commission shall consider all subdivision plats within the city's three (3) mile planning and platting
jurisdiction and make recommendations to the city council.
3. The Luna County commission is also the approval authority for any subdivision within the city's three (3) mile planning and platting
jurisdiction, but not within the city's boundary, and its approval must be obtained in addition to that of the city planning authority,
namely, the city council.
4. No plat of any subdivision within the three (3) mile planning and platting jurisdiction of the city may be filed in the office of the county
clerk without such plat having been submitted to the city planning authority for approval. (Ord. 1244, 1-13-2014)
13-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions set out in section 13-1-2 of this title shall apply to all applicable subdivisions within the city's three (3) mile planning and
platting jurisdiction. (Ord. 1244, 1-13-2014)
13-7-4: PROCEDURES:
The procedures established in chapter 2 of this title shall apply to all applicable subdivisions within the city's three (3) mile planning and
platting jurisdiction. (Ord. 1244, 1-13-2014)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 313/318
13-7-5: DESIGN STANDARDS:
The design standards established in chapter 3 of this title shall apply to all applicable subdivisions within the city's three (3) mile planning
and platting jurisdiction. (Ord. 1244, 1-13-2014)
13-7-6: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The general provisions set out in chapter 4 of this title shall apply to all applicable subdivisions within the city's three (3) mile planning and
platting jurisdiction. (Ord. 1244, 1-13-2014)
13-7-7: PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLATS:
The regulations regarding preliminary and final plats as set out in chapter 5 of this title shall apply to all applicable subdivisions within the
city's three (3) mile planning and platting jurisdiction. (Ord. 1244, 1-13-2014)
13-7-8: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
The required improvements set out in chapter 6 of this title shall apply to all applicable subdivisions within the city's three (3) mile planning
and platting jurisdiction. (Ord. 1244, 1-13-2014)
13-7-9: VARIANCES:
For the purposes of this chapter, section 13-4-8 of this title shall not apply to the city's three (3) mile planning and platting jurisdiction as
defined in this chapter. Rather, the following provisions shall apply in its stead:
A. City Planning And Zoning Commission To Make Recommendations: The city planning and zoning commission shall make
recommendations to the Deming city council, the planning authority for purposes of the city's three (3) mile planning and platting
jurisdiction, with regard to variances or waivers from the regulations of this title.
B. Variances:
1. Where the planning and zoning commission finds that hardships may result from strict compliance with the regulations of this title, the
planning and zoning commission may recommend to the city council a variance or a waiver from any regulation so that substantial
justice may be done and the public interest secured.
2. The planning and zoning commission shall ensure that the recommended varying or waiving of any regulation does not nullify the
intent or purposes of any applicable city plan or ordinance; nor shall the varying or waiving of any regulation have any adverse
financial impact on the city.
3. In recommending a variance or waiver, the planning and zoning commission shall provide reasons for such variance or waiver.
4. The planning and zoning commission in recommending a variance or a waiver to any regulation contained in this title may
recommend the imposition of such conditions as it deems appropriate in the circumstances and does not set a precedent.
5. The city council, the planning authority for the platting jurisdiction, in its sole discretion, may accept and approve the recommended
variances or waivers; or modify the recommended variances or waivers; or deny the recommended variances or waivers.
6. The city council, the planning authority for the three (3) mile planning and platting jurisdiction, in its sole discretion, may approve,
modify or deny any conditions to the approval of a subdivision as recommended by the city planning and zoning commission. (Ord.
1244, 1-13-2014)
13-7-10: PROVISIONS SUSPENDED WHERE CITY AND COUNTY PLATTING AGREEMENT IN EFFECT:
In the event the city and Luna County enter into an agreement, at any time, regarding the processing of subdivisions within the city's three
(3) mile platting jurisdiction or any part thereof, the provisions of this chapter shall be suspended during the term of said agreement. If such
agreement in effect is terminated for any reason, the provisions of this chapter shall continue in full force and effect. The suspension of the
provisions of this chapter and the condition for reinstatement of the provisions of this chapter may form part of any platting agreement
between the city and Luna County. (Ord. 1244, 1-13-2014)
13-7-11: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 314/318
The provisions of section 1-2-4, "Severability Clause", of this code shall apply fully to this chapter. (Ord. 1244, 1-13-2014)
Title 14
INDUSTRIAL REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
ACQUISITION OF INDUSTRIAL PROJECTS
14-1-1: PURPOSE:
For the purpose of inducing industrial enterprises to locate within the city or immediate vicinity thereof, and thus promoting a sound and
proper balance between agriculture, commerce and industry and thus enhancing the general welfare of the citizens of the city, it is hereby
declared necessary and desirable that the city make and issue its revenue bonds, payable solely out of the income to be derived from the
rentals to be received from the leasing or sale of a project or projects to be acquired and owned by the city and that the city irrevocably
pledge such income to the payment of such bonds and interest thereon, the proceeds thereof to be used solely for the purpose of acquiring
by construction or purchase, or either, or a combination thereof, a project or projects. (Ord. 310, 5-2-1960)
14-1-2: SALE OR LEASE OF PROJECTS; TERMS:
The city shall sell or lease the project or projects to a New Mexico corporation, as and when it or they are acquired, the basic terms of which
lease shall be in full accord with the industrial revenue bond act1:
A. Term of lease to be as mutually agreed upon, but not less than a minimum of the period required to pay and retire the bonds issued to
finance the project.
B. Rentals in an amount sufficient:
1. To pay the principal of and interest on the bonds issued to finance said project or projects; and
2. To build up and maintain any reserve deemed by the bond purchasers to be advisable in connection therewith; and
3. To pay all city administrative costs and trustee fees.
4. Bonds to be for terms up to thirty (30) years. Based on the average earnings for the past five (5) years, it should be possible to retire
the bonds issued for the project in fifteen (15) years, or if a branch operation, it should be possible to retire the bonds issued in fifteen
(15) years from earning estimates of the branch operation based on sound evidence to support these estimates.
C. Lessee to keep said demised premises and subject matter of the lease in good repair and insured.
D. And such other additional conditions as may be required to protect bond purchasers, and the city.
Immediately subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance establishing each project, the city shall enter into a firm agreement with the
leasing-operating company of the project committing the city to sell or lease to each said company each project acquired hereunder and
reciting the terms, covenants and conditions under which such a sale or lease shall be finally consummated, between the city and the
company. Such a commitment is deemed necessary and expedient to expedite the acquisition of projects, the issuance of bonds, all as
herein provided. (Ord. 310, 5-2-1960)
14-1-3: ACQUISITION; SUPERVISION BY OPERATING COMPANY:
Such acquisition shall be in accordance with the plans and specifications furnished by the leasing-operating company and all contracts,
work, labor, moving, materials, machinery and equipment shall be performed, furnished and installed under the supervision and control of
the company, and any contracts entered into in connection with the acquisition of any such project shall be approved by the company, in
order to assure proper adaptability and relocation of such project or projects to the use for which the project or projects are acquired.
Whenever practicable, local labor and contractors shall be used. (Ord. 310, 5-2-1960)
14-1-4: BUSINESSES TO MEET CERTAIN REQUIREMENTS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 315/318
To expedite the acquisition of the project and to assure the proper and satisfactory determination of the kind and type of projects to be
acquired that will be best suited to the economy of the city and that will be economically sound and feasible to properly retire the revenue
bonds and interest thereon issued for and in payment for said project or projects, all in accordance with New Mexico Statutes Annotated
sections 3-32-1 et seq. and as provided for in this chapter, the city shall only consider those businesses which meet the following
requirements:
A. Only established businesses, or a branch operation for an established business, or a new business if it meets the other requirements of
this chapter, and sufficient firm contracts for the sale of the product can be shown to ensure feasibility, shall be eligible for a new
industrial project.
B. Said business or businesses have an established and satisfactory earning record or have a satisfactory earning potential.
C. The wage rates are compatible, if more than one business is acquired, organized or created; and that the bulk of employment be such
that local or available labor can be trained to do the work.
D. Any business or branch operation to be secured for a project will not be adversely competitive in any manner with or adversely effect any
existing project.
E. The wage rates of any business or branch operation for any new and additional project will be comparable with those of existing projects
in Deming and that there will be a sufficient labor force available.
F. The local owners of all the leasing-operating companies of the existing industrial projects in Deming be given an opportunity to review
any new and additional industrial project to determine if the conditions required under subsections D and E of this section are
satisfactory.
G. The city council shall determine whether in their best judgment the community's public facilities, including schools, will be or can be
made adequate to service the additional growth the proposed project would generate.
H. Freight is not a prohibitive cost item in either the raw material or the finished product.
I. Good management that would come with the company or be available to the company when same is relocated or organized in Deming.
J. Said projects and/or properties so acquired shall be within the terms of the definitions of "projects" and "property" as recited in New
Mexico Statutes Annotated sections 3-32-1 et seq.
K. In order to create needed employment, each project shall employ a reasonable number of employees, in the Deming plant.
L. A favorable feasibility study and report of the proposed project be made by Ebasco Services, Inc. of New York City, or a comparable
organization of equal national standing and submitted to the city council for study and approval. This feasibility study to also include a
market survey and analysis of the products of the business for the new project. If the new project is to be for an established business, or
a branch operation of an established business where the parent company or owners are going to purchase the necessary bonds to
finance the project, or the branch operation project in Deming, or accept bonds in payment for all the costs to finance a project, or a
branch operation project in Deming, or a combination of both, this subsection need not apply, but in such an event sufficient information
and data shall be submitted to the city council that will demonstrate the feasibility of the project to the satisfaction of a majority of the city
council.
M. There be a firm commitment from a recognized established financial source, for the purchase of any bonds to be issued to finance a
project before the actual consummation of the project. There shall be a specific evidence furnished the city council of the bond
purchaser or purchasers financial ability to carry out the bond purchase commitment, that they are persons of financial substance, and
recognized in their fields of endeavor. Under any circumstances, bonds will not be issued for sale before there are firm commitments for
the acquisition of the necessary business and property for the proposed project. If the city council deem it for the protection of all
concerned, they may require that an investigation of the bond purchaser's financial ability and reputation shall be included as a part of
the feasibility study to be made by Ebasco Service Inc., or an equivalent firm.
N. The project shall be set up and formalized by competent consultants and that the legal firm of Dawson, Nagel, Sherman and Howard of
Denver, or a comparable firm of at least equal standing and recognition, shall render a validating opinion for the bonds issued to finance
any new and additional project. (Ord. 310, 5-2-1960)
14-1-5: FUTURE AMENDMENTS OR ADDITIONS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 316/318
It is contemplated that more than one project may from time to time be financed by the sale of issues of revenue bonds provided for herein
and that this chapter must of necessity be amended or supplemented from time to time, and specific ordinances creating the specific
projects, and to authorize and adopt proper, necessary or required forms of bonds and interest coupons, maturity dates of such bonds and
interest coupons, the terms and conditions of the issuance of such bonds and the maturities thereof, the security therefor and such other
acts and things not inconsistent herewith, not inconsistent with the provisions of New Mexico Statutes Annotated sections 3-32-1 et seq., so
as to further enable a full and complete administering of the legislative act for the purposes herein recited. (Ord. 310, 5-2-1960)
14-1-6: ISSUANCE OF BONDS:
Bonds issued by the city under authority of this chapter shall not be the general obligation of such city within the meaning of article IX,
sections 12 and 13, of the constitution of the state. The bonds shall be payable solely out of the revenue derived from the projects to
finance which the bonds are issued. Bonds and interest coupons issued under authority of this chapter shall never constitute an
indebtedness of the city within the meaning of any state constitutional provision or statutory limitation, and shall never constitute nor give
rise to a pecuniary liability of the city or a charge against its general credit or taxing power, and such fact shall be plainly stated in the face
of each such bond. Such bonds shall be dated, executed and delivered at any time and from time to time may be in such form and
denominations; may be of such tenor; may be in registered or bearer form, either as to principal or interest, or both; may be payable in such
installments and at such times, not exceeding thirty (30) years, from their date; may be payable at such place or places; may bear interest
at such rate or rates payable at such place or places evidenced in such manner; and may contain such provisions not inconsistent herewith,
by subsequent proceedings of the city council or amendments hereto, as herein provided. Any bonds issued under the authority of this
chapter may be sold at public or private sale in such manner and from time to time as may be determined by the city council to be most
advantageous, and the city shall pay all expenses and costs, including consultant, attorney, engineering, and architect fees, premiums, and
commissions which the city council may deem necessary or advantageous in connection with the authorization and creation of a project or
projects, sale and issuance of bonds, which said fees, commissions, expenses, and costs shall be paid out of the proceeds of the sale of
said bonds. (Ord. 310, 5-2-1960)
14-1-7: COSTS OF INSPECTION:
The costs and expenses of the screening, inspection and examination of all projects available for acquisition hereunder shall be deemed to
be engineering fees and included in the cost of acquisition. (Ord. 310, 5-2-1960)
14-1-8: PROCEEDS FROM SALE OF BONDS; WHERE APPLIED:
The proceeds from the sale of any bonds hereunder shall be applied to the payment of the following items:
A. The full acquisition cost and expenses of any project acquired hereunder.
B. All costs and expenses involved in and connected with the acquisition, including expenses of acquiring, altering and constructing
buildings and other necessary facilities, machinery and equipment.
C. All costs and expenses involved in moving, relocating, reorganizing and/or organizing the business or businesses, to or in the city, or
within fifteen (15) miles thereof, said moving expenses to include all costs connected with the actual moving plus the cost of planning,
preparing, and arranging for the relocation in the city, or within fifteen (15) miles thereof, and all other expenses incidental to actually
moving, reorganizing, relocating or organizing and transplanting from site where purchased to the city, a full and complete operating
complement of the business or businesses purchased and acquired hereunder.
D. All other items of expense which might be incurred by the city bond purchasers and the company, including fees of consultants,
engineers, auditors, brokers, and attorneys in connection with the locating, investigating and acquisition of the business or businesses,
the cost of the bond issue, and any court actions that may be necessary.
E. The principal of the bonds to be issued hereunder may include interest on the bonds for the period necessary to complete acquisition of
the project to finance which said bonds are issued.
F. The actual cost of the extension and installation of any utility to the project site. (Ord. 310, 5-2-1960)
14-1-9: TIME LIMITS:
In order to create a project in an orderly manner, the following time limits shall apply:
A. No more than ninety (90) days shall elapse from the date of the initial agreements to the submission of the feasibility report.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 317/318
B. No more than ninety (90) days shall elapse from the date of submission of the feasibility report to the date of consummation of the
project.
C. In extenuating circumstances these limits may be extended by the city council. Any extension of time will be granted only after due
consideration of the circumstances involved. (Ord. 310, 5-2-1960)
14-1-10: SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES:
As herein recited, the city may acquire one or more businesses or projects, which may have an established name and product and wherein
it is deemed desirable to retain said name; and in the event of such a situation a leasing-operating company of a project may have the right
to form a subsidiary company, and as used herein and for the purposes hereof, the term "subsidiary company" shall be construed to mean a
New Mexico corporation wherein the leasing-operating company of a project owns at least fifty one percent (51%) of the authorized capital
stock of such subsidiary company, which shall become the leasing and operating company of the particular business so acquired, and in
that event all of the terms and conditions of this chapter shall apply to the newly formed subsidiary company. (Ord. 310, 5-2-1960)
APPENDICES
: APPENDIX A
Ord.
No.
Passage
Date Franchise
218 09-08-
1947
Granting to Public Service Company of New Mexico the right to furnish electricity for light, heat and power to the
city, the inhabitants thereof, and for other purposes.
242 06-15-
1953
Granting certain rights and franchises to the Mountain States Telephone and Telegraph Company, its successors
and assigns, in the city, and for other purposes.
313 06-06-
1960
Granting to C.M. Treat, his successors and assigns, the right to operate a bus or buses in and along the streets
and thoroughfares of the city.
373*
03-02-
1964
Granting to Teleprompter Corporation for the term of 20 years the right to construct, operate and maintain a
community antenna television system and a closed circuit electronics system along the streets and thoroughfares
of the city.
*Ord. 373 repealed by Ord. 386, 5-3-1965.
405*
05-13-
1966
Granting to J.H. Voiers, d/b/a Sun Cable TV of Deming, New Mexico, his successors and assigns for the term of
20 years the right, authority and power to construct, acquire, maintain and operate a community antenna television
system and a closed circuit electronics system within the city of Deming and to use and occupy the streets, alleys
and other public places of said city for such purposes.
*Also Ord. 417, 3-6-1967; Ord. 422, 10-7-1967.
421 09-11-
1967
Granting to Public Service Company of New Mexico, its legal representatives, successors, lessees and assigns, a
franchise and right to furnish the inhabitants of the city of Deming, and to said city, whenever the municipal
authorities may desire to contract therefor, and to others, electricity for power, heat and illuminating purposes and
for such purposes to maintain the necessary poles or posts of wood, iron, or other suitable material, pipes, and to
string and put in place all necessary wire, apparatus and other attachments suitable or proper for the successful
operation of an electric light and power plant.
564*
06-14-
1976
Granting unto J.H. Voiers, d/b/a Sun Cable TV of Deming, New Mexico, his successors and assigns for the term of
15 years the right, authority and power to construct, acquire, maintain and operate a community antenna television
system and a closed circuit electronics system within the city of Deming and to use and occupy the streets, alleys
and other public places of said city for such purpose.
*Amended by Ord. 647, 1-14-1980; Ord. 709, 10-11-1982.
576 01-10-
1977
Granting unto Mack Thompson, d/b/a Andy's Taxi of Deming, New Mexico, its successors and assigns a certificate
of public convenience and necessity to operate and maintain a taxicab business within the city limits of the city of
Deming and to occupy the streets and public thoroughfares of said city for such business.
608 05-08-
1978
Granting to the Mountain States Telephone and Telegraph Company the nonexclusive right and privilege to
construct, erect, operate and maintain, in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the streets, alleys, public
ways and public places now in use or dedicated, and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, in said city,
poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other telephone fixtures necessary or proper for the
maintenance and operation in said city of a telephone exchange and lines connected therewith; provided,
however, that no poles or other fixtures shall be placed where the same will interfere with any electric light, water
hydrant or water main, and shall be placed in such a manner as to cause a minimum interference with the rights or
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=654 318/318
reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of said streets, alleys or public ways and places, and
all such poles or other fixtures placed in any street shall be placed at the outer edge of the sidewalk and inside the
curb line, and those placed in alleys shall be placed close to the line of the lots abutting on said alley and then in
such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on said streets, alleys and public ways.
841 11-12-
1991
Granting certain rights and privileges to the Mountain States Telephone And Telegraph Company, its successors
and assigns.
972 05-11-
1998
Granting to PNM Gas Services, a division of Public Service Company Of New Mexico, a corporation, its legal
representative, successors, lessees and assigns, grantee herein, certain powers, licenses, rights of way, privileges
and franchise to construct, operate, and maintain in the city of Deming, New Mexico, as now or hereafter
constituted, works, systems and plants for the handling, production, transporting, storing, sale and distribution of
gas into, out of and through a specified portion of said municipality to its inhabitants; and to use the streets,
avenues, easements, rights of way, alleys, highways, sidewalks, paths, bridges and other structures and public
places and grounds in said municipality for a period of fifteen (15) years; and prescribing certain rights, duties,
terms and conditions herein mentioned, and providing for the payment to said municipality of a percentage of
certain revenues of grantee from its operations herein.
1058
04-08-
2002
An ordinance granting an electrical utility franchise.
1075
06-09-
2003
An ordinance granting an electrical utility franchise.
1178
09-08-
2008
An ordinance granting to Public Service Company Of New Mexico, a New Mexico corporation, a franchise to
furnish electricity within the city of Deming, New Mexico, and granting to Public Service Company Of New Mexico,
a New Mexico corporation, the right to use any public highway, street, alley, road or other public place.
1201
07-12-
2010
An ordinance granting to New Mexico Gas Company, Inc., a Delaware corporation, its legal representatives,
successors, lessees and assigns, grantee herein, certain powers, licenses, rights-of-way, privileges and franchise
to construct, operate, and maintain limited areas in the town of Deming, New Mexico, as now or hereafter
constituted, works, systems and plants for the handling, transporting, storing, sale and distribution of natural gas
into, out of and through said municipality to its inhabitants, and others, including customers inside, beyond and
outside the limits of said municipality; and to use the streets, avenues, easements, rights-of-way, alleys, highways,
sidewalks, paths, bridges and other structures and public places and grounds in said municipality for a period of
ten (10) years and prescribing certain rights, duties, terms and conditions herein mentioned, and providing for the
payment to said municipality of a percentage of certain revenues of grantee from its operations herein.
1243
01-13-
2014
An ordinance granting to New Mexico Gas Company, Inc., a Delaware corporation, its legal representatives,
successors, licensees and assigns, grantee herein, certain powers, licenses rights-of-way, privileges and franchise
to construct, operate, and maintain in the town of Deming, New Mexico, as now or hereafter constituted, works,
systems and plants for the handling, transporting, storing, sale and distribution of natural gas into, out of and
through said municipality to its inhabitants, and others, including customers inside, beyond and outside the limits
of said municipality; and to use the streets, avenues, easements, rights-of-way, alleys, highways, sidewalks, paths,
bridges and other structures and public places and grounds in said municipality for a period of ten (10) years and
prescribing certain rights, duties, terms and conditions herein mentioned, and providing for the payment to said
municipality of a percentage of certain revenues of grantee from its operations herein.