Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
§ 1-1. Authority and purpose.
§ 1-2. Legislative intent.
The ordinances and certain resolutions of the City of Española, as codified
by General Code, LLC, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 350, together
with an Appendix, shall be known collectively as the "Code of the City of
Española," hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever reference is made in
any of the ordinances contained in the Code of the City of Española to any
other ordinance appearing in said Code, such reference shall be changed
to the appropriate chapter title, chapter number, article number or section
number appearing in the Code as if such ordinance or resolution had been
specifically amended to so read.
§ 1-3. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the prior Code of Ordinances and ordinances in force immediately
prior to the enactment of the Code by this ordinance, are intended as
a continuation of such ordinances and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance. All such provisions are hereby continued in full force and
effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the City Council of
the City of Española, and it is the intention of said Council that each such
provision contained within the Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in
said Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from
this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-4
below.
§ 1-4. Repeal of inconsistent enactments not included in Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of Española in
force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance which are inconsistent
with any provisions of the Code and not contained herein or recognized and
continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after
the effective date of this ordinance.
A. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the enabling provisions of NMSA
1978 §§ 3-17-1 and 3-21-5, as amended.
B. The purpose of this ordinance is to adopt a General Code of Ordinances
for the City of Española, New Mexico.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:3
§ 1-5. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-4 of this ordinance shall not
affect the following classes of ordinances, rights and obligations, which are
hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 1-6. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of
this ordinance or of any ordinance included in this Code now or through
supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the City of Española prior to the effective date of
this ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement
of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the City of Española
or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the City of Española.
D. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement
or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the City of Española.
E. Any ordinance of the City of Española providing for the laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place
within City of Española or any portion thereof.
F. Any ordinance of the City of Española appropriating money or
transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or
authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the City of
Española or other instruments or evidence of the City's indebtedness.
G. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of taxes, special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
K. Any ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for City employees.
§ 1-5 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1-6
1:4
sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof directly
involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-7. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code has been filed in the office of the Clerk of the City
of Española and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be
adopted, such copy shall be certified by the Clerk of the City of Española,
and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said Clerk,
to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all
times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication of this
ordinance, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-8. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
ordinances known collectively as the "Code of the City of Española" or
any new ordinances, when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate
the intention of the City Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed
to be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments
or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter
be published as amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained
in this ordinance shall affect the status of any ordinance contained herein,
and such ordinances may be amended, deleted or changed from time to time
as the City Council deems desirable.
§ 1-9. Posting on City website.
The City Clerk shall arrange for publication of the Code in its entirety on
the City website.
§ 1-10. Sale of Code.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the City Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a
fee to be set by resolution of the City Council.
§ 1-11. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the City Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of
the City of Española or who alters or tampers with such Code in any
manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the City of Española
to be misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of this
ordinance shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:5
subject to a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for a term of not
more than 90 days, or both, in accordance with NMSA 1978 § 3-17-1.
§ 1-12. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Code
of the City of Española, no changes in the meaning or intent of such
ordinances have been made. In addition, certain grammatical changes and
other minor nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said
pieces of legislation. It is the intention of the City Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances had been
previously specifically amended to read as such.
§ 1-13. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the City of Española, such ordinance to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this ordinance
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-14.2, inclusive.
§ 1-14. When effective; effective date of ordinances.
This ordinance shall take effect in accordance with NMSA 1978 § 3-17-5,
following public hearing and adoption by the City Council of the City of
Española.
§ 1-14.1. Conflicting provisions.
In the event of conflict between the provisions of this Code and other
ordinances or provisions of the New Mexico Statutes, the provision
imposing the greater restriction shall prevail.
§ 1-14.2. Repeal of prior Code.
The Code of Ordinances of the City of Española, New Mexico adopted
August 21, 1979, is repealed.
§ 1-11 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1-14.2
1:6
ARTICLE II
General Definitions and Word Usage
[Adopted as Ch. 1, Sec. 1-2, of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 1-15. Rules of construction.
§ 1-16. Word usage and interpretation.
§ 1-17. Definitions.
As used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CITY — The City of Española, New Mexico.
CITY COUNCIL — The governing body of the City.
CODE — The Code of Ordinances of the City of Española, New Mexico, as
designated and cited in Article I of this chapter.
COUNTY — Rio Arriba County, New Mexico, and/or Santa Fe County, New
Mexico.
A. In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of this City, the
following rules of construction and definitions shall be observed, unless
such construction or definition would be inconsistent with the manifest
intent of the City Council or be repugnant to the context of the
provisions or the context clearly requires otherwise.
B. Generally. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood
according to the common and approved usage of language, but
technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and
understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.
A. Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears in this Code
requiring a City officer or City employee to do some act, it is to be
construed to authorize such officer or employee to designate, delegate
and authorize subordinates to perform the required act.
B. Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and
be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and
corporations as well as to males.
C. Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to
a majority of such officers or other persons.
D. Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the
plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the
singular.
E. Tense. Words used in the past tense or present tense shall include the
future as well as the past or present.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:7
EASEMENT — A right, liberty, privilege or advantage without profit which
the owner of one parcel of land may have in the lands of another; or a right
of the owner of one parcel of land, by reason of such ownership, to use
the land of another for a special purpose not inconsistent with a general
property right in the owner.
LAW — Any statute, ordinance or regulation promulgated by the United
States, the state, the county, the City or any agencies thereof, as well as the
rules and regulations of other bodies politic that may be appropriate.
MINOR — Any person under 18 years of age with respect to all offenses,
except those involving alcoholic beverages.
MONTH — A calendar month.
NMSA 1978 — The New Mexico Statutes Annotated, 1978 Compilation, as
amended.
OATH — Construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by
law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the
words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and
"affirmed."
OFFICIALS, EMPLOYEES, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, ETC. — Whenever
reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other
agencies of the City by title only, i.e., "Mayor," "Clerk," "Manager," "Chief
of Police," etc., they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, employees,
boards, commissions or other agencies of this City.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named in this
Code they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in
current use in the City.
OR; AND — "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the
context of the provision requires it.
OWNER — When applied to a building or land, includes any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant
by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON — Includes and shall be applied to a firm, partnership, association,
corporation, organization, club, society, group acting as a unit, or body
politic and corporate, as well as to an individual.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Includes money, goods, chattels, evidences of
debt, things in action, and any other species of property, except real
property.
PRECEDING; FOLLOWING — Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY — Includes real, personal and mixed property.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public way, park, cemetery, school yard or open
space adjacent thereto; any public lake or stream; and any place or business
open to the use of the public in general, open to public view or to which the
public has access.
§ 1-17 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1-17
1:8
PUBLIC WAY — Any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway, sidewalk or
other public thoroughfare.
REAL PROPERTY — Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
REASONABLE TIME — In all cases where any section of this Code or
City ordinance shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or
reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall be
deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt
performance of such duty, or compliance with such notice.
RESIDENCE — The place adopted by a person as his place of habitation,
and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning.
When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such
person sleeps shall be deemed his residence.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular traffic.
SHALL; MAY — "Shall" is mandatory; and the word "may" is discretionary.
SIDEWALK — Any portion of the street between the curb or the lateral
line of the roadway and the adjacent property line intended for the use of
pedestrians.
SIGNATURE; SUBSCRIPTION — Includes a mark when the person cannot
write, when his name is written near such mark and is witnessed by a
person who writes his own name as witness.
STATE — The State of New Mexico.
STREET — Includes public streets, avenues, boulevards, highways, roads,
alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges, public ways and approaches thereto and
other public thoroughfares in the City devoted to public use.
TENANT; OCCUPANT — As applied to a building or land means any person
who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or
with others.
WRITING; WRITTEN — Includes typewriting, printing on paper and any
other mode of representing words and letters.
YEAR — A calendar year.
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:9

ARTICLE III
Violations and Penalties
[Adopted as Ch. 1, Secs. 1-9 through 1-12, of the Code of
Ordinances]
§ 1-18. Issuance of summons, arrest warrant or non-traffic citation.
§ 1-19. Violations defined; penalties and other remedies. [Amended
5-24-1994 by Ord. No. 516]
A. The procedures established, as set out in the rules of criminal
procedure for the municipal courts of the state, governing the issuance
of summons and warrants for arrest in criminal cases are hereby
adopted by reference as they are presently enacted and hereinafter
amended.
B. The procedures and forms utilized by the state police in the issuance of
a state non-traffic citation may be adopted and utilized by the City
Police Department.
A. Violations defined.
(1) In this section, the expression "violation of this Code" means any of
the following:
(a) Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful,
an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or
regulation authorized by ordinance.
(b) Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by
ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance.
(c) Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a
misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule
or regulation authorized by ordinance.
(2) In this section, "violation of this Code" does not include the failure
of a City officer or City employee to perform an official duty unless
it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as
provided in this section.
B. Penalties.
(1) Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a violation of
this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment. With respect to violations of this Code that
are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation
continues is a separate offense.
(2) The penalty for violations of an ordinance prohibiting driving a
motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
§ 1-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-19
1:11
§ 1-20. Suspension of sentence; probation; community service.
[Added 8-18-1987 by Ord. No. 416]
drugs shall be a fine of not more than $999 or imprisonment for not
more than 179 days, or both.
(3) The penalty for violations of an industrial user wastewater
pretreatment ordinance as required by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency shall be a fine of not more than
$999 per day for each violation.
C. Additional remedies.
(1) The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or
suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative
actions.
(2) Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are
a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other
equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty, however, does not
prevent the simultaneous granting of equitable relief in
appropriate cases.
A. Upon a plea of guilty or a judgment of conviction for violation of a
municipal ordinance, the municipal court may suspend, in whole or in
part, the execution of sentence or place the defendant on probation for
a period not exceeding one year on terms and conditions the court
deems best, or both.
B. Suspension of execution of the sentence or probation, or both, shall be
granted only when the municipal judge is satisfied it will serve the ends
of justice and of the public.
C. The defendant's liability for any fine or other punishment imposed shall
be fully discharged upon successful completion of the terms of
probation.
D. The municipal court may, as a condition of probation, require the
defendant to serve a period of time in volunteer labor to be known as
"community service." The type of labor and period of service shall be at
the sole discretion of the court; provided, however, that any person
receiving community service shall be immune from any civil liability
other than gross negligence arising out of the community service, and
any person who performs community service pursuant to court order or
any criminal diversion program shall not be entitled to any wages, shall
not be considered an employee for any purpose and shall not be entitled
to workers' compensation, unemployment benefits or any other benefits
otherwise provided by law. As used in this section, the expression
"community service" means any labor that benefits the public at large
or any public, charitable or educational entity or institution.
§ 1-19 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1-21
1:12
§ 1-21. Collection of court costs; purpose. [Added 5-24-1994 by Ord.
No. 516; amended 8-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-5]
A. This section is adopted pursuant to the express statutory authority and
direction of NMSA 1978 § 35-14-11 and shall be effective July 1, 2003,
pursuant to that authority.
B. The municipal judge shall collect the following costs:
(1) A corrections fee of $20;
(2) A judicial education fee of $3; and [Amended 7-28-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-05]
(3) A court automation fee of $6.
C. The fees are to be collected upon conviction from persons convicted of
violating any ordinance relating to the operation of a motor vehicle or
any ordinance that may be enforced by the imposition of a term of
imprisonment.
D. All money collected pursuant to Subsection B(1) of this section shall be
deposited in a special fund in the municipal treasury and shall be used
for:
(1) Municipal jailer or juvenile detention officer training;
(2) The construction, planning, construction, operation and
maintenance of a municipal jail or juvenile detention facility;
(3) Paying the cost of housing municipal prisoners in a county jail or
detention facility or housing juveniles in a detention facility;
(4) Complying with match or contribution requirements for the receipt
of federal funds relating to jails or juvenile detention facilities;
(5) Providing inpatient treatment or other substance abuse programs
in conjunction with or as an alternative to jail sentencing;
(6) Defraying the cost of transporting prisoners to jails or juveniles to
juvenile detention facilities; or
(7) Providing electronic monitoring systems.
E. The City of Española may credit the interest collected from fees
deposited in the special fund pursuant to Subsection D of this section to
the City's general fund.
F. All money collected pursuant to Subsection B(2) of this section shall be
remitted monthly to the State Treasurer for credit to the judicial
education fund and shall be used for the education and training,
including production of bench books and other written materials, of the
municipal judges and other municipal court employees.
§ 1-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-21
1:13
G. All money collected pursuant to Subsection B(3) of this section shall be
remitted monthly to the State Treasurer for credit to the municipal
court automation fund and shall be used for the purchase and
maintenance of court automation systems in the municipal courts. The
court automation systems shall have the capability of providing, on a
timely basis, electronic records in a format specified by the judicial
information systems council.
H. As used in this section, "convicted" means the defendant has been
found guilty of a criminal charge by a municipal judge, either after trial,
a plea of guilty or a plea of nolo contendere.
§ 1-21 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1-21
1:14
Chapter 7
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
§ 1-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-21
1:15

ARTICLE I
Appointment and Procedures
[Adopted 5-22-1990 by Ord. No. 460 (Ch. 2, Art. V, of the Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 7-1. Designation; appointment and duties.
The following boards, commissions and committees shall be appointed in
the manner as provided by ordinance, and carry out such duties as are
provided in this chapter or set forth in this Code, as amended:
§ 7-2. Standing boards, commissions or committees.
§ 7-3. Special boards, commissions or committees.
A. Fiesta Advisory Council;
B. Fiesta Committee;
C. Library Board;
D. Lodger's Tax Advisory Board;
E. Grievance Review Board; and
F. Planning and Zoning Commission.
A. "Standing boards, commissions or committees" means an advisory
board, commission or committee, appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the City Council, whose work is to be generally
continuous and a part of the fundamental concerns of the City Council.
B. The Mayor shall appoint the members of the standing boards,
commissions or committees at the organizational meeting of the City
Council and at such other times as the City Council deems appropriate.
A. "Special boards, commissions or committees" means an ad hoc advisory
group which, in the discretion of the Mayor or City Council, will
facilitate the policy-making function of municipal government. Such
group shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of
the City Council, and may be comprised of Council members and
citizens-at-large, or entirely of citizens-at-large.
B. The Mayor shall appoint the members of the special boards,
commissions or committees at the organizational meeting of the City
Council and at such other times as the City Council deems appropriate.
C. With the submission of its final report, or when the special group's task
is completed, the group is automatically dissolved.
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-4
1:17
§ 7-4. Meetings.
All meetings of the boards, commissions or committees shall be held at City
Hall or such other public building as may be designated.
§ 7-5. Quorum and voting.
A majority of all the members of a board, commission or committee
delegation shall constitute a quorum for the transacting of business. A
motion shall carry upon the affirmative vote of the majority of the members
present at any meeting.
§ 7-6. Removal of members.
Except as otherwise provided by law, the City Council may remove any
member of any board, commission or committee by the affirmative vote of
a simple majority of the City Council upon the grounds of malfeasance or
nonfeasance of office, for any reason whatsoever or for no reason.
§ 7-7. Termination of tenure.
The tenure of any member of a board, commission or committee shall
be automatically terminated if such member shall absent himself from
more than three consecutive regular meetings of the group without having
notified the chairman in advance of the reason for such absence, provided
that the City Council, at its discretion, may continue any member in office if
sufficient reason is shown for his absence.
§ 7-8. Vacancies.
If a vacancy occurs on a board or commission or committee, the Mayor, with
the consent of the City Council, shall appoint a person to fill the vacancy for
the remainder of the unexpired term.
§ 7-9. Ex officio members.
The Mayor, members of the City Council, or administrative officers of the
City may be appointed as ex officio members of any board, commission or
committee.
§ 7-10. Scheduling meetings.
Meetings of any board, commission or committee shall be scheduled with
the City Clerk with as much prior notice as is provided in the City open
meetings resolution.
§ 7-4 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 7-10
1:18
ARTICLE II
Committee Rules and Structure
[Adopted 11-30-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-09]
§ 7-11. Establishing committees; limitations.
Committees, which are advisory in nature to the governing body, whether
authorized by specific state statute or by implied powers granted to the
City of Española, shall be established by the Open Meetings Resolution
of the City of Española. In no way is the committee to be used as a
way to "overrule" or "overturn" governing body decisions, ordinances or
resolutions adopted by the City.
§ 7-12. Councilor committees.
The governing body shall create and the Mayor shall appoint, with
governing body approval, representatives from among Council members to
"Councilor committees," which shall be responsible throughout the year for
meeting on topics set forth by the governing body, providing guidance and
support for policies and action. These Councilor committees shall have staff
as recommended below and will be listed in the Open Meetings Resolution
adopted each year by the governing body, along with fixed dates and times
of meetings. Examples of such committees are Public Works, Finance,
Community Development, and Public Safety.
§ 7-13. Public and ad hoc committees.
The Mayor shall create and appoint members to public and/or ad hoc
committees, with the approval of the governing body, as needed. Each
of these committees shall be defined as to their roles at their creation,
whether City staff will support the committees or not, and whether funding,
if needed, shall be given by the City.
§ 7-14. Executive sessions.
Committees can call executive session if it is within the purview of the
committee. In no instance may the executive session of a Councilor
committee be construed to be a decision-making body, as it is the meeting
of an advisory committee to the governing body. Personnel issues and legal
issues, in particular, should be avoided unless they have direct consequence
on the advice to be given to the governing body.
§ 7-15. Role of committees.
The role of the committees is to investigate and discuss policy formulation
or revision, with the input of City staff. All final policy decisions must be
made by the governing board. Rules pertaining to City business shall not be
made without the consent of the governing body.
§ 7-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-16
1:19
§ 7-16. Meeting procedures.
All committee meetings are conducted in accordance with the Open
Meetings Act, NMSA 1978 §§ 10-15-1 to 10-15-4.
§ 7-17. Appointment of officers and members.
All committee chairs and members of assigned committees shall be
appointed and removed by the Mayor with approval of a majority of all the
members of the governing body.
§ 7-18. Administrative staff.
The appointment of an administrative staff member creates a separation
of duties for the purpose of maintaining communication between the
governing body and administration.
§ 7-19. Removal of members.
A committee member may be removed for failure to attend three
consecutive regular committee meetings. Failure to attend three
consecutive regular meetings, without good cause, shall constitute a
presumption of good and sufficient cause for removal. Each committee
shall be responsible for recommending to the Mayor that the nonattending
member be removed.
§ 7-20. Scheduling meetings.
All appointed chairpersons schedule with the Office of the City Clerk the
next proposed date of a committee meeting. The Office of the City Clerk will
schedule meetings in accordance with the Open Meetings Resolution of the
City of Española, adopted annually.
§ 7-21. Recording and posting of agendas and minutes.
The Office of the City Clerk is responsible for recording and posting of all
agendas and minutes for public use in accordance with the Open Meetings
Act, NMSA 1978 §§ 10-15-1 to 10-15-4.
§ 7-22. Joint committee meetings.
A committee chairperson shall communicate with the Office of the City
Clerk in making the determination as to whether there should be a joint
committee meeting for the purpose of efficiency.
§ 7-23. Authority restricted to policy issues.
The committee approved by the governing body shall only hear before
it policy issues. A committee shall not have before it administrative or
personnel issues.
§ 7-16 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 7-24
1:20
§ 7-24. Appointment of Council members to committees.
The City is represented through four voting districts, and it is important that
all districts be represented in each standing Council committee. Therefore,
at least one Councilor from each of the voting districts will be named to
each committee.
§ 7-25. Referrals.
§ 7-26. Action on referrals.
The committee will deal with the policy matter as efficiently as is possible,
taking into consideration necessary research, public input, community and
other prudent considerations.
§ 7-27. Action by governing body.
A. A policy issue may be formed and referred to a committee for review
and research by City Councilors, staff members, members of the public,
or other means; the policy issue may be brought to a meeting of the
governing body for referral to a committee or by direct referral to the
committee.
B. The governing body, at a regular or special meeting, may, by a vote of
the majority, refer a policy to a specific committee for research and
review.
C. A policy issue that is brought directly to a committee for research and
review must meet the subject matter criteria of the committee, and the
governing body shall be made aware the matter is under review by the
committee at the next meeting of the governing body.
A. A policy issue may be taken up by the governing body regardless of its
status in a committee, by a simple vote of the majority.
B. All final committee decisions on a policy matter will be referred to the
governing body for action.
§ 7-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-27
1:21
Chapter 12
CITY COUNCIL
§ 12-1. Duties.
Each Council member shall perform all duties imposed upon him by law, in
addition to other duties while serving as a member of the City Council.
§ 12-2. Compensation.
The compensation paid to each City Council member shall be a monthly
salary of $500.
Chapter 16
CIVIL PREPAREDNESS, DEPARTMENT OF
§ 16-1. Established; composition.
There is hereby established under the executive branch of the government
of the City, in accordance with NMSA 1978 § 12-10-5, a Department of Civil
Preparedness, which shall consist of:
§ 16-2. Purpose; coordination with state and county plans.
The purpose of the civil preparedness organization is to coordinate the
efforts of all municipal agencies and employees and nongovernmental
agencies to prepare for and function in the event of emergencies
endangering the lives and property of the citizens of the City. It shall be the
duty of such organization to coordinate the development of plans for the
effective employment of municipal resources to protect the lives and health
of the citizens of the City and the private and public property therein from
the effects of natural or man-caused disasters, including acts of war, and to
coordinate the implementation of said plans during periods of emergency.
Such plans shall be coordinated with those of Rio Arriba County, and in
consonance with the state civil preparedness plans.
§ 16-3. Coordinator.
A. A Coordinator of Civil Preparedness who shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the concurrence of the City Council and subject to approval
by the State Director.
B. Such additional professional and administrative staff personnel as may
be required to effectively carry out the civil preparedness program.
C. All other City officers and employees, together with those volunteer
forces enrolled to aid them during periods of emergency.
§ 7-27 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 16-3
1:22
§ 16-4. Funds; budget.
Chapter 23
COURT, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 40.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 78.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 86.
A. The Civil Preparedness Coordinator shall be the executive head of the
Department of Civil Preparedness and shall be responsible to the Mayor
for the organization, administration and operation of the civil
preparedness program of the City. The Coordinator shall, acting for the
Mayor, coordinate the civil preparedness activities of all municipal
departments and agencies and nongovernmental agencies, and shall
maintain liaison with and cooperate with the civil preparedness
agencies of the federal government, the state and the other political
subdivisions therein.
B. The Coordinator shall have all necessary authority to act for the City
government in all matters pertaining to civil preparedness, including
the obligation of such municipal funds as may be appropriated for civil
preparedness purposes. He shall develop an organizational structure
for the department, subject to the approval of the City Council, and is
authorized to make appointments to fill the positions established
therein.
A. Funds for necessary expenses of the Department of Civil Preparedness,
including salaries for approved paid positions, may be made available
through appropriations by the City Council in accordance with NMSA
1978 § 12-10-7.
B. The Coordinator shall prepare and submit to the City Council an annual
proposed budget for civil preparedness expenditures, and shall indicate
therein those amounts eligible for matching funds under the federal
civil preparedness assistance programs.
C. Civil preparedness funds may be obligated by the Coordinator only in
the amounts appropriated and for the purposes authorized by the City
Council.
§ 16-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-4
1:23

ARTICLE I
Establishment, Jurisdiction and Fees
§ 23-1. Established; presiding officer.
There is hereby established a Municipal Court in the City. The Municipal
Court shall be presided over by a Municipal Judge.
§ 23-2. Jurisdiction.
The Municipal Court has jurisdiction over all offenses and complaints under
ordinances of the City and may issue subpoenas and warrants and punish
for contempt.1
§ 23-3. Municipal Clerk's authority to accept fines and remittances.
Upon proper designation, the Municipal Clerk may accept fines and
remittances through the Municipal Court on behalf of the City.
1. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 30-28, Filing fees for complaints, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02.
§ 23-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-3
1:25

ARTICLE II
Judge
§ 23-4. Election; term; vacancy.
The elective officers of the City shall include a Municipal Judge. The
Municipal Judge shall be elected for a term of four years. The City Council
may fill any vacancy by appointment of the Municipal Judge to serve until
the next regular municipal election.
§ 23-5. Qualifications.
The Municipal Judge:
§ 23-6. Compensation. [Added 9-24-1985 by Ord. No. 394]
Beginning when the Municipal Judge takes office in the year 1986, the
Municipal Judge shall be paid a salary equal to a full-time state magistrate
judge, as established from time to time by the State Legislature.
§ 23-7. Annual training.
The Municipal Judge shall undergo annual training, as required by NMSA
1978 § 35-14-10, unless exempted by the Chief Justice of the State Supreme
Court, as a prerequisite to drawing his salary.
§ 23-8. Duties and responsibilities.
§ 23-9. Disqualification.
As provided in Article VI, § 18, of the State Constitution, the Municipal
Judge shall not, except by consent of all parties, sit in any cause in which
either of the parties are related to him by affinity or consanguinity within
A. Must be a citizen of the United States.
B. Shall be a legal resident of the state and a qualified elector therein.
C. Shall be a resident of the City.
A. The Municipal Judge shall also be the administrator of the Municipal
Court, and shall be responsible for establishing an effective and
efficient court system. The Municipal Judge shall serve on a full-time
basis and shall have no other employment which would conflict with his
duties as Municipal Judge.
B. Additional duties of the office of Municipal Judge shall be to:
(1) Coordinate and work with community alcoholism programs as they
relate to the Municipal Court.
(2) Coordinate and work with employee assistance programs.
§ 23-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-9
1:27
the degree of first cousin, or in which he was counsel or in which he has an
interest.
§ 23-10. Monthly reports and remittances.
The Municipal Judge shall make monthly written reports to the City Council
of all money collected by him. The reports shall be filed and the money
collected paid to the City not later than the 10th day of the month following
collection.
§ 23-11. Itemized statement of payments.
All required reports shall include an itemized statement showing the
different amounts collected, the purpose of collection, the name of the
person paying and the date of payment.
§ 23-12. Temporary Municipal Judge.
A. Notice required. Whenever the Municipal Judge determines that he will
be temporarily unable to perform the duties of municipal judge,
whether by reason of recusal or disqualification, absence, sickness or
other incapacity, he shall appoint in advance of the event a temporary
Municipal Judge to serve during his temporary absence. For the
purposes of this subsection, the word "appointment" shall mean the
Municipal Judge's designation of a temporary judge by actual notice to
the temporary judge by written notice filed with the Clerk of the Court.
Written notice shall indicate the name of the temporary judge, the
reason for the appointment and the anticipated duration of the
appointment. The appointment shall automatically cease when the
Municipal Judge returns to his duties.
B. Appointment by City Council. If the Municipal Judge becomes unable or
unavailable to perform the duties of Municipal Judge and has failed to
appoint a temporary judge, the City Council shall appoint a temporary
judge, who shall serve until the regular Municipal Judge returns to his
duties. If the City Council declares a vacancy in the office of Municipal
Judge due to the death, removal, resignation or other circumstance
causing a vacancy, as provided by NMSA 1978 § 10-3-1, it may appoint a
temporary judge to serve until a successor Municipal Judge has been
duly appointed by the City Council pursuant to NMSA 1978 § 35-14-4.
C. Qualifications. The temporary Municipal Judge shall be a registered
qualified elector of the City, and shall reside within the corporate limits
of the City.
D. Oath of office. Before assuming the duties of temporary judge, the
temporary Municipal Judge shall take the oath of office as required by
NMSA 1978 § 3-10-2. Once a qualified elector has taken the oath of
office as temporary judge, he shall not be required to repeat the oath on
subsequent appointments. Upon taking the oath of office, the
§ 23-9 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 23-12
1:28
temporary Municipal Judge shall be covered by the corporate surety
bond covering all municipal officials.
E. Salary. The Interim Municipal Judge shall be paid the same amount as
the regular Municipal Judge. Such sum shall be paid out of the general
fund of the municipality. [Amended 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-08]
F. Administrative duties. The requirements of law relating to money
collected, monthly reports, itemized statements and penalties shall
apply to the temporary Municipal Judge.
§ 23-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-12
1:29
Chapter 29
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN
§ 29-1. Title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Economic Development Plan Ordinance."
§ 29-2. Authority.
The Economic Development Plan Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the
statutory authority conferred upon municipalities to allow public support
of economic development (NMSA 1978 §§ 5-10-1 through 5-10-13). This
chapter is adopted as part of the City's Economic Development Plan.
§ 29-3. Purpose.
The purpose of the Economic Development Plan/Ordinance is to allow public
support of economic projects to foster, promote and enhance local economic
development efforts while continuing to protect against the unauthorized
use of public money and other public resources. Further, the purpose of
this chapter is to allow the City to enter into one or more joint powers
agreements with other local governments to plan and support regional
economic development projects.
§ 29-4. Local Economic Development Act authority.
§ 29-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARTS AND CULTURAL DISTRICT — A facility that is owned by the state, a
county, a municipality or a qualifying entity that serves the public through
preserving, educating and promoting the arts and culture of a particular
locale, including theaters, museums, libraries, galleries, cultural
compounds, educational organizations, performing arts venues and
organizations, fine arts organizations, studios and media laboratories and
live-work housing facilities.
A. Local governments are allowed to provide direct or indirect assistance
to qualifying businesses for furthering or implementing economic
development plans and projects; furthermore, local and regional
governments have the authority to contribute assets to development
projects. However, the imposition of a tax must be approved by the
voters in referendum.
B. Eligible uses. Municipalities may impose municipal infrastructure gross
receipts taxes and dedicate the revenue for economic development
projects. A total tax of 0.25% (in four increments of 0.0625%) may be
imposed.
§ 23-12 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 29-5
1:30
BUSINESS INCUBATOR — A business support facility (City-owned) with
processes that accelerate the successful development of start-up and
fledgling companies by providing entrepreneurs with an array of targeted
resources and services. These services are usually developed or
orchestrated by incubator management and offered both in the business
incubator and through network contacts. A business incubator's main goal
is to produce successful firms that will leave the program financially viable
and freestanding. These incubator graduates have the potential to create
jobs, revitalize neighborhoods, commercialize new technologies, and
strengthen local and national economies.
CLUSTER INDUSTRY — A group of business organizations that are located
close together.
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROJECT — The provision of direct or indirect
land, buildings or other infrastructure; public works improvements
essential to the location or assistance to a qualifying business and includes
the purchase, lease, grant, or construction, reconstruction, improvement
or other acquisition or conveyance or expansion of a qualifying business;
and payments for professional services contracts necessary for local or
regional governments to implement a plan or project; the provision of direct
loans or grants for land, buildings or infrastructure; technical assistance
to cultural facilities; loan guarantees securing the cost of land, buildings
or infrastructure in an amount not to exceed the revenue that may be
derived from the municipal infrastructure gross receipts tax or the county
infrastructure gross receipts tax; grants for public works infrastructure
improvements essential to the location or expansion of a qualifying entity;
grants or subsidies to a cultural facility; purchase of land or buildings for a
publicly owned cultural facility or business incubator.
GOVERNING BODY — The City of Española City Council.
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY — A nontangible asset such as computer
software or any other exercise or application of the intellect.
PROJECT PARTICIPATION AGREEMENT — An agreement between a
qualifying entity and the City whereby the City provides assistance to an
economic development project in exchange for the benefits received as set
forth in this chapter.
PUBLIC SAFEGUARDS — A protective stipulation, as in a contract, or a
precautionary measure to guard public assets.
QUALIFYING ENTITY — An existing or proposed corporation, limitedliability
company, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, association or other
person that is one or a combination of two or more of the following:
An industry for manufacturing, processing, or assembling any
agricultural or manufactured products.
A.
A commercial enterprise for storing, warehousing, distributing, or
selling products of agriculture, mining or industry, but other than
provided in Subsection D of this definition, not including any enterprise
for the sale of goods or commodities at retail or for the distribution
B.
§ 29-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-5
1:31
§ 29-6. City assistance.
§ 29-7. Application requirements.
to the public of electricity, gas, water, or telephone or other services
commonly classified as public utilities.
A business in which all or part of the activities of the business involves
the supplying of services to the general public or to government
agencies or to a specific industry or customer, but, other than provided
in Subsection D of this definition, not including businesses primarily
engaged in the sale of goods or commodities at retail.
C.
A telecommunications sales enterprise that makes the majority of its
sales to persons outside of New Mexico.
D.
A. The City Manager, after approval of the governing body, may assist
economic development projects in any legally permissible manner,
including but not limited to provision of land, buildings and
infrastructure, provided that all the requirements of this chapter are
met. The City may provide land, buildings or infrastructure it already
owns, or it may build, purchase or lease the facilities needed for an
economic development project. The City, at its discretion, may bear the
full cost or contribute a portion of the costs, including the waiver of
applicable fees. The City, at its discretion, may also contribute to the
payment of costs for professional service contracts such as industry
feasibility studies and planning and design services needed to
implement a project.
B. The governing body may consider offering all forms of assistance
allowed under this chapter and any other legally permissible forms of
assistance; however, this does not establish any obligation on the City's
part to offer any specific type or level of assistance.
A. Any qualifying entity meeting the definition set forth in § 29-5 may
propose an economic development project to the City. Meeting the
definition of a "qualifying entity" does not create any obligation on the
part of the City of Española.
B. Applications from qualifying entities shall be submitted to the City of
Española on forms provided by the City.
C. Applications shall contain the following information for business
applicants:
(1) Identification information:
(a) Complete name and address of entity.
(b) Incorporation papers with bylaws.
(c) List of board of directors and executive director, with
addresses.
§ 29-5 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 29-7
1:32
§ 29-8. Review criteria.
(d) Resumes of all directors and officers.
(2) Evidence of financial solvency (personal statement of principals):
(a) Financial statement (income statement and balance sheets) for
the past three years.
(b) Federal tax number, State of New Mexico Taxation and
Revenue number and City business license.
(c) Projected income statement for at least three years.
(3) Evidence of organizational capacity:
(a) Brief history of the entity.
(b) Organizational chart of the entity.
(c) Business plans for the entity and proposed project (shall
include pro-forma cash flow analysis).
(4) Miscellaneous requirements:
(a) The project participation agreement.
(b) Any other pertinent information will be forwarded to the
governing body for final consideration at a public meeting.
A. Applications for economic development projects requesting economic
assistance from the City which meet the policies and objectives of the
City's Economic Development Plan shall receive priority. Examples
include, but are not limited to:
(1) Manufacturing firms (including intellectual property such as
computer software);
(2) Projects, which enhance the exporting capacity of companies and/
or provide goods and services which currently have to be imported
into Española;
(3) Private companies seeking to build, expand or relocate facilities;
(4) Private companies which provide facilities or services which
enhance the ability of Española businesses to operate;
(5) Organizations, which assist business start-ups or bring small
companies together to increase their competitive abilities. This
must involve a tangible project which will create jobs and promote
an industry. Examples include, but are not limited to:
(a) Business incubators;
§ 29-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-8
1:33
(b) Art incubators or coalitions (e.g., a performing arts coalition
seeking construction of rehearsal or performance facilities);
(c) Public markets for farmers, gardeners, crafts, etc.; and
(d) Organizations which foster economic development by
promoting work force development efforts such as
apprenticeships or other job training programs;
(6) Projects in industry clusters listed above are particularly
encouraged, but others are eligible to apply as well. The intention
is to retain flexibility in the use of incentives; and
(7) Qualifying entities with existing contract or projects with the City
when this plan is adopted may propose a restructuring of their
projects as an economic development project.
B. All applications for economic development projects requesting
economic assistance from the City shall submit a cost-benefit analysis.
Preparing a cost-benefit analysis shall be the responsibility of the
applicant. The City retains the right to specify a format and
methodology for the cost-benefit analysis. The City trustees shall review
and approve the methodology used. The source and rationale for any
multiplier effects shall be identified. The cost-benefit analysis shall
show that the City will recoup the value of its donation within a period
of 10 years. The analysis shall address the following:
(1) The number and type of jobs to be created, both temporary
construction jobs and permanent jobs (by New Mexico Department
of Labor job category);
(2) Pay scale of jobs;
(3) Determination of which jobs are expected to be filled locally and
which will be filled by transfers from other facilities or recruited
from outside the Española Valley area;
(4) Total payroll expected at start-up and after one year;
(5) Anticipated impact on local tax base; and
(6) Anticipated impact on local school systems.
C. All applicants for economic development projects requesting economic
assistance from the City shall require the same review required of
industrial revenue bond applications. This review shall focus on
environmental and community impacts of proposed projects. Special
attention shall be given to job training and career advancement
programs and policies. Projects shall demonstrate a strong commitment
to providing career opportunities for Española Valley area residents.
Cultural impacts of projects shall also be considered.
§ 29-8 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 29-8
1:34
§ 29-9. Performance review; security interest; transfer of interest;
term of commitment.
D. Any qualifying entity seeking assistance shall prepare and make
available a job training and career development plan for its employees.
E. All applicants for economic development projects requesting economic
assistance from the City shall clearly demonstrate the benefits which
will accrue to the community as a result of the donation of public
resources. The City has considerable flexibility in determining what is
considered "adequate benefits." Benefits, such as providing
components or production capabilities, which enhance a targeted
industry cluster, or addressing critical deficiencies in the regional
economy, may be recognized. The benefits claimed of any proposal will
receive careful scrutiny. However, it is the intent of this chapter to be
flexible in the evaluation of these benefits, and to recognize the
qualitative as well as quantitative impact of a proposal.
F. All applicants for economic development projects requesting assistance
from the City shall clearly demonstrate how the qualifying entity is
making a substantive contribution. The contribution shall be of value
and may be paid in money, in-kind services, jobs, expanded tax base,
property or other thing or service of value for the expansion or
improvement of the economy. The City retains flexibility in defining the
"substantive contributions." The benefits identified in the previous
subsections may be accepted as adequate contributions on their own,
or cash donations may be required. Assistance in providing affordable
housing to its employees or the community at large may also qualify.
Determination of what constitutes an acceptable contribution for a
given project shall be at the discretion of the governing body.
A. All economic development projects receiving assistance from the City
shall be subject to an annual performance review conducted by the City
of Española. This review shall evaluate whether the project is attaining
the goals and objectives set forth in the project participation
agreement. This review shall be presented to the governing body for its
consideration. The governing body, at a public hearing, may terminate
assistance to the economic development project by provisions set forth
in the agreement which terminate the agreement and specify the
disposition of all assets and obligations of the project.
B. The City shall retain a security interest, which shall be specific in the
project participation agreement. The type of security given shall
depend upon the nature of the economic development project and
assistance provided by the City. Types of security may include, but are
not limited to:
(1) Letter of credit in the City's name;
(2) Performance bond equal to the City's contribution;
§ 29-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-9
1:35
§ 29-10. Project participation agreement.
(3) A mortgage or lien on the property or equipment;
(4) Pro-rated reimbursement of donation if company reduces work
force or leaves the community before the term agreed to; and
(5) Other security agreeable to both parties.
C. Should a qualifying entity move, sell, lease or transfer a majority
interest in the economic development project before the expiration of
the project participation agreement, the City retains the right to deny
any and all assignments, sales, leases or transfers of any interests in the
economic development project until adequate assurances are made that
the transferee, assignee or lessee is a qualifying entity and that the
terms of the agreement will be satisfied by the transferee, assignee or
lessee. At its discretion, the City may choose to deny said assignment,
lease or transfer or may negotiate a new agreement with the new
operator, or the City may reclaim the facility and enter into an
agreement with the new qualifying entity.
D. Any qualifying entity seeking assistance from public resources shall
commit to operate in accordance with its project participation
agreement for a minimum of 10 years from the date the ordinance is
adopted and the project participation agreement is passed by the
governing body.
A. The qualifying entity shall prepare with the City a project participation
agreement. This agreement is the formal document which states the
contribution and obligation of all parties in the economic development
project.
B. The agreement must state the following items:
(1) The economic development goals of the project;
(2) The contribution of the City and the qualifying entity;
(3) The specific measurable objectives upon which the performance
review will be read;
(4) A schedule for project development and goal attainment;
(5) The security being offered for the City's investment;
(6) The procedures by which a project may be terminated and the
City's investment recovered; and
(7) The time period for which the City shall retain an interest in the
project. Each project agreement shall have a "sunset" clause after
which the City shall relinquish interest in and oversight of the
project.
§ 29-9 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 29-10
1:36
§ 29-11. Project monies.
All project monies shall be kept in a separate account by the entity and the
City, with such account clearly identified. These accounts shall be subject to
an annual independent audit.
§ 29-12. Termination.
The governing body may terminate this chapter and the City's economic
development plan and any or all project participation agreements
undertaken under its authority. Termination shall be by ordinance at a
public hearing or in accordance with the terms of the project participation
agreement. If an ordinance or a project participation agreement is
terminated, all contract provisions of the project participation agreement
regarding termination shall be satisfied. Upon termination of the ordinance
or any project participation agreement, any City monies remaining in the
City project accounts shall be transferred to the City's general fund.
§ 29-13. Joint regional projects.
The City may engage in economic development projects involving one or
more other government entities for projects which encompass more than
one municipality, county or pueblo (Native American) government. In such
instances, the relevant governing bodies shall adopt a joint powers
agreement. This agreement will establish the application criteria and the
terms of all project participation agreements. Criteria established under
a joint powers agreement shall be consistent with the provisions of this
chapter.
Chapter 34
ELECTION DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Elections — See Ch. 175.
§ 34-1. Purpose and intent.
C. Each project participation agreement shall be subject to review and
approval by the governing body at a public hearing.
A. This chapter may be referred to as the "2011 Redistricting Ordinance."
B. In reestablishing the district boundaries, the governing body
considered the following principles in the following order of priority:
(1) Each district shall contain as nearly as possible substantially the
same population based upon the most recent federal census.
§ 29-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-1
1:37
§ 34-2. Creation of districts; elections; Council member residency.
There are four two-member municipal election districts which include the
following precincts and portions of precincts located within the municipal
boundaries of the City of Española:
Rio Arriba County Precincts 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 12, 10, 11, 36 and 40
Santa Fe County Precincts 1, 58, 59 and 79
§ 34-3. District map.
The boundaries of each municipal election district are shown on the
municipal election district map revised as of November 25, 2011, marked
as Exhibit A attached hereto and incorporated herein, which is hereby
adopted as the official districting map and is to be kept in the custody of the
Municipal Clerk.
Chapter 40
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards and commissions — See Ch. 7.
City Council — See Ch. 12.
Municipal Court — See Ch. 23.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 78.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 86.
(2) Redistricting plans must avoid dilution of minority voting strength.
(3) Communities of interest, including those based upon ethnic and
economic factors, shall be preserved within a single district
whenever reasonable.
(4) Each district shall be formed of compact, contiguous territories.
(5) The total length of all district boundary lines shall be as short as
possible.
(6) Redistricting plans shall compensate for 2010 United States
Census undercount of minorities.
(7) District boundaries shall be reviewed and revised if necessary
following each decennial federal census.
C. District boundaries shall be reviewed and revised, if necessary,
following each decennial federal census.
§ 34-1 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 40-1
1:38
§ 40-1. Intent.
It is essential to the proper administration and operation of the City of
Española that the members of its governing body be, and give the
appearance of being, independent and impartial; that public office not be
used for private gain; and that there be public confidence in the integrity
of the governing body. The governing body finds that the public interest
requires that it protect against such conflicts of interest by establishing
appropriate ethical standards with respect to the conduct of the members
of the governing body in situations where a conflict may exist.
§ 40-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMPLAINT — A written sworn statement filed with the City Clerk
containing specific allegations of misconduct by a member; provided,
however, such allegations must be filed within six months of discovery of the
alleged misconduct.
GOVERNING BODY or MEMBER OF THE GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor
or any Council member of the City and any member appointed to any board
or commission of the City.
INTEREST — Any direct pecuniary benefit, which is not a remote interest
held by or accruing to a member of the governing body as a result of a
contract or transaction that is or may be the subject of an official act or
action by or with the City. A member of the governing body shall be deemed
to have an interest in transactions involving:
§ 40-3. Prohibitions.
A. Any person in the member's immediate family;
Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the
member may receive any payment or other benefits unless the member
is receiving a benefit for goods or services in the normal course of
business for which the member has paid a commercially reasonable
rate;
B.
Any business in which the member is a director, officer, employee,
agent, or shareholder, except as otherwise provided herein; or
C.
Any person of whom the member is a creditor, whether secured or
unsecured.
D.
A. No member of the governing body shall:
(1) By conduct, give reasonable basis for the impression that any
person can improperly influence him/her or unduly enjoy his/her
favor in the performance of official acts.
§ 40-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-3
1:39
(2) Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a
gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for himself/herself or
another person if it could reasonably be considered to influence the
member in the discharge of official duties.
(3) Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by
virtue of his/her official position for his/her or another person's
private gain.
(4) Use his/her official position to attempt to secure privileges that are
not available to the general public.
(5) Engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any
private business or professional activity when such employment or
rendering of services is adverse to and incompatible with the
proper discharge of official duties.
(6) Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law now
existing or hereafter enacted which is applicable to him/her by
virtue of being a member of the governing body.
(7) Use his/her position to request or require an employee to:
(a) Do clerical work on behalf of the member's family, business,
social, church or fraternal interest when such work is not
furthering a City interest;
(b) Perform any work outside the employee's normal course of
municipal employment;
(c) Purchase goods or services to be used for personal, business,
or political purposes; and
(d) Work for the member personally without paying the employee
just compensation.
(8) Use government property of any kind for other than officially
approved activities, nor shall he/she direct employees to use such
property for any purposes other than those officially approved.
(9) Use his/her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of
coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to
himself/herself or persons having an interest.
B. The prohibition in Subsection A(2) of this section shall not apply in the
case of:
(1) An occasional nonpecuniary gift in the amount of $50 or less.
(2) An award publicly presented in recognition of public service.
(3) A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made
in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual
§ 40-3 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 40-3
1:40
§ 40-4. Disclosure of conflicts of interest.
An appointed member of the governing body who has an interest that he/
she has reason to believe may be affected by his/her official acts or actions
or by the official acts or actions of the governing body shall disclose the
precise nature of such interest by written or verbal statement three days
prior to the governing body's taking official action on a matter affecting
such interest and abstain from discussion and voting. An elected member
of the governing body shall disclose the nature of any interest he/she has
at the time such matter is presented to Mayor and Council for discussion.
Such written or verbal statements shall be recorded into the minutes of
the meeting and thus become part of the public record. Following any
disclosure made pursuant to this section, the member shall refrain from all
ex-parte communications with other members regarding the application in
which he/she has an interest.
§ 40-5. Disqualification.
A member of the governing body shall disqualify himself/herself from
participating in any official act or action of the City that results in a
pecuniary benefit to the member or a business or activity in which he/she
has an interest, when such benefit is not available to the public at large.
§ 40-6. Contracts.
authorized by the laws of New Mexico to engage in the making of
such a loan or financial transaction.
(4) Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with
New Mexico law and the Española City Code.
C. The prohibition in Subsection A(5) of this section shall not apply to a
member of the governing body who is a licensed professional and
appears on behalf of any applicant in such professional capacity so long
as disclosures required by Section 2-5-4 et seq. are made to the board
or commission Chairperson 30 days prior to any action being taken, and
the member is associated with the project at the time the initial
application is filed.
A. The City shall not enter into any contract involving services or property
with a member of the governing body or with a business in which a
member of the governing body has an interest. This subsection shall not
apply in the case of the designation of a bank or trust company as a
depository for City funds.
B. Permitted contracts include Subsection B(1) through (4) below:
(1) The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution or
organization which offers the lowest available rate of interest in the
community for such loan.
§ 40-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-6
1:41
§ 40-7. Restrictions on contracts with former members of governing
body.
The City shall not enter into any contract with any person or business
represented by such person who has been, within the preceding twelvemonth
period, a member of the governing body, unless a competitive bid or
a committee selection process awards the contract.
§ 40-8. Complaints.
Any person having a complaint against any member of the governing body
for an alleged ethics violation shall file in writing a complaint setting
forth the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the alleged
violation against the governing body. The complaint shall be filed with the
City Clerk. Upon notification of a complaint, the Mayor or, in the event
the complaint regards the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem, shall appoint three
members of Council, who, along with the City Attorney, shall constitute
an investigating committee to determine whether the complaint sets forth
significant facts and circumstances so as to warrant a hearing before the
Board of Ethics. The committee shall make a determination, within 10 days
of receiving the complaint, whether to forward the complaint to the Ethics
Board or dismiss the complaint for failure to substantiate a claim. In the
event the complaint does not set forth sufficient facts to constitute an
alleged violation and is found unjustified, frivolous or patently unfounded,
it shall be dismissed and the complainant notified immediately. In the event
the complaint is found to state sufficient facts to warrant a hearing before
the Board of Ethics, the Board shall be appointed as provided herein.
All complaints are subject to the New Mexico Public Records Act,3 as
applicable.
§ 40-9. Board of Ethics.
(2) Contracts entered into in accordance with the Official Procurement
Code of New Mexico.2
(3) Contracts entered into under circumstances that constitute an
emergency situation, provided that the Mayor prepares a written
record explaining the emergency.
(4) Contracts entered into with a member of the governing body, or
with a business in which a member of the governing body has an
interest, provided that such contract is the result of a competitive
bid, disclosure of the nature of such member's interest is made
prior to the time any bid is submitted, and a waiver of the
prohibition contemplated by this section is issued by the City
Manager following disclosure.
A. Composition of the Board of Ethics.
2. Editor's Note: See NMSA 1978 § 13-1-28 through 13-1-199.
3. Editor's Note: See NMSA 1978 § 14-3-1 et seq.
§ 40-6 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 40-9
1:42
(1) The Board of Ethics of the City shall be composed of five residents
of the City to be appointed as provided in Subsection A(2) and (3) of
this section. Each member of the Board of Ethics shall have been a
resident of the City for at least one-year immediately preceding the
date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the City while
serving as a member of the Board of Ethics. No person shall serve
as a member of the Board of Ethics if the person has, or has had
within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract,
transaction, or official action of the City.
(2) The Mayor and Councilors shall each designate two qualified
citizens to provide a pool of 18 individuals who have consented to
serve as a member of such Board of Ethics and who will be
available for a period of two years to be called upon to serve in the
event a Board of Ethics is appointed.
(3) The City Manager shall maintain a listing of these 18 qualified
citizens. Should the investigating committee determine a complaint
warrants a hearing before the Board of Ethics, the Mayor and
Council shall direct the City Manager, at the first public meeting
after such determination, to draw names randomly from the listing
of qualified citizens until the specified five members of the Board of
Ethics have been appointed. Such Board will elect one of its
members to serve as Chairman.
(4) The members of the Board of Ethics shall serve without
compensation. The governing body of the City shall provide
meeting space for the Board of Ethics. Subject to budgetary
procedures and requirements of the City, the City shall provide the
Board of Ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be
reasonably necessary for it to perform its duties and
responsibilities.
B. The constituted Board of Ethics shall have the following duties and
powers:
(1) To establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its
internal organization and conduct of its affairs.
(2) To hold a hearing within 60 days after the receipt of complaint.
(3) To prescribe forms, approved by the City Attorney, for the
disclosure required in this chapter and to make available to the
public information disclosed as provided in this section.
(4) To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards
required by this chapter.
(5) To make such investigation and response to a complaint as it deems
necessary to determine whether any person has violated any
provisions of this chapter.
§ 40-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-9
1:43
§ 40-10. Service of complaint; hearing; disposition of complaint.
The Board of Ethics as appointed herein shall cause the complaint to
be served on the member of the governing body charged as soon as
practicable. Service may be by personal service or by certified mail, return
receipt requested. A hearing shall be held within 60 days after filing of
the complaint. The Board of Ethics shall conduct the hearing in accordance
with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances,
the hearing shall include the taking of sworn testimony and the crossexamination
of witnesses. The decision of the Board of Ethics shall be
rendered to the Mayor and Council, City Manager and City Attorney within
five days after completion of the hearing.
§ 40-11. Penalty; Council member rights.
§ 40-12. Appeals.
Chapter 45
FIESTA DEL VALLE DE ESPAÑOLA
(6) To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as deemed
necessary to investigate and rule upon complaints.
(7) To report its findings to the governing body for such action as the
governing body deems appropriate.
C. The Board of Ethics members shall be appointed by the governing body
within 60 days of the enactment of this chapter.
A. Any member of the governing body who knowingly violates any
provision of the Code of Ethics provided in this chapter may be subject
to public reprimand or censure by the governing body of the City.
B. At any hearing held by the Board of Ethics, the member of the
governing body who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to
written notice of the allegations at least 10 business days before a
hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the
evidence and witnesses and to present evidence and witnesses in
opposition or in extenuation.
A. Any member of the governing body or the complainant adversely
affected by these findings of the Board of Ethics may obtain judicial
review of such decision as provided in this section.
B. An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application
for a writ of certiorari in the First Judicial District Court within 30 days
after the decision of the Board of Ethics. The filing of such application
shall act as supersedes.
§ 40-9 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 45-1
1:44
§ 45-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the Fiesta del Valle de
Española, to achieve participation in the various fiesta events by the civicminded
citizens of this community and to provide centralized supervision
over persons who sponsor, conduct or manage the various fiesta activities,
and to ensure fiscal and financial responsibility on the part of those who
solicit and collect fees, assessments and contributions from the people
of the City. This chapter is adopted for the purpose of promoting and
protecting the public safety, health and welfare of the community, and shall
be liberally construed to carry out its purposes.
§ 45-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
FIESTA COMMITTEE — A committee consisting of the Mayor and two
members of the Fiesta Council, appointed under the terms of this chapter.
FIESTA COUNCIL — A council appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the City Council, under the terms of this chapter.
FIESTA DEL VALLE DE ESPAÑOLA — The annual public celebration held in
this City to commemorate and celebrate the initial conquest of New Mexico
by Captain Juan de Oñate in July 1598, and the establishment of his capital
at San Gabriel de Los Españoles, at the confluence of the Rio Chama and
the Rio Grande del Norte.
§ 45-3. Fiesta Advisory Council created.
There is hereby created a Fiesta Advisory Council, called "Council" in this
chapter, which shall consist of 20 members to 40 members to be appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the majority of the membership
of the City Council. The Mayor shall designate the Chairman of the Council,
and the Council shall meet as often as is necessary in the discretion of the
Chairman to discharge its duties and shall promulgate its own bylaws and
regulations, subject to the approval of the Fiesta Committee.
§ 45-4. Fiesta Committee created.
There is hereby created a permanent committee to be known as the
"Committee on the Fiesta del Valle de Española," called "Fiesta Committee"
in this chapter, which shall consist of the Mayor as Chairman and two other
members of the Fiesta Advisory Council to be appointed by the Chairman of
such Council. The Fiesta Committee shall in its discretion delegate duties
and responsibilities as required to the Fiesta Council in order to accomplish
the purpose of this chapter. The Fiesta Committee shall report regularly to
the City Council.
§ 45-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-5
1:45
§ 45-5. Property acquired by Committee to be property of City.
All property acquired by the Fiesta del Valle de Española Fiesta Committee
shall be the property of the City.
§ 45-6. Delegation of powers.
The City may delegate to a nonprofit corporation created for such purpose
all rights, powers and duties authorized by this chapter.
Chapter 49
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 192.
Fireworks — See Ch. 196.
Sprinkler systems — See Ch. 286.
§ 49-1. Created. [Amended 9-1-1998 by Ord. No. 603]
There is hereby created a Fire Department for the City.
§ 49-2. Composition.
The department created by this chapter shall consist of such number of fire
fighters as may be established from time to time.
§ 49-3. Duties generally.
The Fire Department, its Chief and its members shall be diligent in the
performance of their duties, and shall continually work to improve
conditions in the City which may be hazardous for life and property from
fire. Fire prevention shall be a fundamental responsibility of the
Department.
§ 49-4. Inspection of certain buildings.
A. It shall be the right of the Chief of the Fire Department, or his designee
under his direction, to inspect periodically every building or place
within the City where kerosene, coal, oil, gasoline or other like
combustibles or inflammables are kept or stored, and he shall swear out
warrants with the Chief of Police for failing, neglecting, or refusing to
comply with any provisions, regulations, or requirements recommended
by the Fire Department pertaining to such keeping or storing.
B. Any person violating the provisions of this section or who shall refuse to
allow the Chief of the Fire Department or his designee to make proper
inspection of the store, building, warehouse or house used as a store,
§ 45-5 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 49-4
1:46
§ 49-5. Interfering with fire apparatus or equipment.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the fire engines, hook
and ladders, or other apparatus connected therewith or belonging to the
City or its Fire Department, or to interfere with any other fire-fighting
equipment of the City.
§ 49-6. Interference with fire fighters.
No person shall interfere with, hinder or delay any member of the Fire
Department in the discharge of his duties.
§ 49-7. Possession and control of buildings on fire.
Immediately upon the arrival upon the premises, the Chief or next ranking
officer of the Fire Department shall have sole and absolute possession and
control of any and all buildings on fire within the City and shall so remain
in possession and control until the fire shall be extinguished and premises
abandoned by the Fire Department.
§ 49-8. Right-of-way over adjoining property in case of fire.
While endeavoring to control or extinguish the burning of any building or
structure within the City, the Fire Department, under the order of its Chief
or officer in charge, may enter and pass through and over any adjacent or
neighboring lot, house and structure of any kind.
Chapter 67
LIBRARY
building or warehouse, belonging to, or under the control of such
person, shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article III, Violations and Penalties, § 1-19.
§ 49-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-8
1:47

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 67-1. Established.
There hereby is established in the City a free public library to be known
in this chapter as the "Española Public Library"; established as a proper
and legitimate object of municipal expenditures and operation and as part
of the government of the City pursuant to and by authority of NMSA 1978
§ 3-14-14.4
§ 67-2. Library fund.
There is hereby created within the municipal budget of the City a library
fund, and such fund shall be administered by the City Manager as are other
funds of the City. All money derived from any charges, fines or penalties,
together with appropriations from other funds by the City for salaries,
books, supplies or other purposes, shall be placed in the library fund,
together with any monetary gifts, bequests or donations to the City for the
library, as provided in § 67-9.
§ 67-3. Annual budget.
The Library Board shall cause to be made and submitted to the City Council
an annual budget on the first day of the first regular meeting of the City
Council in May of each year.
§ 67-4. Director and other personnel.
A. A duly qualified Library Director and such other assistant librarians, or
other personnel which the City Manager determines may be necessary
for the operation and maintenance of the library shall be selected and
employed by the City Manager. The Library Board shall have the right
and obligation to establish qualifications for such personnel and to
make recommendations to the City Manager as to such employment.
B. The duties of the Library Director shall be those imposed on library
directors by law, and he shall be considered the executive officer of the
Library Board, and shall have charge of the administration of the library
under the direction and review of the City Manager. The Library
Director shall be responsible for the care of the building and
equipment, the supervision of the assistant librarians and the staff, the
efficiency of the library service to the public, the operation of the
library, the financial condition set forth in the annual budget, and the
Library Director shall attend all Library Board meetings.
4. Editor's Note: See NMSA 1978 § 3-18-14, regarding municipal libraries.
§ 67-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-4
1:49

ARTICLE II
Public Library Board
§ 67-5. Created.
There is hereby created the Española Public Library Board as an advisory
agency of the City.
§ 67-6. Composition; terms; compensation. [Amended 6-12-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-02]
The Library Board shall consist of nine members who shall be residents of
the City or the surrounding area and who shall be appointed by the Mayor
of the City with the consent and approval of a majority of the City Council.
They shall serve without compensation. The Mayor, with the consent and
approval of the Council, shall also designate from the membership of the
City Council an ex officio member of the Library Board. The terms of all
members shall be three years The term of the ex officio member appointed
from the City Council shall be for two years. Except as otherwise provided,
all terms shall expire on July 1 three years thereafter or when their
successors have been duly appointed and qualified. At the first meeting of
the Board, the members shall elect a President, Vice President and other
officers as may be necessary and proper to carry out the functions of the
public library.
§ 67-7. Meetings. [Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
The Library Board shall hold regular meetings at such time and place as the
Library Director and Chairman of the Library Board shall determine, but
not less frequently than two times per calendar year.
§ 67-8. Duties.
The Board is hereby charged with the responsibility and conduct of the
affairs of the Española Public Library, subject to the mandates of the Mayor
and City Council. The Library Board shall act in an advisory capacity and
shall advise and assist the City Council in every possible way to ensure
the efficient and economical management of the Española Public Library.
It shall be the duty of the advisory board in its advisory role to advise the
Library Director of the Española Public Library in all matters pertaining to
the management and operation of the Española Public Library.
§ 67-9. Powers.
A. The Library Board, with the approval of the Mayor and the City Council,
shall establish and operate the Española Public Library and shall have
control and management thereof, including the following powers:
(1) Receive and dispose of any gift, donation, devise or bequest that is
made to the City for the purpose of establishing, increasing or
improving the library. If the gift is monetary, it shall be controlled
§ 67-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-9
1:51
for accounting purposes by the City Manager. Nevertheless, an
accounting of any gift, for property control purposes, shall be made
to the City Manager.
(2) Apply the use, profit, proceeds, interests and rents accruing from
any such property in any manner that will best improve the library
and its use.
(3) Make bylaws and reasonable rules and regulations for the
operation of the public library not in conflict with other ordinances
of the City or state statutes. These rules and regulations shall be
posted in conspicuous places in the library for public inspection
and review.
B. Nothing in this section shall prevent the Española Public Library from
receiving gifts of books, money, or any other real or personal property,
for the use and benefit of the Española Public Library, and controlling
and managing such gifts as described in Subsection A of this section.
§ 67-9 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 67-9
1:52
Chapter 72
MASTER PLAN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 200.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 290.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 294.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 311.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 72-1. Preparation; contents.
§ 72-2. General purposes.
In the preparation of the Master Plan the Commission shall make careful
and comprehensive surveys and studies of the existing conditions and
probable future growth of the municipality and its environs. The plan shall
be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a
coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the municipality
which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote
health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, character, or the
A. It shall be the function and duty of the Planning Commission to make
and approve a Master Plan for the physical development of the
municipality, including any areas outside of the corporate limits and
within the planning and platting jurisdiction of the City as determined
by the laws of the state, which in the Commission's judgment bear
relation to the planning of the municipality.
B. The Master Plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts, and
descriptive and explanatory matter, shall show the Commission's
recommendations to the City Council for such physical development,
and may include, among other things, the general location, character,
and extent of streets, bridges, viaducts, parks, parkways, waterways
and waterfront developments, playgrounds, airports, and other ways,
grounds, places and spaces; the general location and extent of public
utilities and terminals, whether privately or publicly owned, for water,
light, power, heat, sanitation, transportation, communication and other
purposes; the acceptance, widening, abandonment or change of use of
any of such public ways, grounds, places, spaces, buildings, properties,
utilities or terminals; the general location, character, layout and extent
of community centers, and neighborhood units; and the general
character, extent and layout of the replanning of blighted districts and
slum areas.
C. The Commission may from time to time recommend an amendment,
extension or addition to the Master Plan or may recommend that any
part or subject matter be carried into greater detail.
§ 67-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-2
1:53
general welfare, as well as the efficiency and economy in the process of
development.
§ 72-3. Adoption.
The Commission may approve the adoption of the Master Plan as a whole by
a single resolution, or, as the work of making the Master Plan progresses,
may from time to time adopt parts of the Master Plan, any such parts to
correspond generally with one or more of the functional subdivisions of the
subject matter of the plan; provided, however, that before the adoption of
the Master Plan or part of the Master Plan, the Commission and the City
Council shall hold at least one public hearing, notice of the time and place
of which shall be given at least 15 days in advance by publication in a
newspaper having general circulation in the community. The adoption of
the plan or any part, amendment or addition shall be by resolution carried
by the affirmative votes of not less than a majority of the members of
the Planning Commission, subject to the approval of the City Council. The
resolution shall refer expressly to the maps, descriptive and other matters
intended by the Commission to form the whole or part of the plan, and the
action taken shall be recorded on the adopted plan or part of the plan by the
identifying signatures of the members of the Commission and by the Mayor
and attested by the Municipal Clerk.
§ 72-4. Approval of actions following adoption of plan; exceptions.
A. After a Master Plan or any part of the Master Plan has been approved,
and within the area of the Master Plan or any part so approved, the
approval of the Planning Commission is necessary to construct,
authorize, accept, widen, narrow, remove, extend, relocate, vacate,
abandon, acquire or change the use of any:
(1) Park, street or other public way, ground, place or space;
(2) Public building or structure; or
(3) Utility, whether publicly or privately owned.
B. The failure of the Planning Commission to act within 65 days after the
submission of a proposal to it constitutes approval of the proposal
unless the proponent agrees to an extension of time. If the Planning
Commission disapproves a proposal, it must state its reasons to the City
Council. The City Council may overrule the Planning Commission and
approve the proposal by a two-thirds vote of all its members.
C. None of the provisions of NMSA 1978, Ch. 3, Art. 19 (NMSA 1978,
§ 3-19-1 et seq.), shall apply to any existing building, structure, plant or
other equipment owned or used by any public utility or the right to its
continued use or its reasonable repair or alteration for the purpose for
which it was used at the time the Master Plan or any part of the Master
Plan affecting the property takes effect. After the adoption of the
Master Plan or any part of the Master Plan affecting the property, all
§ 72-2 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 72-4
1:54
Chapter 78
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards and commissions — See Ch. 7.
City Council — See Ch. 12.
Municipal Court — See Ch. 23.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 40.
Fire Department — See Ch. 49.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 86.
Police Department — See Ch. 94.
extensions, betterments or additions to buildings, structures, plants
or other equipment of any public utility shall be made in conformity
with the Master Plan or any part of the Master Plan affecting the
property and upon the approval of the Planning Commission. After a
public hearing, the State Corporation Commission or the State Public
Service Commission, or the regulatory agency having jurisdiction, or
their successors having jurisdiction as the case may be, may order
that the extensions, betterments or additions to buildings, structures,
plants or other equipment are reasonable and that the extensions,
betterments or additions may be made even though they conflict with
the adopted Master Plan or any part of the Master Plan affecting the
property.
D. Any public agency or official not under the jurisdiction of the City
Council authorizing or financing a public way, ground, place, space,
building, structure or utility shall submit the proposal to the Planning
Commission. If the Planning Commission disapproves the proposal, the
board of the public agency, by a two-thirds vote of all its members, or
the official may overrule the Planning Commission and proceed with the
proposal, subject to the provisions of Subsection C of this section.
§ 72-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-4
1:55

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 1, of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 78-1. Organizational meeting; appointment and removal of
officers. [Amended 10-15-1985 by Ord. No. 395]
A. At the organizational meeting of the City Council, which shall be held
on the second Monday following the election, the Mayor shall submit,
for confirmation by the City Council, the names of persons who shall be
employed by the City to fill the positions of City Manager, City Clerk,
Chief of Police and Field Superintendent. Incumbent persons holding
these positions prior to the organizational meeting may be removed
during the organizational meeting at the pleasure of the City Council by
a majority vote of all members of the City Council, without hearing and
without showing cause.
B. Subsequent to the organizational meeting of the City Council, the City
Manager, City Clerk, Chief of Police and Field Superintendent shall not
be removed except upon just and probable cause relating to
malfeasance in office, neglect of their duties or failure to carry out the
orders of the City Council. Such removal by the City Council shall be
effective when five or more members of the City Council vote in the
affirmative for removal.
§ 78-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-1
1:57

ARTICLE II
Mayor
[Adopted 2-27-1990 by Ord. No. 459 (Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 2, of the
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 78-2. Compensation.
The compensation of the Mayor of the City shall be a monthly salary of
$800.
§ 78-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-2
1:59

ARTICLE III
City Manager
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 3, of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 78-3. Office created.
There is hereby created the office of City Manager.
§ 78-4. Appointment and selection; residency; authority.
§ 78-5. Term.
The City Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term, except as
otherwise provided.
§ 78-6. Limitation on appointment of elective officer as Manager.
No elective officer of the City shall be appointed City Manager during the
term for which he shall have been elected.
§ 78-7. Oath; bond.
The City Manager shall take the oath prescribed by law and shall furnish
a surety bond in the sum of $10,000 to be approved by the City Council.
Such bond shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of his duties.
The premium of the bond shall be paid by the City.
A. The Mayor shall appoint, with the consent of a majority of all the
members of the City Council, a Manager who shall be responsible for
the proper and efficient administration of the government of the City.
The Manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of administrative
qualifications, and his selection shall not be limited by reason of former
residence. However, residency must be established in the metropolitan
area within 90 days of appointment.
B. The Manager shall have a seat, but no vote, at every meeting of the City
Council.
C. All municipal employees, including department heads, supervisors, the
Chief of Police and the Field Superintendent, are subordinate to the
City Manager. All employees except the City Clerk, City Attorney, and
Chief of Police are subject to discharge or suspension at the discretion
of the City Manager in accordance with the personnel merit system of
the City. The City Clerk, Chief of Police and City Attorney are subject to
discharge or suspension only by the City Council.
D. The Municipal Judge is an elected public official.
§ 78-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-8
1:61
§ 78-8. Compensation.
The City Manager shall receive such compensation as the Council shall fix
by resolution.
§ 78-9. Qualifications.
The City Manager shall have a college degree, preferably in business, public
administration, or some other field allied to municipal administration, and
shall have two years' experience in administration in an executive capacity,
preferably in or under a city manager form of government.
§ 78-10. Duties.
The Manager shall:
A. Enforce and carry out all ordinances, rules and regulations enacted by
the City Council;
B. Administer the day-to-day business and matters of the City;
C. Employ, suspend, demote and discharge all persons engaged in the
administrative service of the municipality, in accordance with the
personnel merit system of the City, except the City Clerk, City Attorney,
and Chief of Police, who are subject to employment discharge or
suspension by the City Council;
D. Prepare and submit an annual budget;
E. Make recommendations to the City Council on all matters concerning
the welfare of the municipality;
F. Administer the personnel merit system by means of rules and
regulations authorized by the Code or other applicable law;
G. Subject to City Council approval, issue and administer supplemental
personnel rules and regulations as are necessary for the effective
implementation of the Code, Council policy and rules and regulations
adopted pursuant to the Code;
H. Recommend contractual arrangements with any qualified persons for
performance of such technical services as may be desired in the
establishment and operation of the personnel program; and
I. Delegate in writing responsibility for administering various procedural
phases of the personnel program.
§ 78-8 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 78-10
1:62
Chapter 86
PERSONNEL POLICIES
§ 78-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-10
1:63

ARTICLE I
Collective Bargaining
[Adopted 4-18-1995 by Ord. No. 539 (Ch. 74, Art. III, of the Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 86-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
APPROPRIATE BARGAINING UNIT — A group of employees designated by
the Board for the purpose of collective bargaining. Appropriate units shall
be formed by occupational group, such as blue collar (unskilled, semiskilled,
and skilled), white collar (clerical, secretarial, administrative employees),
paraprofessional, technical, professional, corrections, police, and fire.
BOARD — The City Labor Management Relations Board.
CERTIFICATION — The designation by the Board of a labor organization as
the exclusive representative for all employees in an appropriate bargaining
unit.
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING — The act of negotiating between the employer
and an exclusive representative for the purpose of entering into a written
agreement regarding wages, hours and other terms and conditions of
employment.
CONFIDENTIAL EMPLOYEE — A person who assists and acts in a
confidential capacity with respect to a person who formulates, determines
and effectuates management policies.
EMPLOYEE — A regular nonprobationary employee of the City.
EMPLOYER — The City.
EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE — A labor organization that, as a result
of certification by the Board, represents all employees in an appropriate
bargaining unit for the purposes of collective bargaining.
FACT-FINDING — The procedure following mediation whereby the parties
involved in an impasse submit their differences to a third party for an
advisory recommendation.
GOVERNING BODY — The City Council.
IMPASSE — Failure of the employer and an exclusive representative, after
good-faith bargaining, to reach agreement in the course of negotiating a
collective bargaining agreement.
LABOR ORGANIZATION — Any employee organization, one of whose
purposes is the representation of public employees in collective bargaining
and in otherwise meeting, consulting, and conferring with employers on
matters pertaining to employment relations.
§ 86-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-1
1:65
LOCKOUT — An act by the employer to prevent its employees from going
to work for the purpose of resisting demands of the employees' exclusive
representative or for the purpose of gaining a concession from the exclusive
representative.
MANAGEMENT EMPLOYEE — An employee who is engaged primarily in
executive and management functions and is charged with the responsibility
of developing, administering or effectuating management policies. An
employee shall not be deemed a management employee solely because
the employee participates in cooperative decision-making programs on an
occasional basis.
MEDIATION — Assistance by an impartial third party to resolve an impasse
in contract negotiation between the employer and an exclusive
representative through interpretation, suggestion and advice.
PROFESSIONAL EMPLOYEE — An employee whose work is predominantly
intellectual and varied in character and whose work involves the consistent
exercise of discretion and judgment in its performance and requires
knowledge of an advanced nature in a field of learning customarily
requiring specialized study at an institution of higher education or its
equivalent. The work of a professional employee is of such character that
the output or result accomplished cannot be standardized in relation to a
given period of time.
STRIKE — An employee's refusal, in concerted action with other employees,
to report for duty or his willful absence or withholding of service in whole
or in part from the full, faithful, and proper performance of the duties of
employment for the purpose of inducing, influencing or coercing a change
in the working conditions, compensation, rights, privileges or obligations of
employment.
SUPERVISOR — An employee who devotes a substantial amount of work
time to supervisory duties, who customarily and regularly directs the work
of two or more other employees and who has the authority in the interest
of the employer to hire, promote or discipline other employees or to
recommend such actions effectively. This definition does not include
individuals who perform merely routine, incidental, or clerical duties or
who occasionally assume supervisory or directory roles or whose duties are
substantially similar to those of their subordinates and does not include
lead employees or employees who participate in peer review or occasional
evaluation of employees.
§ 86-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to guarantee employees the right to organize
and bargain collectively with their employer, to protect the rights of the
employer and to promote harmonious and cooperative relationships
between the employer and the employees; and to acknowledge the rights of
the citizens to the orderly and uninterrupted delivery of services.
§ 86-1 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 86-3
1:66
§ 86-3. Interpretation.
In the event of conflict with other City ordinances, the provisions of this
article shall supersede other previously enacted ordinances.
§ 86-4. Rights of employees.
Employees, other than management, supervisors, and confidential
employees, may form, join or assist any labor organization for the purpose
of collective bargaining through representatives chosen by the employees
without interference, restraint or coercion. Employees also have the right
to refuse to form, join or assist any labor organization.
§ 86-5. Management rights.
Unless limited by the provisions of a collective bargaining agreement or by
other statutory provision, the employer's rights shall include, but are not
limited to, the following:
§ 86-6. Labor Management Relations Board.
A. Direct and supervise all operations, functions and the work of the
employees;
B. Hire, lay off, promote, demote, assign, reassign, transfer, discipline,
discharge or terminate employees;
C. Determine what, by whom and when services will be rendered to the
citizens;
D. Determine staffing requirements, create, abolish positions or eliminate
or reorganize work units;
E. Determine the need for and the qualifications of new employees, and
determine the qualifications for and qualifications of employees
considered for transfer and promotion;
F. Take actions as necessary to carry out the mission of the employer in
emergencies; and
G. The employer retains all rights not specifically limited by a collective
bargaining agreement or other statutory provision.
A. Creation; terms.
(1) The Labor Management Relations Board is hereby created. The
Board shall be composed of three members appointed by the City
Council. One member shall be appointed on the recommendation of
individuals representing labor, one member shall be appointed on
the recommendation of the City Manager, and one member shall be
appointed on the recommendation of the first two appointees.
§ 86-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-6
1:67
(2) Board members shall serve for a period of one year, with terms
commencing in the month of September except in the initial
appointment which will be a shorter term effective the same day as
the ordinance from which this section is derived. Vacancies shall be
filled in the same manner as the original appointment, and such
appointments shall only be made for the remainder of the
unexpired term. A Board member may serve an unlimited number
of terms.
(3) During the term of appointment, no Board member shall hold or
seek any other political office or public employment or be an
employee of a union or an organization representing public
employees or public employers.
(4) Each Board member shall be paid per diem and mileage in
accordance with the provisions of the Per Diem and Mileage Act
(NMSA 1978 § 10-8-1 et seq.).
B. Powers and duties.
(1) The Board shall promulgate rules and regulations necessary to
accomplish and perform its functions and duties as established in
this article, including the establishment of procedures for:
(a) The designation of appropriate bargaining units;
(b) The selection, certification and decertification of exclusive
representatives; and
(c) The filing of, hearing on and determination of complaints of
prohibited practices.
(2) The Board shall:
(a) Hold hearings and make inquiries necessary to carry out its
functions and duties; and
(b) Request from employers and labor organizations the
information and data necessary to carry out the functions and
responsibilities of the Board.
(3) The Board may issue subpoenas requiring, upon reasonable notice,
the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
any evidence, including books, records, correspondence or
documents relating to any matter in question. The Board may
prescribe the form of the subpoena, but it shall adhere insofar as
practicable to the form used in civil actions in the District Court.
The Board may administer oaths and affirmations, examine
witnesses and receive evidence.
(4) The Board shall decide all issues by majority vote and shall issue its
decisions in the form of written orders and opinions. The decisions
of the Board on interpretation and applications of this article and
§ 86-6 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 86-6
1:68
§ 86-7. Hearing procedures.
collective bargaining agreements are final and binding on the
parties, subject to the appeal process provided in § 86-18. This
section does not apply to negotiation impasses.
(5) The Board has the power to enforce provisions of this article, which
includes the labor management agreements between parties
covered by this article, through the imposition of appropriate
administrative remedies.
(6) The Board shall have no power to promulgate policy other than for
its own operation.
(7) No rule or regulation promulgated by the Board shall require,
directly or indirectly, as a condition of continuous employment, any
employee covered by this article to pay money to any labor
organization that is certified as an exclusive representative. This
issue shall be left to voluntary bargaining by the parties.
A. Purposes of hearings. The Board may hold hearings for the purposes of:
(1) Information gathering and inquiry;
(2) Adopting rules and regulations; and
(3) Adjudicating disputes and enforcing the provisions of a labor
management agreement, the provisions of this article and rules and
regulations adopted pursuant to this article.
B. Procedural regulations. The Board shall adopt regulations setting forth
procedures to be followed during hearings of the Board. Such
regulations shall meet minimal due process requirements of the State
and Federal Constitutions.
C. Prohibited labor practices charges; filing; fee. Prohibited labor
practices charges that are filed within 60 days of the commission,
omission or discovery of the action that generated the charges shall be
heard by the Board. Charges filed beyond the sixty-day limit shall not be
heard by the Board and are not considered timely. Such charges must
identify the specific violation and relief requested. Proceedings against
the party alleged to have committed a prohibited practice shall be
commenced by service upon it and the Board of a written notice,
together with a copy of the charges and relief requested. A filing fee of
$100 shall be paid by any party filing a prohibited labor practice
complaint with the Board. The filing fee may be waived by the Board for
any party which can establish the inability to pay.
D. Filing of adopted rules. All adopted rules and regulations shall be filed
in accordance with applicable laws.
E. Recordkeeping. A verbatim record made by electronic or other suitable
means shall be made of every rule-making and adjudicatory hearing.
§ 86-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-7
1:69
§ 86-8. Appropriate bargaining units.
The record shall not be transcribed unless required for judicial review
or unless ordered by the Board. Payment for the transcription shall be
made by the party requesting the transcript.
F. Costs of producing witnesses. Each party to a prohibited labor practice
shall bear the cost of producing its own witnesses for hearings under
this article.
G. Public hearing and comment on proposed regulations. No regulation
proposed to be adopted by the Board that affects any person or
governmental entity outside of the Board and its staff shall be adopted,
amended or repealed without public hearing and comment on the
proposed action before the Board. The public hearing shall be held after
notice of the subject matter of the regulation, the action proposed to be
taken, the time and place of the hearing, the manner in which
interested persons may present their views, and the method in which
copies of the proposed regulation, proposed amendment or repeal of an
existing regulation may be obtained. All meetings shall be held in the
City. Notice shall be published once at least 30 days prior to the hearing
date in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, and notice shall
be mailed at least 30 days prior to the hearing date to all persons who
have made a written request for advance notice of hearings.
A. Factors for determining. The Board shall, upon receipt of a petition for a
representation election filed by a labor organization, designate the
appropriate bargaining unit. Appropriate bargaining units shall be
established on the basis of occupational groups with a clear and
identifiable community of interest in employment terms, employment
conditions and related personnel matters among the employees
involved. Occupational groups shall generally be identified as blue
collar, white collar, paraprofessional, technical, professional,
corrections, police and fire. Bargaining units shall not be determined by
craft or trade designations. The parties, by mutual agreement and
approval of the Board, may further consolidate occupational groups.
Essential factors in determining appropriate bargaining units shall
include the principles of efficient administration of government, the
history of collective bargaining with the employer and the assurance to
employees of the fullest freedom in exercising the rights guaranteed by
the Public Employee Bargaining Act (NMSA 1978 § 10-7D-1 et seq.).5
B. Hearing on composition upon disagreement. If the labor organization
and the employer cannot agree on the appropriate bargaining unit
within 30 days, the Board shall hold a hearing concerning the
composition of the bargaining unit. Any agreement as to the
appropriate bargaining unit between the employer and the labor
organization shall be subject to the approval of the Board.
5. Editor's Note: NMSA 1978 §§ 10-7D-1 through 10-7D-26 were repealed by L. 1992, Ch. 9,
§ 30, effective 7-1-1999. See now NMSA 1978 § 10-7E-1 et seq.
§ 86-7 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 86-8
1:70
§ 86-9. Representation elections.
§ 86-10. Exclusive representation.
C. Excluded employees. The Board shall not include in any appropriate
bargaining unit probationary, supervisory, managerial or confidential
employees.
A. Whenever, in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Board, a
petition is filed by a labor organization containing the signatures of at
least 30% of the employees in an appropriate bargaining unit, the Board
shall conduct a secret ballot representation election.
B. Once a labor organization has filed a petition with the Board calling for
a representation election, other labor organizations may seek to be
placed on the ballot. Any organization may file a petition containing the
signatures of not less than 10% of the employees in the appropriate
bargaining unit no later than 10 days after the Board has posted a
written notice that a petition containing the signatures of not less than
30% of the employees has been filed by a labor organization.
C. All representation elections, except runoff elections, shall include the
option for no representation.
D. In the event of an election with two or more organizations on the ballot
where none of the choices received a majority of the votes cast, a runoff
election shall be held within 15 days. The choices on the runoff election
shall consist of the two choices which received the greatest number of
votes in the original election.
E. Where a majority of the votes cast are in favor of representation by a
labor organization and at least 60% of the members in the bargaining
unit have cast a vote, the Board shall certify the labor organization as
the exclusive representative for all employees in that appropriate
bargaining unit. No labor organization shall be certified as an exclusive
representative unless at least 60% of the members of the bargaining
unit vote in the election.
F. No election shall be conducted if an election has been conducted in the
twelve-month period immediately preceding the proposed
representation election. No election shall be held during the term of an
existing collective bargaining agreement, except as provided in
§ 86-11B.
G. Election disputes shall be resolved by the Board.
A. A labor organization that has been certified by the Board as
representing the employees in the appropriate bargaining unit shall be
the exclusive representative of all employees in the appropriate
bargaining unit. The exclusive representative shall act for all employees
in the bargaining unit and negotiate a collective bargaining agreement
covering all employees in the bargaining unit. The exclusive
§ 86-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-10
1:71
§ 86-11. Decertification of exclusive representative.
§ 86-12. Scope of bargaining.
representative shall represent the interests of all employees in the
bargaining unit without discrimination or regard to membership or
nonmembership in the labor organization.
B. This section does not prevent an employee, acting individually, from
presenting a grievance without the intervention of the exclusive
representative. At any hearing on a grievance brought by an employee
individually, the exclusive representative shall be afforded the
opportunity to be present and make its views known. Any adjustment
made shall not be inconsistent with or in violation of the collective
bargaining agreement then in effect between the employer and the
exclusive representative.
A. Any member of a labor organization or the labor organization itself may
initiate decertification of a labor organization as the exclusive
representative if 30% of the employees in the appropriate bargaining
unit make a written request to the Board for a decertification election.
Decertification elections shall be held in a manner prescribed by the
Board.
B. When there is a collective bargaining agreement in effect, a request for
a decertification election shall be made to the Board no earlier than 90
days and no later than 60 days before the expiration of the collective
bargaining agreement; provided, however, that a request for a
decertification election may be filed at any time after the expiration of
the third year of a collective bargaining agreement with a term of more
than three years.
C. When, within the time period prescribed in Subsection B of this section,
a competing labor organization files a petition containing signatures of
at least 30% of the employees in the appropriate bargaining unit, a
representation election rather than a decertification election shall be
conducted.
D. When an exclusive representative has been certified but no collective
bargaining agreement is in effect, the Board shall not accept a request
for a decertification election earlier than 12 months subsequent to a
labor organization's certification as the exclusive representative.
A. Except for a retirement program provided under the Public Employees
Retirement Act (NMSA 1978 § 10-11-1 et seq.), the parties shall bargain
in good faith on wages, hours and other terms and conditions of
employment and other issues agreed to by the parties.
B. Bargaining in good faith shall not require either party to agree to a
proposal or to make a concession.
§ 86-10 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 86-12
1:72
§ 86-13. Negotiations and impasse resolution.
C. The obligation to bargain collectively imposed by this article shall not
be construed as authorizing employers and exclusive representatives to
enter into any agreement that is in conflict with state statutes or federal
statutes. In the event of conflict between the provision of any federal or
state statutes and any agreement entered into by the employer and the
exclusive representative, the former shall prevail.
D. Payroll deduction of the exclusive representative's membership dues
shall be a mandatory subject of bargaining if either party chooses to
negotiate the issue. The amount of dues shall be certified in writing by
an official of the labor organization and shall not include special
assessments, penalties or fines of any type levied by the exclusive
representative. During the time that a Board certification is in effect for
a particular exclusive representative, the employer shall not deduct
dues for any other labor organization from members of the same
bargaining unit.
E. Any agreement provision by the employer and an exclusive
representative that requires the expenditure of funds shall be
contingent upon the specific appropriation of funds by the governing
body and the availability of funds to fund the agreed-upon provision.
F. Any agreement by an employer and an exclusive representative shall
contain a grievance procedure culminating with final and binding
arbitration. Final and binding arbitration applies only to grievances and
does not apply to negotiation impasses.
A. Closed meetings. The following meetings shall be closed:
(1) Meetings for the discussion of collective bargaining strategy
between the employer and the employer's negotiating team;
(2) Collective bargaining sessions; and
(3) Consultations and impasse resolution procedures at which the
employer and the exclusive representative of the appropriate
bargaining unit are present.
B. Impasse procedure. The following impasse procedure shall be followed
by the employer and exclusive representative:
(1) Either party may declare an impasse if no agreement has been
reached by the contract expiration date or within 120 days of the
first negotiating session on the negotiation of the first agreement.
Once an impasse exists, a mediator from the Federal Mediation and
Conciliation Service will be assigned by the Board.
(2) If the impasse continues after a sixty-day mediation period, either
party may request from the Board that a fact-finder be assigned to
the negotiations. A fact-finder will be selected by the parties from a
§ 86-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-13
1:73
§ 86-14. Prohibited practices for employers.
No employer or his representative shall:
§ 86-15. Prohibited practices for employees and labor
organizations.
An employee, labor organization or its representative shall not:
list of individuals requested from the Federal Mediation and
Conciliation Service.
(3) The fact-finder shall conduct hearings with the parties. The factfinder
shall complete all work and submit a recommendation to the
parties and the Board within 45 calendar days of initial
appointment. If the parties have not reached agreement within 10
days after receipt of the fact-finder's report, the Board shall publish
the report.
(4) The cost for the mediator or the fact-finder shall be borne equally
by the parties to the impasse.
A. Discriminate against an employee with regard to terms and conditions
of employment because of the employee's membership in a labor
organization;
B. Interfere with, restrain or coerce any employee in the exercise of any
right guaranteed under this article;
C. Dominate or interfere in the formation, existence or administration of
any labor organization;
D. Discriminate in regard to hiring or any term or condition of employment
in order to encourage or discourage membership in a labor
organization;
E. Discharge or otherwise discriminate against an employee because he
has signed or filed an affidavit, petition, grievance or complaint or given
any information or testimony under the provisions of this article or
because an employee is forming, joining or choosing to be represented
by a labor organization;
F. Refuse to bargain collectively in good faith with the exclusive
representative;
G. Refuse or fail to comply with any provisions of this article or Board
regulation; or
H. Refuse or fail to comply with any collective bargaining agreement.
A. Discriminate against an employee with regard to labor organization
membership because of race, color, religion, creed, age, disability, sex
or national origin.
§ 86-13 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 86-15
1:74
§ 86-16. Strikes and lockouts.
§ 86-17. Agreements valid; enforcement.
All collective bargaining agreements and other agreements between
employers and exclusive representatives are valid and enforceable
according to their terms when entered into in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
§ 86-18. Judicial enforcement; standard of review.
B. Solicit membership for an employee or labor organization during the
employee's duty hours. This does not include the break or lunch period.
C. Use City time, property or equipment for union business other than as
provided in a collective bargaining agreement between the parties.
D. Interfere with, restrain or coerce any employee in the exercise of any
right guaranteed by the provisions of this article.
E. Restrain or coerce any elected official for the purpose of gaining a
concession.
F. Refuse to bargain collectively in good faith with the employer.
G. Refuse or fail to comply with any collective bargaining agreement with
the employer.
H. Refuse or fail to comply with any provision of this article.
I. Picket homes or private businesses of Board members, elected officials
or employees of the City.
J. Interfere with or coerce the employer in the selection of its agent for
bargaining.
A. No employee or labor organization shall engage in a strike. No labor
organization shall cause, instigate, encourage or support a strike. The
employer shall not cause, instigate or engage in an employee lockout.
B. Should the employer allege that a strike has occurred by the bargaining
unit employees, the Labor Management Relations Board shall meet in
emergency session, within 48 hours of the filing of the charge by the
employer, and determine whether a strike has indeed occurred.
C. Any labor organization that causes, instigates, encourages or supports
a public employee strike, walkout, or slow-down may be decertified as
the exclusive representative for that appropriate bargaining unit by the
Board and shall be barred from serving as the exclusive representative
for any bargaining unit of the City employees for a period of not more
than one year.
§ 86-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-18
1:75
A. The Board may request the District Court to enforce any order issued
pursuant to this article, including those for appropriate temporary
relief and restraining orders. The Court shall consider the request for
enforcement on the record made before the Board. The Court shall
uphold the action of the Board and take appropriate action to enforce it
unless the Court concludes that the order is:
(1) Arbitrary, capricious or an abuse of discretion;
(2) Not supported by substantial evidence on the record considered as
a whole; or
(3) Otherwise not in accordance with law.
B. Any person or party, including any labor organization, affected by a final
regulation, order or decision of the Board may appeal to the District
Court for further relief. All such appeals shall be based upon the record
made at the Board hearing. All such appeals to the District Court shall
be taken within 30 days of the date of the final regulation, order or
decision of the Board. Actions taken by the Board shall be affirmed
unless the Court concludes that the action is:
(1) Arbitrary, capricious or an abuse of discretion;
(2) Not supported by substantial evidence on the record taken as a
whole; or
(3) Otherwise not in accordance with law.
§ 86-18 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 86-18
1:76
ARTICLE II
Retiree Health Coverage
[Adopted 7-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-06]
§ 86-19. Coverage under state act.
Pursuant to the terms of the Retiree Health Care Act,6 the City of Española
determines to be included in coverage under the Act.
6. Editor's Note: See NMSA 1978 § 10-7C-1 et seq.
§ 86-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-19
1:77
Chapter 90
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards and commissions — See Ch. 7.
Master Plan — See Ch. 72.
Fair housing — See Ch. 184.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 294.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 90-1. Creation.
There is hereby created the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City.
§ 90-2. Purpose.
The purpose of the Commission created by this chapter shall be to serve as
an advisory commission.
§ 90-3. Membership; composition; qualifications; appointment;
terms; vacancies.
§ 90-4. Compensation of members.
Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve as such
without compensation. Actual expenses incurred by any member may be
reimbursed upon recommendation of the Commission and when authorized
and approved by the City Council.
§ 90-5. Meetings and records.
A. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of seven members
who shall be residents of the City or of the County of Rio Arriba or of the
County of Santa Fe, within a five-mile radius of the corporate limits, but
no more than four members of this Commission may reside outside the
City. The Commission members shall be qualified by training,
experience and ability to exercise sound and practical judgment on
civic, social, economic and governmental affairs. The members shall be
appointed by the Mayor with approval of the majority of all members of
the City Council, each for a term of two years. There shall be no limit as
to the number of terms a person might serve on the Commission
through reappointment. Members shall serve on the Commission until
their successors are duly appointed and qualified.
B. Prior to the expiration date of a member's term on the Commission, in
such time as to allow the City Council due deliberation regarding a
successor, the Mayor shall nominate for appointment to the Planning
and Zoning Commission persons to fill such vacancies.
§ 86-19 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 90-5
1:78
§ 90-6. Chairman.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall elect a Chairman from among
its members for a term of one year, with eligibility for reelection, and may
fill such other of its offices as it may create in a manner prescribed by rules
which may be adopted by such Commission.
§ 90-7. Secretary.
The Chairman may appoint one of the members of the Planning and Zoning
Commission to serve as Secretary, or may call upon the Municipal Clerk to
act in that capacity.
§ 90-8. Employees.
City employees may, from time to time, be assigned to assist in the work of
the Commission, but employment at the City's expense of special employees
or consultants, hired specifically for aid in the work of the Planning and
Zoning Commission, may be engaged only upon the express authorization
of the City Council.
§ 90-9. Jurisdiction.
The territorial jurisdiction of the Commission created by this chapter with
relation to planning and zoning shall be that as determined by law, and the
Commission, in its advisory capacity, may make recommendations to the
City Council within the territorial limits as prescribed by law.
§ 90-10. Powers and duties.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have those powers and duties
as are specifically provided by this chapter and the ordinances with relation
to planning and zoning now in effect or to be enacted by the City Council.
All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the Commission, within a
reasonable time, such available information as it may require for its work.
The Commission, its members and employees, in the performance of its
functions, may enter upon any land, make examinations and surveys, and
place and maintain necessary monuments or markers thereon. In general,
the Commission shall have all such powers as may be necessary to enable
it to fulfill and perform its functions, promote municipal growth and
development or carry out all the purposes of this chapter.
A. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold at least one regular
meeting each month and shall adopt rules for the transaction of its
business and keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings,
and determinations. All meetings of the Commission shall be open to
the public.
B. A transcript of all proceedings before the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall be submitted to the City Council within 10 days of the
date any meeting of such Commission is held.
§ 90-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-10
1:79
Chapter 94
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 86.
§ 94-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide the City with an alert and welltrained
police force, free from any and all political control or domination,
and to provide tenure and an adequate wage scale for the members of the
Police Department.
§ 94-2. Creation.
There is hereby created a department of the City which shall be known as
the "Police Department."
§ 94-3. Composition.
The City Police Department shall be composed of the Chief and such
number of members and other personnel as may be established by the City
Council from time to time.
§ 94-4. Training.
The Manager and Chief of Police shall, from time to time, schedule such
training for Department members and personnel in modern police practices
as they shall deem advisable.
Chapter 121
VETERANS MEMORIAL FOUNDATION
§ 121-1. Findings.
A. The City of Española created the Española Veterans' Memorial with
federal, state and local funds.
B. The Española Veterans' Memorial honors those men and women who
honorably served our nation in all the wars and conflicts that this nation
has endured to preserve our freedom, liberty, and democratic way of
life.
C. The City takes great honor in establishing this chapter, thereby laying
the cornerstone for the Española Veterans' Memorial Foundation to
perpetuate the Española Veterans' Memorial. In so doing, the City
§ 90-10 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 121-1
1:80
§ 121-2. Creation; Board membership.
The governing body of the City of Española hereby creates the Española
Veterans Memorial Foundation; and the initial Board of five members shall
be appointed by the Mayor and ratified by the City Council.
§ 121-3. Responsibilities.
The Española Veterans Memorial Foundation has the responsibility to:
§ 121-4. Duties of City.
The City of Española shall:
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 128
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT AND USES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 133.
Public dances — See Ch. 169.
Minors — See Ch. 241.
Offenses — See Ch. 260.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 270.
honors its unselfish veterans who heroically served their country and
ensured our freedoms and our American way of life.
A. Perpetuate itself with its bylaws; and
B. Create and fiscally manage an endowment for the purpose of
maintaining, expanding, and preserving this Memorial to recognize
honorably discharged veterans of our northern New Mexico
communities.
A. Make available the property for the Española Veterans Memorial at no
cost to the Española Veterans Memorial Foundation.
B. Assume all liability for the property and facilities belonging to the City
of Española.
C. Assume the responsibility to maintain, expand and preserve the
Española Veterans Memorial in the event that the Foundation is unable
to do so.
§ 121-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-4
1:81

ARTICLE I
Indecent Behavior
[Adopted as Ch. 10, Art. III, Div. 1, and Ch. 70, Art. V, Div. 1, of the
Code of Ordinances]
§ 128-1. Indecent dancing.
§ 128-2. Indecent exposure.
§ 128-3. Indecent waitering.
§ 128-4. Prostitution and related offenses.
A. Indecent dancing consists of a person knowingly and intentionally
exposing his intimate parts to public view while dancing or performing
in a licensed liquor establishment. The term "intimate parts" means the
mons pubis, penis, testicles, mons veneris, vulva, female breast or
vagina. As used in this section, the term "female breast" means the
areola, and the word "exposing" does not include any act in which the
intimate part is covered by any nontransparent material.
B. Whoever commits indecent dancing is guilty of a misdemeanor. A liquor
licensee, his transferee or their lessee or agent who allows indecent
dancing on the licensed premises is guilty of a petty misdemeanor and
his license may be suspended or revoked pursuant to the provisions of
law.
A. Indecent exposure consists of a person knowingly and intentionally
exposing his primary genital area to public view. "Primary genital area"
means the mons pubis, penis, testicles, mons veneris, vulva or vagina.
B. Whoever commits indecent exposure is guilty of a misdemeanor.
A. Indecent waitering consists of a person knowingly and intentionally
exposing his intimate parts to public view while serving beverage or
food in a licensed liquor establishment. The expression "intimate parts"
means the mons pubis, penis, testicles, mons veneris, vulva, female
breast or vagina. As used in this section, the term "female breast"
means the areola, and the word "exposing" does not include any act in
which the intimate part is covered by any nontransparent material.
B. Whoever commits indecent waitering is guilty of a misdemeanor.
C. A liquor licensee or his lessee or agent who allows indecent waitering
on the licensed premises is guilty of a petty misdemeanor, and his
license may be suspended or revoked pursuant to the provisions of law.
A. Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the acts
defined or described in this section.
B. Prostitution. Prostitution consists of knowingly engaging in or offering
to engage in sexual intercourse for hire.
§ 128-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-4
1:83
§ 128-5. Possession of marijuana. [Amended 12-13-1988 by Ord. No.
436]
§ 128-6. Fortunetelling.
It shall be unlawful to practice or engage in fortunetelling, palmistry,
reading futures and the like.
C. Patronizing prostitutes. Patronizing prostitutes consists of:
(1) Entering or remaining in a house of prostitution with intent to
engage in sexual intercourse with a prostitute; or
(2) Knowingly hiring a prostitute to engage in sexual intercourse.
D. Promoting prostitution. Promoting prostitution consists of any person:
(1) Knowingly establishing, owning, maintaining or managing a house
of prostitution, or participating in the establishment, ownership,
maintenance or management of a house of prostitution;
(2) Knowingly permitting any place which a person partially or wholly
owned or controlled to be used as a house of prostitution;
(3) Knowingly procuring a prostitute for a house of prostitution;
(4) Knowingly inducing another to become a prostitute;
(5) Knowingly soliciting a patron for a prostitute or for a house of
prostitution;
(6) Knowingly procuring a prostitute for a patron;
(7) Knowingly procuring transportation for, paying for the
transportation of, or transporting a person within this state with
the intention of promoting that person's engaging in prostitution;
or
(8) Knowingly being employed by a house of prostitution to perform
any function which constitutes promoting prostitution.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally possess marijuana
unless it was obtained pursuant to a valid prescription or order of a
practitioner while acting in the course of his professional practice, or
except as otherwise authorized by the Controlled Substances Act,
NMSA 1978 § 30-31-1 et seq.
B. Any person convicted of violating Subsection A of this section shall pay
a fee of $75 to defray the costs of chemical or other analyses. This fee
shall be in addition to other penalties for violations which may be
provided by law. All funds collected pursuant to this subsection shall be
transmitted to the administrative office of the courts pursuant to NMSA
1978 § 31-12-9.
§ 128-4 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 128-6
1:84
Chapter 133
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult entertainment and uses — See Ch. 128.
Regulation of businesses — See Ch. 158.
Public dances — See Ch. 169.
Minors — See Ch. 241.
Offenses — See Ch. 260.
Smoking — See Ch. 278.
§ 128-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-6
1:85

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 133-1. Definitions. [Amended 6-23-1993 by Ord. No. 503]
The definitions in NMSA 1978 § 60-3A-3, as now or hereafter amended,
apply to this chapter.
§ 133-2. Sale prohibited except in compliance with chapter.
The sale or the possession for the purpose of sale, or offering for sale, of
alcoholic beverages is hereby prohibited in the City, except upon the terms
and conditions specified in this chapter.
§ 133-3. Drinking in public places.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or use any alcoholic beverages of
any kind, whether lawfully purchased or not, in any public dance hall, pool
room, bowling alley, or any public street or highway, or in any other public
place, excepting establishments having a license to dispense alcoholic
beverages.
§ 133-4. Underage persons procuring alcoholic beverages.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to purchase,
attempt to purchase or otherwise procure, consume or have in his
possession, or within a vehicle under his control, any beer or other alcoholic
beverages, unless accompanied by his parent or legal guardian.
§ 133-5. Intoxicated persons. [Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-02]
An intoxicated person who meets the requirements for protective custody
as set out within NMSA 1978 § 43-2-8 may be picked up by police and taken
to a holding facility, where they will be allowed to stay until they wish to
leave the facility.
§ 133-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-5
1:87

ARTICLE II
Dealers
§ 133-6. Hours and days of sale.
§ 133-7. Loitering of underage persons.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any saloon to permit a
person under the age of 21 years to attend, frequent or loiter in or about
such premises without being accompanied by the parents or guardian of
such person.
§ 133-8. Selling of alcoholic beverages in public places.
It shall be unlawful to sell, serve, furnish, or permit the drinking or
consumption of alcoholic beverages in any public place, private club, or key
club, whether operated for profit or not, except establishments having a
license to dispense alcoholic beverages by the owner, lessee, or proprietor
of such establishments.
A. Alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, delivered or consumed on
licensed premises only during the following hours and days:
(1) On other weekdays from after 12:00 midnight of the previous day
until 2:00 a.m., then from 7:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight; and
(2) On Sundays only after 12:00 midnight of the previous day until 2:00
a.m., except as provided in Subsection B of this section.
B. Any holder of a dispenser or club license may, upon payment of an
additional fee of $100, obtain a permit to sell, serve or permit the
consumption of alcoholic beverages by the drink on the licensed
premises on Sundays from 12:00 noon until 12:00 midnight except as
otherwise provided in Subsection C of this section. The permit shall
expire on June 30 of each year and may be renewed from year to year
upon application for renewal and payment of the required fee. The
permit fee shall not be prorated. Sales made pursuant to this subsection
shall be called "Sunday sales."
C. Dispenser, retail and club licensees shall close their places of business
during voting hours on the days of the primary election, general
election, elections for officers of a municipality and any other election
as prescribed by the rules and regulations of the Director of the
Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. Dispenser, retail and club
licenses shall also close places of business from 2:00 a.m. on Christmas
Day until 7:00 a.m. on the day after Christmas. Restaurant, club and
governmental licensees or their lessees may serve, sell or allow the
consumption of beer and wine with meals from 12:00 noon until 10:00
p.m. on Christmas Day.
§ 133-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-9
1:89
§ 133-9. Sales to or by certain persons prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to serve or sell any alcoholic beverages,
including beer or wine, to persons under the age of 21 years, to persons of
unsound mind, to any pupil of any school or state institution, or to habitual
drunkards. It shall also be unlawful for any person to permit any person
under the age of 21 years to serve or sell alcoholic beverages, including
beer and wine.
§ 133-10. Conduct of business.
Every licensee under this chapter shall conduct his place of business in an
orderly and lawful manner. No closed booths shall be permitted in any place
where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises, and in
both dispensers' and retailers' establishments the view from the street shall
be open and unobstructed.
§ 133-9 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 133-10
1:90
ARTICLE III
License Tax
[Amended 6-23-1993 by Ord. No. 503]
§ 133-11. Imposition.
§ 133-12. Failure to pay.
Failure of any person holding a retailer's, dispenser's, canopy, club, or
restaurant license to pay the license tax on the dates and in the manner
imposed by this article shall be subject to appropriate action by the City
Council, as provided by NMSA 1978 § 7-24-3, relating to the closing of
establishments.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of NMSA 1978 § 7-24-1, a person who has
been issued a state license from the Department of Regulation and
Licensing, Bureau of Alcoholic Beverage Control, shall pay the
municipal license tax as follows:
(1) Payment in full by July 1; or
(2) Payment in two installments of equal amounts, the first of which is
due and payable by July 1. The second installment shall be due and
payable no later than December 31 of each year.
B. The tax rates shall be as follows:
Type of License License Tax Amount
Dispenser's license $250
Retailer's license $250
Club license $250
Restaurant license $250
Sunday sales $100
C. Persons granted a special dispenser's permit, under the provisions of
NMSA 1978 § 60-6A-12, shall pay to the municipality a fee of $10 per
day for each day the permittee dispenses alcoholic beverages.
§ 133-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-12
1:91
Chapter 137
ANIMALS AND ANIMAL FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Carnivals and circuses — See Ch. 163.
Noise — See Ch. 249.
Nuisances — See Ch. 254.
§ 133-12 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 133-12
1:92
ARTICLE I
Animals and Fowl, Generally
§ 137-1. Title and purpose.
§ 137-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — Any vertebrate member of the animal kingdom, excluding
human beings.
ANIMAL CONTROL CENTER — The facility maintained and operated
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — An employee of the City, designated as
such by the Director, who has the authority of a peace officer to issue
citations for violations of this chapter and performs such other duties
relating to animal control as prescribed by the City Manager or respective
department head.
ANTI-ESCAPE PROVISION — Any housing, fencing or device which a guard
dog cannot go over, under, through or around.
BITE — An actual puncture or tear of the skin inflicted by the teeth of an
animal.
COMMERCIAL KENNEL — Any commercial establishment or premises
where 10 or more dogs or cats, over three months of age, are boarded,
kept or maintained for any purpose whatsoever, with the exception of stateinspected
veterinary hospitals and shelters.
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY —
DIRECTOR — The Division Director of the Animal Control Division or his
duly authorized representative.
ENCLOSED LOT — A parcel of land or portion thereof in private ownership
around the perimeter of which a wall or fence has been erected.
A. This chapter may be cited as the "Animal Control Ordinance."
B. It is the intent of the governing body that this chapter protect animals
from cruelty, neglect and abuse, protect residents from annoyance and
injury, assist in providing housing for animals in a control center,
finance the functions of licensing and recovery, and establish a program
for the sterilization of animals.
A portion of land, buildings or land and buildings in the City zoned for
or utilized for commercial or business uses, including temporary sites;
and
A.
B. Any vehicle utilized for commercial or business purposes in the City.
§ 137-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-2
1:93
ESTABLISHMENT — A place of business together with its grounds and
equipment.
GROOMING PARLOR — Any establishment, or part thereof, or premises
maintained for the purpose of offering animal cosmetological services for
profit.
GUARD DOG — Any dog that is utilized to protect commercial property, as
defined above.
HANDLER — A person who trains dogs for socialization or dog shows or
trials or a security person capable of controlling guard dogs.
HANDLER BREEDER or HOBBY BREEDER — Any person involved in
controlled breeding of animals which are approved by a nationally
recognized animal breeding organization, and are eligible to be so
registered. Animals under the age of three months are not required to
be registered. Handler breeders or hobby breeders are subject to the
professional animal permit requirements.
HOBBY KENNEL — Any private, nonprofit premises operated by a person
for the purpose of bringing aid and comfort to more than four animals but
not to exceed 15 animals, which will be used for the purpose of breeding.
HOUSING — Any location where a guard dog is kept when not used for
protection purposes.
IMPOUND — To take-up and confine an animal in a humane manner.
KENNEL — Any commercial establishment or premises where 10 or more
dogs or cats, over three months of age, are boarded, kept or maintained for
any purpose whatsoever, with the exception of state-inspected veterinary
hospitals and shelters.
LICENSED VETERINARIAN VETERINARY MEDICINE DEGREE — A person
with a Doctor of Veterinary Medicine degree, licensed to practice in the
state.
NUISANCE — Includes, but is not limited to, defecation, urination,
disturbing the peace, emitting noxious or offensive odors or otherwise
endangering or offending the well-being of the inhabitants of the City.
OWNER OF ANIMAL — A person who owns, harbors or keeps, or knowingly
permits an animal to be harbored or kept, or has an animal in his care, or
who permits an animal to remain on or about his premises.
PERSON — Any individual, household, corporation, company, society,
association, agent or employee thereof, firm, partnership, and every officer.
PET SHOP — Any commercial establishment or premises or part thereof
maintained for the purchase, sale, exchange or hire of animals of any type,
except that the term shall not include livestock auctions.
POLICE DOG — Any dog owned by a public agency and used in law
enforcement activities under the direction of a handler.
PREMISES — A parcel of land and the structure thereon.
§ 137-2 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 137-2
1:94
QUARANTINE — To detain or isolate an animal suspected of having a
contagious disease.
RUNNING AT LARGE — Not confined within a building, shelter, walled or
fenced area or secured by a leash, rope, chain or other restraining device,
unless under the direct control of the owner/handler or keeper.
SHELTER — Any establishment owned and operated by a nonprofit humane
organization licensed to do business in the state.
STRAY ANIMAL — Any animal found running at large beyond the
boundaries of the premises of the owners.
VACCINATION — Protection provided against rabies by inoculation with
antirabies vaccine recognized and approved by the state.
VICIOUS ANIMAL — Any animal which shall bite or in any other manner
attack or attempt to attack any person or animal, except that any animal
that bites, attacks, or attempts to attack any person or animal unlawfully
upon its owner's or keeper's premises, without provocation, shall not be
deemed a vicious animal.
WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMAL — Any animal not normally considered
domesticated and shall include, but is not limited to:
§ 137-3. Administration.
The Director is responsible for the administration of this chapter.
Reasonable rules and regulations shall be prescribed by the Director and
approved by the City Manager to carry out the intent and purpose of this
chapter. The Director may delegate authority to his duly appointed control
officers as he deems expedient to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
Class reptilia: order phidia, such as racers, boas, water snakes and
pythons; and order loricata, such as alligators, caymans and crocodiles.
A.
The following members of the class aves: order falconiforms, such as
hawks, eagles and vultures, and subdivision ratitae, such as ostriches,
rheas, cassowaries and emus.
B.
Class mammalia: order carnivora, family felidae, such as ocelots,
amrgays, tigers, Jaguars, leopards and cougars, except commonly
accepted domesticated cats; the family canidae, such as wolves, dingos,
coyotes and jackals, except commonly domesticated dogs; family
mustelidae, such as weasels, martins, mink, badgers; family
procynnidae, such as raccoons; family ursidae, such as bears; and
order marsupialia, such as kangaroos and common opossums; order
edentata, such as sloths, anteaters and armadillos; order proboscidea,
such as elephants; order primata, such as monkeys, chimpanzees and
gorillas; order rodenta, such as porcupines; and order ungulata, such
as antelope, deer, bison and camels.
C.
§ 137-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-4
1:95
§ 137-4. Authority to issue citations; Animal Control Officers.
The City police, the Director and Animal Control Officers have the authority
of peace officers to issue citations for violations of this chapter and to
perform such other duties as are prescribed by the City Manager. An
Animal Control Officer shall, over the first months of his or her employment,
receive training and certification as an animal control officer. If the officer is
unsuccessful in achieving certification within the first six months, he or she
will be removed from the position of Animal Control Officer without right of
appeal. This provision shall apply to officers hired after the adoption date of
this chapter. An Animal Control Officer shall wear a uniform, and a badge,
and a name tag identifying him as an Animal Control Officer. The badge
shall be returned to the Director upon the termination of his employment.
§ 137-5. Right of entry.
Animal Control Officers, in the performance of their duties, may enter
upon private property, except a private residence, for the purpose of
apprehending animals running at large and stray animals.
§ 137-4 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 137-5
1:96
ARTICLE II
Animal Control Center
§ 137-6. Establishment.
There is established an animal control center in such location as designated
by the City.
§ 137-7. Hours of operation.
The animal control center shall be kept open to the public for the
transaction of business during the hours set by the department head.
§ 137-8. Impoundment.
It is the duty of the Animal Control Officers to take up and impound in the
animal control center any stray or any animal kept or maintained contrary
to this chapter.
§ 137-9. Surrender of stray animals; disposition; costs; records.
A. No person shall hold or retain possession of any animal of which he is
not the owner, without the knowledge or consent of the owner, for more
than 24 hours without first reporting the possession to the Director or
his designee, giving his name and address, a true and complete
statement of the circumstances, a description of the animal and the
precise location where such animal is confined.
B. It is unlawful for any person taking up an animal to fail to give the
notice required in Subsection A of this section, and for any person
having such animal in his possession to fail to refuse to immediately
surrender such animal to the Director or his designee upon demand.
C. A licensed stray shall be confined at the animal control center for a
period of at least five days, during which time the owner shall be
notified. If identification or notification of the owner is not possible, the
animal control center may dispose of said animal, without notice, one
day after the required impoundment period and may either place the
animal in an adoptive home or may destroy said animal in a humane
fashion, as the Director may deem proper.
D. An unlicensed stray animal shall be confined at the animal control
center for a period of at least three days. One day after the required
impoundment period, the Director may either place the animal in an
adoptive home, or may destroy said animal, in a humane fashion, as the
center may deem proper.
E. No animal that has been impounded by the animal control center will be
adopted out for the purpose of breeding or sale. Every dog or cat
adopted from the center shall be neutered by a licensed veterinarian. A
fee for the operation shall be paid to the animal control center or its
designee by the person purchasing the dog or cat, prior to the release of
§ 137-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-9
1:97
the animal. Nothing in this section shall be construed as applicable to
any dog or cat returned to the owner.
F. Any stray avian, bovine, equine, ovine, porcine or caprine animal which
cannot be adopted may be destroyed following notice to the State
Livestock Board. The time and place where the animal is to be
destroyed shall be posted for five days at the center and published once
in a newspaper of general circulation. Any other stray animal not
redeemed by its owner or placed with a new owner may be disposed of
by the animal control center, at its discretion.
G. It is the responsibility of an owner of an animal legally impounded to
pay for boarding and other costs. The City shall establish appropriate
fees by resolution and procedures for their collection. In addition, the
owner shall pay any license fees due, the cost of inoculations, fines
imposed or other costs incurred in the care and maintenance of the
animal. The animal control center shall not release any animal
impounded at the center until such fees, fines and costs are paid.
H. The animal control center shall maintain records for the period of time
mandated by the records retention schedule adopted by the City. The
record shall include at least the following:
(1) A complete description of the animal;
(2) The manner and date of its acquisition by the center;
(3) The date and manner of disposal;
(4) The name and address of the purchaser of any animal;
(5) All fees received; and
(6) The altered state of the animal, and either:
(a) Record of request to owner if unaltered; or alternatively
(b) The record of the alteration of the animal.
I. The first time an animal is impounded, the animal's altered status will
be recorded, and if the animal is unaltered, it will be requested of the
owner that the animal be altered within two months. If left unaltered
and the animal is impounded a subsequent time, the animal will be
altered and the fees charged to the owner pursuant to Subsection G.
§ 137-9 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 137-9
1:98
ARTICLE III
Owner's Duties
§ 137-10. Rabies vaccinations.
§ 137-11. Rabid animals.
An animal that has rabies or shows signs of having rabies and every animal
bitten by another afflicted with rabies or that has been exposed to rabies
shall be confined at once in a secure place by the owner. A person who
knows or who has reason to know that an animal is infected with rabies
or has been exposed to rabies shall, immediately upon learning of the
infection, notify the animal control center and the State Health and
Environment Department as to the place where the animal is confined and
shall surrender said animal to the animal control center upon demand. The
animal control center shall then deal with the rabid animal pursuant to state
law.
§ 137-12. Biting dogs or other animals.
A. It is the duty of all persons owning or keeping a dog or cat over the age
of three months to have such animals vaccinated against rabies. The
initial rabies vaccination shall be given in an amount sufficient to
provide immunity from rabies for one year. Subsequent vaccinations,
provided proof of prior rabies vaccination is provided, can be
administered with a three-year vaccine. A certificate from a licensed
veterinarian shall be evidence of vaccination and type. The Director
may require other animals to receive rabies vaccinations. All antirabies
vaccine shall be administered by or under the supervision of a licensed
veterinarian, who shall issue a serially numbered certificate and tag for
each such administration.
B. The veterinarian administering antirabies vaccine to any animal shall
issue to the owner or keeper of the animal a numbered vaccination
certificate. The certificate shall contain the name and address of the
owner or keeper of the animal, a description of the animal vaccinated,
the date of the vaccination and the expiration date of the period of
immunity.
C. It is unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog or cat to fail to exhibit
its certificate of vaccination upon demand by the Director or by the
Animal Control Officer.
A. The owner of an animal that bites a person, and a person bitten by an
animal, shall report that occurrence to the animal control center and to
the District Health Officer of the State Health and Environment
Department within 24 hours. The owner of an animal that bites a person
shall surrender said animal to the animal control center if the Director
deems it necessary to impound said animal for a period of observation.
§ 137-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-12
1:99
§ 137-13. Animals on unenclosed and enclosed premises.
§ 137-14. Dog licenses; fees; exceptions.
B. A physician who renders professional treatment to a person bitten by an
animal shall report that fact to the animal control center and to the
District Health Officer of the State Health and Environment
Department within 24 hours of his first professional attendance. The
physician shall report the name, sex and address of the person bitten,
as well as the type and location of the bite. The physician shall give the
name and address of the owner of the animal that inflicted the bite, if
known, and any other facts or details that may assist the Director in
ascertaining the immunization status of the animal.
C. An animal that bites a person shall be confined securely at a place and
for a period of time deemed necessary by the Director. The owner of the
animal shall bear the cost of confinement. The Director may consent to
confinement on the owner's premises but only if the animal had current
rabies vaccination at the time the bite was inflicted. The premises
where the home confinement is to occur shall be inspected and
approved for such purposes by an Animal Control Officer. The owner of
the animal shall be required to enter into an indemnity agreement on a
form approved and prescribed by the Director before consent may be
given for such home confinement.
D. A person who has custody of an animal that has bitten a person shall
immediately notify the Director if the animal shows any signs of
sickness, abnormal behavior, of if the animal escapes confinement. If
the animal dies while it is in confinement, the person having custody of
the animal shall notify the Director or an Animal Control Officer and
relinquish any claims to said animal.
A. It is unlawful to permit dogs in the streets or public places unless on a
secure leash not exceeding eight feet in length and under the
immediate physical control of the person having custody thereof. No
dog, cat or other member of the canine or feline families is allowed
upon a public playground or on the premises of a public swimming pool
or upon a school yard.
B. The above provisions do not apply when such an animal is in a bona fide
animal show or training program authorized by law or appropriate
school authority.
A. Any person owning, possessing or harboring any dog three months of
age or over shall obtain a license for such animal. Licenses may be
obtained from the animal control center. A current rabies vaccination
certificate shall be presented at the time of the application for license.
The license fee for a tag and certificate shall be $5 for an altered animal
and $30 for an unaltered animal. In the event a tag is lost, replacement
tags costing $1 shall be purchased. The license shall expire one year
from the date of issue and shall be renewed annually. A late renewal
§ 137-12 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 137-14
1:100
§ 137-15. Mandatory spaying and neutering.
charge (more than one month beyond the renewal date) will be $1 per
animal.
B. A current license tag shall be affixed to the licensed dog at all times in a
reasonable manner, unless the licensed dog is being kept in an
approved kennel, veterinary hospital, grooming parlor, is appearing in
an approved show or is being trained; provided that the person who is
training a dog shall have in his personal possession the valid license tag
for each dog and shall immediately display such upon request by an
Animal Control Officer, animal shelter personnel or other law
enforcement officers.
C. Animals belonging to nonresidents who do not keep said animals within
the corporate limits of the City for 30 consecutive days shall be exempt
from this section; provided, however, that all the other provisions of this
chapter must be complied with.
D. The license fees shall not apply to guide or hearing ear aid dogs trained
to assist and in fact used to assist the disabled, or to any police dog.
A. No person shall own or harbor within the City of Española any dog or
cat over the age of six months which has not been spayed or neutered,
unless that person obtains from the Animal Control Department, at the
cost of $25 annually, a permit to keep an unaltered dog or cat.
B. Proof of neutering, if not apparent upon visual inspection, may be made
by certificate or receipt from a licensed veterinarian, or by affidavit of
the animal's owner.
C. Proof of an unaltered dog or cat permit must be available upon
reasonable demand of an Animal Control Officer or the owner of said
animal will be cited for violation of this chapter and the animal may be
impounded pursuant to § 137-8, Impoundment.
§ 137-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-15
1:101

ARTICLE IV
Kennels, Grooming Parlors, Pet Shops and Shelters
§ 137-16. Purpose.
The City declares it to be conducive to the promotion of the health and
general welfare of the inhabitants of the City to require a professional
animal care permit to operate a kennel, grooming parlor, pet shop or
shelter, and to impose certain regulations and inspection fees on those
engaged in operating, maintaining or owning a kennel, grooming parlor, pet
shop or shelter.
§ 137-17. Permits required; fees.
§ 137-18. Specifications and maintenance of facilities.
A. Persons operating kennels, grooming parlors, pet shops or shelters
shall obtain a professional animal care permit from the Director. It shall
be unlawful to operate a kennel, grooming parlor, pet shop or shelter
without a current valid professional animal care permit.
B. When a permit is applied for, an inspection of the kennel, grooming
parlor, pet shop or shelter shall be conducted by the Director to
determine compliance with this chapter. If inspection reveals that the
premises comply with the law and regulations, a professional animal
care permit will be issued. Said permit is only valid for the approved
premises. Permittees who keep animals confined shall, at the option of
the permittee, be exempt from the animal license requirements of this
chapter and will not be issued any license tags unless the required
animal license fee is paid.
C. Permits are not transferable from one person to another person or
place. A valid permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place in every
kennel, grooming parlor, pet shop or shelter.
D. A permit holder shall notify the Director of any change in his operations
which may affect the status of his permit and shall keep the Director
informed of any change in the name or location of his business.
E. Persons in charge of a kennel, grooming parlor, pet shop or shelter shall
be responsible for complying with this chapter. There shall be kept at
each kennel, grooming parlor, pet shop or shelter a record of all animals
received and of their final disposition.
F. The professional animal care permit shall expire December 31 of each
calendar year and shall be renewed by February 1 of the following year.
New professional animal care permits, but not a renewal, shall be
issued with professional animal care permit fees pro rated on a
semiannual basis. Professional animal care fees shall be established by
the Director and approved by the governing body of the City.
§ 137-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-18
1:103
§ 137-19. Right of entry for inspections.
The Director or his duly appointed agent shall be permitted to enter, at any
reasonable time, any kennel, grooming parlor, pet shop or shelter for the
purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this chapter.
The Director shall make as many inspections and reinspections as necessary
for the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 137-20. Permit violations, suspensions and revocations.
A. Animal housing facilities shall be constructed of nontoxic materials and
in a structurally sound design. Interior floors shall be of a smooth, easily
cleanable construction and impervious to water. The facility shall be
kept in good repair and kept clean and sanitary at all times so as to
protect the animals from disease and injury.
B. Animals maintained in pens, cages or runs for periods exceeding 24
hours shall be provided with adequate space to prevent overcrowding
and to maintain normal exercise, according to species.
C. Indoor housing shall be provided for in all pet shops, grooming parlors,
shelters and commercial kennels. These facilities shall be sufficiently
temperature-controlled and ventilated to provide for the animals'
comfort and health.
D. Sufficient lighting shall be provided by either artificial or natural
means.
E. Outside housing shall be sufficient to protect animals from sunlight,
rain, snow or cold weather that may be detrimental to the animal's
health.
F. Provisions shall be made for the removal and proper disposal of animal
and food waste, bedding, dead animals and debris.
G. Adult animals shall be segregated by sex, except where otherwise
indicated for health, welfare or breeding purposes, and vicious or
quarantined animals shall be removed and caged by themselves.
H. Animals shall be provided with clean, fresh, sufficient and wholesome
food and water. Food and water containers shall be kept clean.
I. Each animal shall be observed daily by the animal caretaker in charge
or his representative. Sick, diseased, injured, lame or blind animals
shall be provided with proper veterinary care. Any person operating or
employed at a kennel, grooming parlor, pet shop or shelter who
observes an animal which he suspects of being rabid shall at once notify
the Director and the State Department of Health and Environment and
segregate such animal for a period of 10 days, unless examined and
released by written statement of a veterinarian and then only at the
discretion of the Director.
§ 137-18 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 137-20
1:104
A. If the Director makes an inspection of a kennel, grooming parlor, pet
shop or shelter and discovers a violation of this chapter, he shall notify
the permit holder, or operator, of the violation by means of an
inspection report form or other written notice. The notification shall:
(1) Set forth the specific violation found;
(2) Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for the correction
of the violation found;
(3) State that failure to comply with any notice issued in accordance
herewith may result in immediate suspension of the permit; and
(4) State that an opportunity for appeal from any notice or inspection
findings will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed
with the Director within five days.
B. Notices provided for under this section shall be deemed to have been
properly served when the original of the inspection report form or other
notice has been delivered personally to the permit holder or person in
charge, or the notice has been sent by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the last known address of the permit
holder. A copy of the notice shall be filed with the records of the animal
control center.
C. Permits may be suspended temporarily by the Director for failure of the
holder to comply with the requirements of this chapter or other
applicable laws or regulations. Whenever a permit holder or operator
has failed to comply with any notice issued under the provisions of this
chapter, the permit holder or operator shall be notified in writing that
the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and
that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request
for a hearing is filed with the Director by the permit holder.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, when the Director
finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation of a kennel,
grooming parlor, pet shop or shelter, which, in his judgment, constitute
a substantial hazard to public health, he may, without warning or
hearing, issue a written notice to the permit holder or operator, citing
such conditions and specifying the corrective action to be taken. If
deemed necessary, the order shall state that the permit is immediately
suspended and all operations are to be immediately discontinued. Any
person to whom such an order is issued shall comply immediately.
D. For serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this
chapter, or for interference with the Director in the performance of his
duties, the permit may be permanently revoked after an opportunity for
a hearing has been provided by the Director. Prior to such action, the
Director shall notify the permit holder, in writing, stating the reasons
for which the permit is subject to revocation and advising that the
permit shall be permanently revoked at the end of five days following
service of such notice, unless a request for a hearing is filed with the
Director by the permit holder within the five-day period. A permit may
§ 137-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-20
1:105
§ 137-21. Review of permit violations, suspensions and revocations.
be suspended for cause pending its revocation or a hearing relative
thereto.
A. The hearings provided for shall be conducted by the City Manager at a
time and place designated by him. Based upon the record of the
hearing, the City Manager shall make a finding, and shall sustain,
modify or rescind any official notice or order considered in the hearing.
The actions of the City Manager may be appealed to the governing
body. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the
permit holder by the Director. This subsection shall not preclude the
City from instituting court action, as otherwise provided by law.
B. Any person whose permit has been suspended may, at any time, make
application for an inspection for the purpose of reinstatement of the
permit. Within five days following a request for reinstatement, the
Director shall make an inspection. If the applicant is complying with the
requirements of law and regulations, the permit may be reinstated.
§ 137-20 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 137-21
1:106
ARTICLE V
Prohibited Activities
§ 137-22. Animals running at large; feral cat colonies.
§ 137-23. Enclosure for breeding animals.
It is unlawful for any person to let any female animal to any male animal
except within an enclosure so arranged as to obstruct the animals
completely from the view of all who have no proprietary interest in the
breeding of the animals.
§ 137-24. Animals on unenclosed premises.
A. It is unlawful for any person to allow or permit an animal to run at large,
as defined in this chapter, in or on any street, alley, sidewalk, vacant lot,
or on public or private property.
B. A notice of impoundment will be left in each case that an animal is
impounded from private property. An attempt will be made by the
Animal Control Officer to contact the owner.
C. The Animal Control Officers have the right to impound animals that are
destroying public property or endangering the welfare of any person or
animal that is lawfully on a public or private right-of-way. Any animal in
violation of this section is declared to be a nuisance, a menace to the
public health and safety and shall be impounded as provided in §§ 137-6
through 137-9 of this chapter. Further, the Animal Control Officer shall
destroy any dog if it is in the act of pursuing or wounding livestock or
wounding and killing poultry or attacking humans (NMSA 1978
§ 77-1-9).
D. Feral cat colonies that are actively managed by a property owner are
exempt from the sections of this chapter requiring licensing fees or
tags. To be an eligible feral cat colony manager, the property must show
active work to trap, feed, vaccinate, neuter and release members of the
colony. Animals that are trapped and released will have their left ear
clipped as a visual identification of sterilization and vaccination against
rabies. Colonies will be logged by Animal Control. Information for each
colony cat will include a description of the cat (sex, color, and
approximate age), date of sterilization, location of colony, and property
owner's name. Each cat will be assigned a log number. In order to
qualify for the exemptions, it will be the responsibility of the property
owner to provide Animal Control with information about each cat in the
colony as it is trapped and sterilized. Animals with appropriate
markings and found on property elsewhere will be treated as though
they were on the property where their colony resides.
A. It is unlawful for any person to chain, stake out, graze or herd any
animal on any unenclosed premises in such a manner that the animal
may go beyond the property line.
§ 137-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-24
1:107
B. Any dog not deemed potentially dangerous or dangerous on its owner's
property shall be:
(1) Placed in a secure run or kennel with access to shade; or
(2) Kept within a secure enclosure, as defined in this chapter,
surrounding the owner's premises or a portion thereof; or
(3) Kept under the immediate physical control of a person capable of
restraining the animal; or
(4) Confined through a means of a buried electronic barrier/collar
system if the animal is properly trained, and the electronic system
is functioning properly; or
(5) Restrained by means of a trolley system, if the following conditions
are met:
(a) Only one animal may be tethered to each cable run; and
(b) The device must be attached to a pulley on a cable run or
trolley; and
(c) There must be a swivel on at least one end of the tether to
minimize tangling of the tether; and
(d) The tether and cable must be of adequate size and strength to
effectively restrain the animal. The size and weight must not be
excessive as determined by the Animal Control Officer,
considering the age, size and health of the animal; and
(e) The cable run must be at least 10 feet in length and at least
four feet above the ground; and
(f) The tether must not allow the animal to move beyond the legal
boundary of the owner's property; and
(g) The device must be affixed to the animal by use of a
nonabrasive, comfortably fitted collar or harness; and
(h) The device must be fastened so that the animal can sit, walk,
and lie down comfortably, and must be unobstructed by objects
that may cause the device or animal to become entangled or
strangled; and
(i) The animal must have easy access to adequate shade, shelter,
food, and potable water; and
(j) The area where the animal is confined must be kept free of
garbage and other debris that might endanger the animal's
health or safety. Feces shall be cleaned up regularly, but no less
frequently than once per week.
§ 137-24 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 137-25
1:108
§ 137-25. Vicious animals.
It is unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any vicious animal. Any
person attacked by a vicious animal while on public property may use
reasonable force to repel the attack. After a judicial determination that an
animal is vicious, the owner or keeper of the vicious animal shall destroy
it humanely or turn the animal over to the animal control center for
destruction.
§ 137-26. Animals disturbing the peace.
It is unlawful for any person to allow any animal to persistently or
continuously bark, howl or make noise common to the species, or otherwise
to disturb the peace and quiet of the inhabitants of the City or to keep or
maintain animals in such a manner as to disturb by noxious or offensive
odors, or otherwise endanger the health and welfare of the inhabitants of
the City.
§ 137-27. Nuisances.
It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to permit, either willfully or
through failure to exercise due care or control, the animal to commit any
nuisance upon any property other than that of the owners of the animal, and
then only so long as no other provision of this chapter is violated.
§ 137-28. Unlawful use of license tags.
It is unlawful for any person to remove any license tag from one animal to
another or to remove a license tag from any stray without lawful permission.
It is unlawful for any person to manufacture or cause to be manufactured or
to have in his possession or under his control a stolen, counterfeit or forged
animal license tag, rabies vaccination certificate or other form of animal or
premises license.
§ 137-29. Breaking into center, shelter or animal control vehicles.
It is unlawful for any person to break open any pound, center or animal
control vehicle wherein animals are impounded by the City, or in any other
way to remove or assist in the removal of any animal from the pound, center
or vehicle without lawful permission.
§ 137-30. Dogs trained to assist individuals with disabilities.
[Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
It is unlawful for any person owning, operating or maintaining any public
place of business or conveyance into which the general public is invited
for any business purpose to debar or exclude therefrom any guide dog
or helping dog which has been trained or is undergoing training to assist
the disabled, provided that such dog is in the company of the disabled
person whom it was trained to assist or with a certified guide dog trainer in
conformance with state law.
§ 137-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-31
1:109
§ 137-31. Confining animals in motor vehicles.
No person having control over a motor vehicle shall place or confine an
animal or allow an animal to be placed or confined or to remain in a motor
vehicle under such conditions or for such period of time as may endanger
the health or well-being of such animal due to heat, lack of food or drink, or
such other circumstances as may reasonably be expected to cause suffering,
disability or death.
§ 137-32. Transportation of animals.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the transportation of
horses, cattle, sheep, poultry or other agricultural livestock in trailers or
other vehicles designed and constructed for such purpose.
§ 137-33. Removal of animals from motor vehicles; redemption by
owner. [Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
An animal control or peace officer who finds an animal in a motor vehicle
in violation of this chapter may enter into the motor vehicle if necessary
to remove the animal. The owner of said motor vehicle shall hold harmless
and indemnify the animal control or peace officer for all damage to his
motor vehicle reasonably incurred while removing the animal. The officer
removing the animal shall take the animal to an animal control center or
other place of safekeeping. If a vehicle is entered, left unsecured and cannot
be resecured, an animal control or peace officer shall stay with the vehicle
until the owner arrives. In the event the person having custody cannot be
contacted, the officer shall leave in a prominent place in the motor vehicle
a written notice bearing his name and office and the address where the
animal may be claimed by the owner. The animal will be surrendered to
the owner if the owner claims the animal within five days from the time
the animal was impounded. The owner shall pay all reasonable charges that
have accrued for the maintenance of the animal. If the owner fails to claim
the animal within five days after its removal from the motor vehicle, the
animal control center will make reasonable efforts to contact the owner and
give notice that the animal is in custody. In the event the owner cannot be
contacted or expresses no interest in claiming the animal within five days
after contact or efforts of contact, the animal control center may dispose of
the animal in any reasonably humane manner.
§ 137-31 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 137-33
1:110
ARTICLE VI
Cruelty to Animals
§ 137-34. Cruelty prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously kill, maim, disfigure,
torture, kick, beat with a stick, chain, club or other object, mutilate, burn or
scald with any substance any animal, except that reasonable force may be
employed to drive off vicious or trespassing animals.
§ 137-35. Work cruelty.
It is unlawful for any person to drive or work any animal cruelly.
§ 137-36. Neglect; outdoor enclosures.
It is unlawful for any person to fail, refuse or neglect to provide any animal
in his charge or custody, as owner or otherwise, with proper food, drink,
shade, care or shelter, or to carry an animal in or upon any vehicle in
a cruel or inhumane manner. Any animal habitually kept outside shall be
provided with a structurally sound, weatherproof enclosure, large enough
to accommodate the animal.
§ 137-37. Abandonment.
It is unlawful for any person having charge, custody or ownership to
abandon any animal. All animals which are to be abandoned may be turned
over to the animal control center or the animal shelter for adoption.
§ 137-38. Poisoning.
It is unlawful for any person by any means to make accessible to any animal,
with the intent to cause harm or death, any substance which has in any
manner been treated or prepared with any harmful or poisonous substance.
It is not the intent of this section to prohibit the use of poisonous substances
for the control of vermin of significance to the public health.
§ 137-39. Protective care by Director.
When the Director finds that any animal is or will be without proper care
because of injury, illness, incarceration or absence of the owner or person
responsible for the care of the animal, the Director may take up the animal
for protective care; and, in the event of sickness or injury, upon the advice
of a licensed veterinarian, the Director may take such action as called for
to prevent undue pain and suffering, including immediate destruction of the
animal.
§ 137-40. Injury by motorists.
A. Every operator of a motor vehicle or other self-propelled vehicle upon
the streets and ways shall immediately, upon injuring, striking, maiming
§ 137-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-40
1:111
§ 137-41. Hobbling livestock.
It is unlawful to hobble livestock or other animals by any means which may
cause injury or damage to any animal.
§ 137-42. Keeping of diseased or painfully crippled animals.
It is unlawful to have, keep or harbor any animal which is infected with any
dangerous or incurable or painfully crippling condition except as provided
in this chapter. The Director may impound the diseased or painfully crippled
animal in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. All such animals
impounded, following examination and approval by a veterinarian, may be
destroyed humanely as soon thereafter as is conveniently possible. In the
case of destruction of an animal, the Director shall not be required to
give any of the notices provided in this chapter. This section shall not be
construed to include veterinary hospitals or animals under active veterinary
care.
§ 137-43. Animal fights.
It is unlawful for any person to promote, stage, hold, manage, conduct,
carry on or attend any game, exhibition, contest or fight in which one or
more animals are engaged for the purpose of injuring, killing, maiming or
destroying themselves or any other animal.
§ 137-44. Confining or crating of fowl.
It is unlawful for any person to confine, or the Director to confine or
impound, any wild or domestic fowl or bird unless provisions are made
for the proper feeding and the furnishing of water to the fowl or bird at
intervals not longer than 12 hours; and unless provisions are made that the
crate, box or other enclosure in which fowl or bird is confined or impounded
permits the fowl or bird to stand in a naturally erect position.
§ 137-45. Birds.
It is unlawful to willfully kill any bird, or to molest or rob the nest of a bird.
or running down any animal, give aid as is reasonably able to be
rendered. In the absence of the owner, he shall immediately notify the
animal control center, furnishing sufficient facts relative to the injury.
B. Every such operator shall remain at or near the scene until the
appropriate authorities arrive, and upon the arrival of the appropriate
authorities, the operator shall immediately identify himself to them.
Alternatively, in the absence of the owner, a person may give aid by
taking the animal to a veterinary hospital or the animal control center.
The animal shall be deemed an abandoned animal within the meaning
of § 137-37 of this chapter. This provision does not apply to operators of
emergency vehicles.
§ 137-40 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 137-45
1:112
ARTICLE VII
Sale
§ 137-46. Use of public property.
It is unlawful to display, sell or offer for sale, give away or otherwise dispose
of any animal upon any street, sidewalk or public park.
§ 137-47. Rabbits or fowl.
It is unlawful to sell, offer for sale, barter or give away any unweaned
baby rabbits or fowl under four weeks of age. Raising of such rabbits
and fowl by an individual for his personal use and consumption is not
prohibited, provided that he shall maintain proper brooders and other
facilities for the care and containment of the animals and fowl while they
are in his possession. The sale of young fowl by commercial breeders is not
prohibited.
§ 137-48. Use as premiums or novelties.
No person shall offer any live animal as a premium, prize, award, novelty or
incentive to purchase merchandise.
§ 137-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-48
1:113

ARTICLE VIII
Exotic Animals; Guard Dogs
§ 137-49. Wild or exotic animals.
A. It is unlawful to be in charge of, possess or own:
(1) Any exotic animal or species prohibited by federal or state law;
(2) Any exotic animal or species when kept in such numbers or in such
a way as to constitute a likelihood of harm to the animals
themselves, to human beings or to the property of human beings, or
which constitute a public or private nuisance;
(3) Bats; or
(4) Skunks, except those owned by individuals on the effective date of
this chapter and provided that any exotic animal permit is obtained
for the skunks within 60 days of the effective date.
B. It is unlawful to receive, purchase, own or keep any exotic animal
without first applying to and receiving from the Director a permit to do
so. Notwithstanding, those persons in possession of an exotic animal
when they become residents of the City in the future or who possess
said animal on the effective date of this chapter have a sixty-day period
in which to apply for the permit before the penalty provisions of this
chapter become enforceable.
C. No person shall apply for an exotic animal permit without first
obtaining any required state or federal permits.
D. The application for a permit shall contain the name of the applicant; his
address, the address of the proposed location of the exotic animal if
different from that of the applicant; a brief description of the applicant's
plan for keeping the exotic animal, which shall include the species of
animal, the number of individuals qualified to care for the animal
desired or that have agreed to advise or assist the applicant in the
proper care and treatment of the animal and who would be willing to
recommend the person applying for the permit; and the list of
publications which the applicant has studied in order to qualify for a
permit for said animal.
E. Upon receipt of the application, the Director shall inspect the facilities
where the animal is to be housed and shall make whatever other
investigations he deems necessary.
F. If the Director approves the application, the initial exotic animal permit
fee of $25 shall be paid and the permit issued. Whenever, in any given
permit year, there are new exotic animals in a collection due to the
reproduction of members of the collection or to replacement in the
same number and zoological species as the members replaced, the new
animals do not require an additional permit during the year, provided
§ 137-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-49
1:115
the Director is notified in writing of the new exotic animals within 30
days of acquisition. When a new exotic animal or collection is added,
a new permit must be secured and new fee shall be due and payable
at the time of issuance of the permit and shall be a prerequisite of the
issuance.
G. The exotic animal permit shall be valid for one year, and must be
reviewed within 60 days after expiration and inspection is required
prior to the renewal of the permit. The annual fee for the renewal of the
permit is $10. If, during the preceding year, more than one initial permit
has been issued an applicant, the former permit may be consolidated so
that only one renewal permit is required; provided, however, that the
renewal date for the consolidated permit shall be the date of the
issuance of the earliest initial permit. The animal control center may
deny the application for renewal for cause.
H. Individuals authorized to acquire an exotic animal shall, within 14 days
of acquisition, submit to the animal control center a health certificate
from a qualified veterinarian stating that the animal is in good health
and has been vaccinated in accordance with applicable time schedules.
I. It is unlawful to receive, purchase, own or keep exotic animals unless:
(1) Housing is sufficiently spacious, ventilated and temperaturecontrolled,
clean and sanitary at all times;
(2) The exotic animal is provided with proper food, water and
attention;
(3) The exotic animal is kept and cared for in such a way as not to
endanger the safety of any person or property; and
(4) The exotic animal permittee notifies the Director when changing
his residence or location of the exotic animal, or selling or
otherwise disposing of the exotic animal for which the permit was
issued.
J. Permits issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be
surrendered for inspection upon the request of the Director. The
premises on which an exotic animal is maintained shall be open at any
reasonable hour and in a reasonable manner for inspection by the
Director.
K. For failure to have a permit in advance of obtaining an exotic animal or
to renew said permit within 60 days of the expiration date, or upon
suspension of an exotic animal permit, the Director shall have the
authority to enter the premises where the exotic animal is kept, at any
reasonable hour, and to impound said animal. The animal shall e
surrendered upon the demand of the Director. Procedures for the
reclamation and destruction of impounded exotic animals shall be
followed pursuant to §§ 137-8 and 137-9 of this chapter, and for
penalties, pursuant to § 137-52 of this chapter. The exotic animal may
§ 137-49 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 137-49
1:116
§ 137-50. Guard dogs.
be returned to its owner if the problem for which it was impounded
is corrected within the time period allotted by the Director and all
penalties are paid.
L. Notwithstanding the above, a valid zoological park, veterinary hospital,
humane society, shelter, public laboratory, circus, sideshow, educational
or scientific facility is excluded from the above portions of this section,
provided protective devices adequate to prevent the animal from
escaping or injuring the public are provided.
M. Upon application to the Director, the keeping of these prohibited
animals may be permitted for educational or scientific purposes;
provided there is no conflict with state and federal regulations. In lieu
of licensing each animal, an exotic animal permit may be issued in
accordance with this section.
N. No person shall keep, conduct or operate any traveling animal show,
petting zoos, circus, pony rides, animal acts or miscellaneous animal or
reptile exhibits without first obtaining a special animal permit from the
Director as follows:
(1) Each application for a special animal permit shall be in writing
upon a form to be furnished by the Director and shall contain such
information as the Director shall require. The fee for each special
animal permit is $25;
(2) All special permits issued by the Director shall be for a specified
period of time, but not to exceed one year unless revoked or
suspended, or unless the holder of the permit changes the location
of his place of business, or sells, assigns, transfers or otherwise
disposes of his business or his interests therein; and
(3) Upon the filing of each application, either for an original permit or
renewal, the Director shall make an investigation as he deems
proper. The Director shall then issue a permit to the applicant if it is
found that the animals or the conduct or operation of the business
for which the permit is requested will not constitute a menace to
the health, peace or safety of the citizens; and the premises and
condition and that the animals will not be subject to needless
suffering, unnecessary cruelty or abuse and that the applicant has
not had a permit revoked within one year prior to the date of
application.
A. It is conducive to the promotion of the health and general welfare of the
inhabitants of this City to require permits for guard dogs, used on
commercial property, and to establish regulations for the proper and
safe use of guard dogs used for protecting commercial property.
B. Permits:
§ 137-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-50
1:117
§ 137-51. Notice of violation; permit suspension or revocation;
hearings and appeals.
(1) Unless a guard dog permit is in effect for each commercial property
where guard dogs are to be used, they shall not be used.
Procedures for permit application, inspection of guard dog
facilities, and issuance of dog identification tags will be established
by the Director. Permits for both permanent and temporary
locations may be transferred to a new location operated by the
same business firm during the license year. However, such
transfers shall not be effective until the Director or his designee
has inspected and approved required facilities at the new location
and the information required below for permit applications has
been recorded. Applicants must provide five working days' advance
notice to the animal control center for permit transfers.
(2) Permit applications shall include the following information: the
business name, address and telephone number of the commercial
property where guard dogs are to be used; the name, address and
telephone number of the handler who can be reached at any time
during the day or night; the number of dogs to be used and general
description of their use; the location where dogs are to be housed;
and any other information that the Director deems necessary by
rule and regulation. Permit holders shall notify the animal control
center if any information recorded as part of the permit application
is changed during the course of the period for which the permit is
issued.
(3) The building and yard in which a guard dog is housed must be
posted with bilingual, English and Spanish, or visual guard dog
signs, approved by the Director, which shall not be more than 200
feet apart and shall be at all property corners and at every entrance
into the area.
(4) For guard dogs either transported or used in vehicles, measures
must be taken to protect the public from accidental contact with a
guard dog.
(5) A handler is required to be physically present while guard dogs are
being used at temporary sites which do not comply with this
section.
C. Dogs which are used as private guard dogs on the property of their
owner's private residence shall be excluded from the provisions of this
section unless said residence is located on premises used for
commercial purposes. Guard dogs kept in a kennel with a valid
professional animal permit are also excluded.
A. If the Director makes an inspection of a kennel, grooming parlor, pet
shop, shelter, facility for exotic animals or commercial property where
guard dogs are used, and discovers a violation of law or regulations, he
§ 137-50 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 137-51
1:118
shall notify the permit holder, or operator, of such violations by means
of an inspection report form or other written notice. The notice shall:
(1) Set forth the specific violation found;
(2) Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for correction of
the violation found;
(3) State that failure to comply with any notice issued in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter may result in immediate
suspension of the permit; and
(4) State than an opportunity for appeal from any notice or inspection
findings will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed
with the Director within five days of the receipt of the notification.
B. Notices provided for under this section shall be deemed to have been
properly served when the original of the inspection report form or other
notice has been delivered personally or mailed by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the permit holder, person in
charge, or alleged violator. A copy of such notice shall be filed with the
records of the Director.
C. Hearings provided for in this section shall be conducted by the Director
at a time and place designated by him. Based upon the record of such
hearing, the Director shall make a finding and shall sustain, modify or
rescind any official notice or order considered in the hearing. A written
report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the permit holder by
the Director. This subsection shall not be intended to preclude the
institution of court action as provided elsewhere in this chapter.
D. Permits may be suspended by the Director for failure of the holder to
comply with the requirements of law or regulations. The Director may
notify a permit holder in writing that the permit or license is, upon
receipt of the notice, immediately suspended, and that an opportunity
for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed
with the Director within five days of receipt.
E. Notwithstanding the notice requirements herein, when the Director
finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation of a kennel,
grooming parlor, pet shop, shelter, exotic animal facility, or site where
guard dogs are used, which, in his judgment, constitute a substantial
hazard to public health, he may, without notice or opportunity to be
heard, issue a written notice to the permit holder or operator citing
such condition and stating the corrective action to be taken. If deemed
necessary, the permit shall be immediately suspended and all
operations immediately discontinued. Any person to whom such an
order is issued shall comply forthwith.
F. For repeated violation of any of the requirements of law or regulations
or for interference with the Director in the performance of his duties,
the violator's permits may be permanently revoked after an opportunity
§ 137-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-51
1:119
for a hearing has been provided by the Director. The individual whose
professional animal, exotic animal or guard dog permit is revoked shall
not apply for another permit or license for the period of one year. Prior
to such action, the Director shall notify the permit holder in writing,
stating the reasons for which the permit is proposed to be revoked at
the end of five days following service of such notice, unless a request
for a hearing is filed with the Director by the permit holder or licensee
within such five-day period.
G. If an exotic animal permit is revoked, the owner of the exotic animal
shall give away, sell or surrender the animal to the animal control
center within five days of the effective date of revocation. If, within
seven days thereafter, the Director finds the former permittee is in
compliance with law and regulations, the permit shall be renewed.
H. Any person whose professional animal or guard dog permit has been
suspended shall cease the previously permitted activity. Said person
may, at any time, make application for inspection for the purpose of
reinstatement of the permit. Within five days of a request for
reinstatement, the Director shall make an inspection. If the applicant is
complying with the requirements of law and regulations, the permit
may be reinstated.
I. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Director may, within five
days of receipt of his decision, file written notice of appeal to the City
Manager. The hearing of the City Manager shall be conducted within 30
days of receipt of the notice of appeal. The actions of the City Manager
may be appealed to the governing body.
§ 137-51 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 137-51
1:120
ARTICLE IX
Penalties
§ 137-52. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished according to the provisions of Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article III, Violations and Penalties, § 1-19, of the Española Code. Each day
this chapter is violated shall be considered a separate offense.
A. The following is a schedule of mandatory fines:
(1) For redemption of impounded animals:
(a) First offense: $5.
(b) Second offense: $10.
(c) Third offense: $20.
(d) Fourth offense: confiscation of animal.
(2) Unlicensed dogs: $15 plus license fee.
(3) Running at large, or animals disturbing the peace:
(a) First offense: $10.
(b) Second offense: $20.
(c) Third offense: $30.
(d) Fourth offense: citation for court action pursuant to Subsection
B of this section.
(4) No rabies vaccination: $10 plus cost of vaccination.
B. Any violation of this chapter other than those listed in Subsection A of
this section shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article III, Violations and Penalties, § 1-19, of the Española
Code. If any person is convicted of cruelty or mistreatment of an animal,
that animal shall be removed from his custody and placed with the
Director.
C. In addition to the mandatory fines for impounded animals pursuant to
Subsection A of this section, an additional boarding fee will be charged
by the animal control center.
§ 137-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-52
1:121
Chapter 142
AVIATION
§ 137-52 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 137-52
1:122
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 142-1. Penalty.
§ 142-2. Adoption of Federal Aviation Agency rules by reference.
The air traffic rules promulgated by the Federal Aviation Agency of the
United States of America and presently in effect are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part of this chapter by reference, as fully and in all
respects as if particularly set forth in this section.
§ 142-3. Aircraft operation.
It shall be unlawful for any pilot or operator of any aircraft to operate such
aircraft in such a manner as to imperil the safety of the inhabitants of the
City or to imperil property within the City.
§ 142-4. Flying height.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate or pilot any aircraft over the City
at a height of less than 500 feet above the house tops.
§ 142-5. Stunt flying.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate or pilot any aircraft over the City
in a reckless manner, or cavort the same into spirals, loops, tailspins or
other such actions, commonly called "stunt flying."
A. Any person operating or handling aircraft in violation of this chapter, or
refusing to comply therewith, may be removed or ejected from the
airport or may be temporarily grounded by or under the authority of the
airport sublessee; and upon the order of the City Council may be
deprived of the further use of the airport and its facilities for such
length of its interest therein.
B. Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to punishment as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article III, Violations and Penalties, § 1-19, and the City
Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to proceed with prosecution
of any violations with the Municipal Court.
§ 142-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-5
1:123

ARTICLE II
Municipal Airport
§ 142-6. Scope of article.
This article applies to the municipal airport.
§ 142-7. Terminal facility.
The municipal airport shall be conducted as a terminal facility for the
promotion and accommodation of air commerce and shall be operated as a
free public air terminal.
§ 142-8. Hours of operation; exceptions.
The airport shall be open for public use at all hours of the day, subject to
such restrictions due to inclement weather, the conditions of the landing
area, the presentation of special events and like causes as may be
determined by the airport sublessee.
§ 142-9. Special services and facilities; commercial activities
restricted.
Special services may be rendered or special facilities may be provided at
the municipal airport on such terms as the City Council may prescribe from
time to time. No person shall use the airport as a base for the carrying
on of commercial activities; for the carrying for hire of passengers, freight,
express, or mail; for instruction in aviation in any of its branches; or any
other commercial purposes unless permission in writing is granted prior
thereto by the City Council.
§ 142-10. Obligation to obey regulations.
The use of the airport or any of its facilities in any manner shall create an
obligation on the part of the user of such facilities to obey all the regulations
provided in this article.
§ 142-11. Indemnification of City.
The privilege of using the airport and its facilities shall be conditioned on
the assumption of full responsibility and risk by the user of such facilities,
and he shall release, hold harmless and indemnify the City, its officers
and employees from any liability or loss resulting from such use as well
as against claims of third persons as against those of the person so using
the airport. The exercise of the privilege of use shall constitute an
acknowledgment that the City maintains the airport in a governmental
capacity.
§ 142-12. Certification required for operation; exceptions.
§ 142-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-12
1:125
§ 142-13. Registration of persons stationed at, employed at or using
airport.
Every person stationed or employed at the airport or receiving instruction
thereon or operating therefrom shall register at the office of the airport
manager and shall state his name, address, telephone number and the
nature of his business or occupation.
§ 142-14. Authority to provide for safety of public.
The airport sublessee shall have authority to take such steps as may be
necessary for the handling, policing and protection of the public while
present at the airport, subject to the review of the Airport Commission and
City Council.
§ 142-15. Use and removal of aircraft and equipment.
No person shall take or use any aircraft, parts or accessories of aircraft,
or tools or other equipment owned or controlled by any other person and
stored or otherwise left at the airport without the consent of the owner or
operator, or other satisfactory evidence of his right to do so.
§ 142-16. Use of runways or taxiways.
Only authorized vehicles shall be permitted on runways or taxiways.
§ 142-17. Taxiing rules.
A. No person, not properly certified by the Federal Aviation Agency, and no
aircraft, not similarly certificated, shall operate on or over the airport;
provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply to public aircraft
belonging to the government of the United States or to a state, territory,
possession or any political subdivision nor to any aircraft of a foreign
country operated under permission of the federal government.
B. No person shall navigate any aircraft over, land upon or take off from,
or service, repair or maintain any aircraft on the airport or conduct any
operation on or from the airport otherwise than in conformity with the
rules and regulations of this article and those of the Federal Aviation
Agency.
A. All aircraft in motion on the ground shall be taxied at a safe and
reasonable speed with due regard for other aircraft, persons and
property.
B. Aircraft awaiting takeoff shall park in the turnaround provided and in a
position so as to have a direct view of aircraft approaching for landing.
C. All takeoffs shall be initiated from the extreme end of the runway in use.
D. Taxiing aircraft shall conform to the taxi patterns as set forth on the taxi
chart attached hereto and made a part of this article by reference.7
§ 142-12 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 142-17
1:126
§ 142-18. Traffic rules.
All aircraft in flight below 1,500 feet above the surface within a threemile
radius of the airport shall comply with the following rules and with
the traffic diagrams shown on the traffic pattern chart made a part of this
article by reference.
§ 142-19. Instruction and practice flying.
E. No turnaround of 180° shall be made on any runway.
A. All aircraft taking off shall proceed straight ahead to an altitude of 400
feet above the surface, level off and execute a ninety-degree left turn
when outside the airport boundary.
B. Aircraft intending to remain in the traffic pattern shall continue to
climb to traffic altitude of 800 feet above the surface after the first
ninety-degree turn and shall thereafter follow the patterns as set forth
on the traffic pattern chart.
C. Aircraft leaving the traffic pattern shall climb to a traffic altitude of 800
feet above the surface after the first ninety-degree turn, and shall then
leave traffic by doing a forty-five-degree turn to the right.
D. Aircraft entering the traffic pattern shall do so at an angle of 45°
midway on the downwind leg at an altitude of 800 feet above the
surface.
E. Aircraft entering the traffic pattern shall not cause aircraft already in
the pattern to deviate from their course.
F. Standard no-wind runway will be 34.
G. Aircraft having flight characteristics which make the above procedures
impractical shall be flown at the one-thousand-foot altitude and shall
conform to the circular pattern shown on the traffic pattern chart. Such
aircraft:
(1) May enter the circular pattern at any point but shall fly at least a
ninety-degree segment of the circular pattern or a base leg before
landing.
(2) May depart traffic in a straight climb after takeoff or may depart
the circular pattern at any point.
H. The traffic direction shall be as indicated by the windsock. If a calm
condition exists, all landings and takeoffs shall be made to the north.
I. These rules may be deviated from when an immediate emergency
presents itself that requires such deviation in the interest of safety.
7. Editor's Note: The taxi chart is on file in the City offices.
§ 142-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-19
1:127
§ 142-20. Landing and taking off.
No aircraft shall land or take off in such manner as to clear any public road
at an altitude of less than 100 feet, nor land or take off on a taxiway or
over hangars or other structures, automobile parking areas or groups of
spectators.
§ 142-21. Use of alcohol and drugs.
No person shall take any aircraft from the landing area or hangars or
operate such craft while under the influence of, or using, any intoxicating
liquor or habit-forming drug.
§ 142-22. Repairs to aircraft.
No aircraft shall be permitted to remain on any part of the landing or takeoff
area for the purpose of repairs. All repairs shall be effected at the places
designated therefor.
§ 142-23. Removal of wrecked aircraft.
Every aircraft owner, his pilot and agents, severally, shall be responsible for
the prompt removal, under the direction of the airport manager, of wrecked
aircraft.
§ 142-24. Authority to refuse clearance.
The airport sublessee may refuse clearance to any aircraft until all charges
for storage, supplies or services rendered to it shall have been paid.
A. Every person instructing students in flying at the airport shall acquaint
them with the rules and regulations in effect at the airport.
B. No aircraft shall remain on the landing or takeoff area for the purpose
of instructing students between flights.
C. The airport sublessee, by appropriate notices, may restrict practice
flights and student training to portions of the airport designated by him.
§ 142-19 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 142-24
1:128
Chapter 150
BUILDING CODES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 154.
Fair housing — See Ch. 184.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 192.
Housing standards — See Ch. 222.
Nuisances — See Ch. 254.
Sprinkler systems — See Ch. 286.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 294.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 311.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 142-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-24
1:129

ARTICLE I
Building Code
§ 150-1. Adopted; fees.
There is hereby adopted by the City, so far as it is not in conflict with
the laws of the state or rules and regulations of the General Construction
Board of the state, for the purpose of regulating the erection, construction,
enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition,
occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings or
structures in the City and for the purpose of providing for the issuance of
permits and the collection of fees, that certain code known as the "New
Mexico Uniform Building Code," adopted by the General Construction
Board and accepted by the Construction Industries Commission and which
is also known as the "International Building Code 2009" and the
"International Residential Code 2009." The City does hereby adopt such
codes in their entirety, and any amendments or changes thereto, including
any and all new editions thereof, and the same are hereby adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set out verbatim in this article, except that the fee
schedule is to be derived from the building valuation data from the current
International Code Council book and Appendix L of the International
Residential Code 2009 unless and until the same is repealed by ordinance
of the City Council.
§ 150-2. Availability of copies.
One or more copies of the New Mexico Uniform Building Code adopted by
§ 150-1 shall be available and subject to inspection at all reasonable times
in the office of the City Manager in the municipal building.
§ 150-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-2
1:131

ARTICLE II
Electrical Code
§ 150-3. Adopted.
There is hereby adopted by the City, so far as it is not in conflict with laws
of the state or rules and regulations of the State Construction Industries
Division, for the purpose of regulating the installation of electrical wiring
and apparatus for safety to life and property, that certain code known as the
"National Electrical Code 2006" which was approved by such division. The
City does hereby adopt such code in its entirety, and any amendments or
changes thereto, including any and all new editions thereof, and the same is
hereby adopted and incorporated in this article as if fully set out verbatim.
§ 150-4. Availability of copies.
One or more copies of the National Electrical Code adopted in § 150-3 shall
be available and subject to inspection at all reasonable times in the office of
the City Manager in the municipal building.
§ 150-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-4
1:133

ARTICLE III
Gas Code
§ 150-5. Adopted.
There is hereby adopted by the City, for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire
or explosion, that certain code known as the "2009 New Mexico Plumbing
Code," and any amendments or changes thereto, including any and all new
editions thereof, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated in this
article as fully as if set out verbatim.
§ 150-6. Enforcement.
All applications for natural gas permits shall be handled as provided for in
the 2009 New Mexico Plumbing Code adopted by § 150-5, and the Deputy
State Plumbing Inspector shall continue to issue permits, conduct
inspections and charge fees, all as provided for by the Natural Gas Code of
the state.
§ 150-7. Availability of copies.
One or more copies of the 2009 New Mexico Plumbing Code adopted by
§ 150-5 shall be available and subject to inspection at all reasonable times
in the office of the City Manager in the municipal building.
§ 150-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-7
1:135

ARTICLE IV
Plumbing Code
§ 150-8. Adopted.
There is hereby adopted by the City for the purpose of establishing a
minimum standard of plumbing installation, service, and operation of
sanitary plumbing systems, to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the people in the City, that certain code known as the "2009 New Mexico
Plumbing Code" and any amendments or changes thereto, including any
and all new editions thereof, and the same is hereby adopted by reference
and incorporated as fully as if set out in this article verbatim.
§ 150-9. Availability of copies.
One or more copies of the 2009 New Mexico Plumbing Code adopted by
§ 150-8 shall be available and subject to inspection at all reasonable times
in the office of the City Manager in the municipal building.
§ 150-10. Permits.
All applications for plumbing permits shall be handled as provided for in
the State Plumbing Code, and the Deputy State Plumbing Inspector shall
continue to issue permits, conduct inspections, and charge fees, all as
provided for by the 2009 New Mexico Plumbing Code.
§ 150-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-10
1:137
Chapter 154
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building codes — See Ch. 150.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 192.
Housing standards — See Ch. 222.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 290.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 294.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 154-1. Numbering plan.
All lots, buildings and structures in the City shall be numbered in
accordance with the following plan: North and south numbers shall
commence at Oñate Street. East and west numbers shall commence at the
Rio Grande River. Odd numbers shall be on the east and north sides of the
streets; even numbers shall be on the south and west sides of the streets.
There shall be 100 numbers to each block; one number to every 30 feet of
frontage.
§ 154-2. Street number chart.
The City Clerk shall keep a chart showing the proper street numbers of
every lot in the City, which shall be open to inspection by anyone interested.
§ 154-3. Duty to place numbers on houses.
It shall be the duty of the owners and occupants of every house in the City
to have placed thereon, in a place visible from the street, figures at least
2 1/2 inches high, showing the number of the house. Any person failing to
so number any house, building or other structure occupied by him, or who,
after receiving notice to do so from the Clerk, shall continue in his failure to
so number such house, building or structure, shall be subject to punishment
as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III, Violations and
Penalties, § 1-19.
Chapter 158
BUSINESSES, REGULATION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Handbills — See Ch. 218.
Littering — See Ch. 235.
Nuisances — See Ch. 254.
Smoking — See Ch. 278.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 150-10 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 154-3
1:138
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 158-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BUSINESS REGISTRATION — A document issued by the City Finance
Department containing all the approvals and information necessary to
authorize a business activity within a fixed and permanent structure.
GARAGE SALE — A sale of goods from a private residence which occurs on
a nonregular basis at intervals greater than six months apart at the same
residence.
LIVESTOCK — Any domesticated animal generally kept for the purpose of
providing food or other services to humans. The word "livestock" includes,
but is not limited to, cows, horses, fowl, goats and other animals normally
found on farms or ranches.
LOCAL — As applied to goods or livestock means grown, raised or produced
within 22 miles of the City limits.
LOCAL VENDOR — Any person who conducts business within municipal
boundaries, who permanently resides within 22 miles of those boundaries
and who furnishes persuasive proof of such residence by agricultural
certificates, a state driver's license or other form of identification.
PERMIT — A document issued by the City Finance Department containing
all the approvals and information necessary to authorize a business activity.
TEMPORARY SALE — The sale or offering for sale of services and goods for
14 consecutive days or less at a private residence, church, school, shopping
center or other similar facility. This type of sale shall include, but not be
limited to, garage sales, rummage sales, yard sales and the sale of livestock
and other farm animals.
TEMPORARY SALES PERMIT — A document issued by the City Finance
Department containing all the approvals and information necessary to
authorize the sale of goods and merchandise, including livestock and
garage/rummage sales from a private residence, church, school or other
similar facility.
TRANSIENT VENDOR — All nonlocal merchants, vendors, peddlers or
hawkers going from door to door, street to street or business to business, or
located at a temporary mobile structure, offering goods or services for sale.
§ 158-2. Penalty.
Any person who conducts business within the City and is unable to produce
the proper permits or business registration upon the request of any
customer or enforcement officer commits an offense punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III, Violations and Penalties. § 1-19.
§ 158-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-3
1:139
§ 158-3. Purpose.
This chapter responds to the need for a measure of protection to the
citizens of the City by monitoring to some degree the operations of vendors,
solicitors, peddlers, hawkers and itinerant merchants within the City and
to set fees to offset the higher administrative costs for police protection,
sanitation and tax collection arising from transient and itinerant business
activities. This chapter intends to set a fee schedule which takes into
account the increased difficulty of monitoring the transient and itinerant
business activity of nonlocal vendors and merchants, as well as the transient
sale of nonlocal goods. This chapter will monitor to some degree the sale of
these goods and services but does not endorse, warrant, insure or promote
any goods, services or their vendors. To establish a method of monitoring
gross receipts taxes due from permanent businesses within the City, as
well as verification of compliance with other municipal ordinances, such
businesses shall be required by this chapter to obtain a business
registration from the City Finance Office.
§ 158-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply within City limits as set out in the current official
Zoning Map of the City and shall equally apply to non-Indians open for
business to the general public on Indian lands located within the City limits.
§ 158-5. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, City
Manager, their designees or any City police officer.
§ 158-6. Prohibited acts.
It is unlawful to:
§ 158-7. Temporary sales; signs.
Any person conducting a temporary sale may erect temporary signs for
advertisement. Such signs may be placed one day prior to the sale and
must be removed within one day after the sale. No sign permit fee shall be
required. All signs must conform to Chapter 350, Zoning and Development,
Article IX, Signs, and any amendments thereto, and to an approved plan
indicating where signs are to be placed. The following rules shall also apply:
A. Solicit the sale of goods or services door-to-door without the express
verbal or written permission of the owner or lawful occupant.
B. Sell or give away livestock or other animals within or adjacent to a
public right-of-way.
C. Sell or offer for sale any goods or services or solicit any gifts, donations
or contributions within City boundaries without first obtaining the
appropriate permit or business registration, as prescribed by this
chapter.
§ 158-3 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 158-7
1:140
A. No sign may be larger than four square feet and higher than 36 inches
from the ground.
B. All signs must have the name and address, with the signature of the
permit holder, on the lower lefthand corner.
C. Any sign left out more than one day after the last day of the sale will be
picked up by City crews. Such signs shall constitute litter and a
nuisance in violation of Chapter 254, Nuisances, of this Code, and the
permittee may be cited and punished by a fine of not more than $500 or
90 days in jail, or both.
§ 158-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-7
1:141

ARTICLE II
Permits and Registration
§ 158-8. Business registration required.
All persons doing business in a fixed and permanent structure within the
City shall first obtain a business registration from the Finance Department
of the City. However, business registration shall also be required of persons
who provide security to individuals, residential areas or business
establishments within municipal boundaries, regardless of whether the
business is conducted from a fixed and permanent structure within the City.
§ 158-9. Permit required for transient merchants.
Any person who, except from a fixed and permanent structure, solicits
donations, contributions, or gifts or who sells or offers for sale goods,
services or merchandise in or upon private property, public property, or
shopping centers, whether by foot, vehicle or at a roadside stand, whether
or not for profit, shall first procure a permit from the City Finance
Department, unless a specific exception is contained in this chapter. Such
permit shall be approved by the Business Office, Zoning Office and Police
Chief.
§ 158-10. Application information.
Applications for business registration or permits under this article must be
filed with the City Finance Department. An applicant must submit a sworn
application containing the following information on a form to be furnished
by the City Business Office:
A. The applicant's name, date of birth, and social security number.
B. The applicant's mailing address.
C. The applicant's state tax identification number (not necessary for
temporary sales permit).
D. A brief description of the nature of the business and goods or services
to be sold.
E. A brief description of the place where the business will be conducted. If
the business is to be conducted at a location not owned by the
applicant, a lease or other written permission from the owner is
required.
F. If employed, the name and address of the applicant's employer.
G. The length of time for which the applicant seeks the right to do
business.
H. If a vehicle will be used to conduct business, a description and license
number or other means of identification and proof of insurance.
§ 158-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-10
1:143
§ 158-11. Fees.
Before a permit or registration becomes effective, the following fees shall
be paid to the City:
§ 158-12. Business registration expiration.
All business registrations issued under the provisions of this article shall
expire on December 31 of the current calendar year. A thirty-day grace
period to acquire a new registration shall be allowed for renewal of the
registration for businesses holding the previous year's registration. After
January 30, a late fee of $1 per day, not to exceed $300, shall be imposed
for the renewal of an expired registration.
§ 158-13. Display.
§ 158-14. Revocation.
Permits and registrations issued under the provisions of this article may be
revoked by the City for any of the following causes:
I. Any other pertinent information reasonably necessary to approve the
application.
A. For local vendors selling locally grown produce, a permit is required for
which there is no fee.
B. For local vendors selling locally raised livestock, a permit is required.
The fee is $50.
C. For local vendors selling nonlocal goods, a permit is required. The fee is
$150.
D. For transient vendors or solicitors selling only local goods, a permit is
required. The fee is $150.
E. For transient vendors selling nonlocal goods, a permit is required. The
fee is $1,500.
F. For temporary sales, except for garage sales and rummage sales
sponsored by a charitable, nonprofit legal entity, a permit is required.
The fee is $25.
G. For garage sales and rummage sales sponsored by charitable legal
entities, no permit is required.
H. There shall be a business registration fee of $35.
A. Solicitors and vendors are required to have their permits available for
inspection at all times.
B. Businesses must display their registrations in plain view at all times.
§ 158-10 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 158-14
1:144
§ 158-15. Appeals, hearings and notice.
A. Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for license.
B. Fraud, unfair or unconscionable trade practices in the course of
business.
C. Any violation of this chapter.
D. Conducting the business in such a manner as to constitute a breach of
the peace or a danger to the health, safety, or general welfare of the
public.
A. A person aggrieved by any decision under this chapter may, within 10
days of the decision appealed from, file with the Planning and Zoning
Department a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds for the
complaint. Failure to file a timely notice of appeal shall constitute a
waiver of any complaint and shall deprive the Planning and Zoning
Commission of jurisdiction to hear the appeal.
B. All appeals shall be heard by the Planning and Zoning Commission in an
informal hearing. The aggrieved party may be represented by counsel
and shall have the right to present evidence and to cross examine
witnesses under oath. The appeal shall be heard at the next regular
meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission or within 14 days
following the date of filing. Unless the enforcement officer certifies that
delay in enforcement will cause serious and imminent harm to safety or
property, the filing of an appeal shall stay all enforcement actions.
C. Revocation of a business registration or permit shall require notice and
hearing. Notice of a hearing for a proposed revocation of a registration
or permit shall be given to the registrant or permittee in writing, setting
forth specifically the grounds for proposed revocation and the time and
place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed by certified mail to the
registrant or permittee at his last known address at least five days prior
to the date set for the hearing.
D. The decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission regarding any
appeal or revocation hearing is final unless, upon application within 10
days of the Commission's decision, the City Council agrees to review
the decision. If so, the City Council shall hear the matter within 14 days
of its agreement for review or at the next regularly scheduled City
Council meeting, and the applicant shall be permitted to present
evidence, cross examine witnesses and be represented by counsel.
§ 158-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-15
1:145
Chapter 163
CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES
§ 163-1. Permission required; limitation on number.
Carnivals and circuses shall be allowed in the City only upon the permission
of the City Council. No more than one carnival and one circus shall be held
within the City within any one year.
§ 163-2. Application; deposit; insurance.
A. Filing. Application for a permit for a carnival or circus shall be made in
conformance with this section and shall be submitted to the Chief of the
Police Department. The application must be filed with the Chief of
Police at least 30 days before the date on which it is proposed to
conduct the carnival or circus.
B. Information required. The application for a permit shall set forth the
following information:
(1) The name and address and telephone number of the person seeking
to conduct such carnival or circus or, if the carnival or circus is
proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization,
the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of
the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of
such organization.
(2) The date and the hours when such carnival or circus will start and
terminate.
(3) The address and location of the building or place where the circus
or carnival is to be located.
(4) The approximate number of persons who it is anticipated will
attend the circus or carnival.
C. Deposit required. At the time of making application for a circus or
carnival permit, there shall be deposited with the City Treasurer the
sum of $500 in cash or certified check. Such money so deposited shall
remain as security for leaving the grounds or location where the circus
or carnival is conducted in a neat, clean, healthy and sanitary condition,
to the satisfaction of the responsible City official. Only upon
certification will security money be returned to the applicant. If the
owner and/or manager of the circus or carnival fails to so clean up the
location within three days after date of operation, the City Manager
shall proceed to order City crews to place the location in a neat, clean,
healthy and sanitary condition. Costs for restoration of the location
shall be charged against the security money. A full accounting shall be
provided to the applicant, and any monies remaining shall be refunded.
§ 158-15 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 163-2
1:146
§ 163-3. Investigation and approval.
§ 163-4. Fees.
§ 163-5. Indemnification.
The person seeking to conduct such carnival or circus, in addition and
without respect to the insurance required, shall execute a written
D. Insurance required. At the time of making application for a circus or
carnival permit there shall be deposited with the City Clerk for review
and approval or disapproval by the City Attorney proof of an effective
policy of liability insurance covering the operations and naming the
City, its agents, officers and employees as coinsured in the sum of
$1,000,000 per claimant.
A. No circus or carnival permit shall be issued to a person who is not a
person of good moral character, nor to a corporation or organization
which is not represented by a person of good moral character. It shall
be the duty of the Chief of Police to make or cause to be made an
investigation into the character of each applicant and report the results
of such investigation to the City Council, together with his
recommendations as to approval of the application.
B. In his report to the City Council, the Chief of Police shall also advise as
to the number of police officers required to be present at the circus or
carnival.
C. The Chief of Police must act upon the request within five days from
receipt, and forward his recommendations to the City Clerk for
transmittal to the City Council.
D. If the City Council approves the request for an application for a permit
to conduct a circus or carnival, the City Clerk shall issue a permit for
the circus or carnival upon payment of the required fees and execution
of an indemnification agreement as set forth in § 163-5, provided that
the deposit has been made.
A. A daily permit fee of $125 shall be paid for each day the circus or
carnival is in operation.
B. An additional daily police protection fee of $50 shall be paid for each
police officer required to be present at the circus or carnival, as
determined by the Chief of Police in his report to the City Council.
C. An additional daily garbage service fee of $25 shall be paid.
D. Water and sewer rates will be those assessed against commercial users.
The City Clerk shall collect a commercial water deposit of $40 at the
time of the issuance of the permit and shall bill the person or
organization conducting the circus or carnival for the water and sewer
services upon completion of the carnival or circus.
§ 163-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-5
1:147
agreement to be prepared by the City Attorney indemnifying and holding
the City harmless from any and all liabilities resulting from the operation of
such carnival or circus.
Chapter 169
DANCES, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult entertainment and uses — See Ch. 128.
§ 169-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful to operate or conduct a public dance in the City without
having first obtained a license therefor in accordance with this chapter.
§ 169-2. Application.
§ 169-3. Investigation and approval.
A. Application for public dance licenses shall be made in conformance with
this section and shall be submitted to the Chief of the Police
Department. An application shall be filed with the Chief of Police at
least seven days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the
public dance.
B. The application for a license shall set forth the following information:
(1) The name and address and telephone number of the person seeking
to conduct such dance. If the dance is proposed to be conducted
for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and
telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of
the authorized and responsible heads of such organization.
(2) The date and the hours when such dance will start and terminate.
(3) The address and location of the building or place where the dance
is to be conducted.
(4) The approximate number of persons who it is anticipated will
attend the dance.
C. The Chief of Police, where good cause is shown, shall have the authority
to consider any application under this chapter which is filed less than
seven days before the date such dance is proposed to be conducted.
A. No public dance license shall be issued to a person who is not a person
of good moral character, nor to a corporation or organization which is
not represented by a person of good moral character. It shall be the
§ 163-5 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 169-3
1:148
§ 169-4. Appeal from denial.
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a public
dance license to the City Council. The appeal shall be taken by notifying the
City Clerk of such an appeal in writing at least eight hours before a City
Council meeting. The appeal shall be heard and determined at such City
Council meeting.
§ 169-5. Fees; security officers.
§ 169-6. Possession of license.
The person in charge of a public dance shall have the dance license upon
his person during the conduct of the dance, and shall make it available at
the request of any City police officer.
§ 169-7. Security.
The person conducting a public dance shall have present at all times during
the dance the number of security officers deemed necessary by the Chief
of Police. All persons hired for such security work must be approved prior
thereto by the Chief of Police. Payment to the security officers concerned
shall be the responsibility of the person obtaining the dance license or
permit.
duty of the Chief of Police to make or cause to be made an investigation
into the character of each applicant and report the results of such
investigation to the Mayor of the City, together with his
recommendations as to approval of the application.
B. In his report to the Mayor the Chief of Police shall also advise as to the
number of security officers required to be present at the dance.
C. The Chief of Police must act upon the request within 72 hours from
receipt, and the Mayor shall approve or disapprove the application
within 48 hours from receipt from the Chief of Police.
D. Upon approval, the Mayor shall submit the application to the City Clerk,
who shall issue a permit for the dance on payment of the required
license fee.
A. Any person desiring to operate a public dance hall continuously shall
pay an annual license fee of $100 for a calendar year, or any fractional
part thereof; and any such public dance hall shall have on duty at all
times dances are permitted a security officer approved by the Chief of
Police. The need for an officer may be waived by the Chief of Police.
B. The individual license fee for a dance conducted by a charitable or
fraternal, or other nonprofit corporation, shall be the sum of $5. All
other persons or organizations shall pay the sum of $25 for each public
dance permit.
§ 169-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-7
1:149
Chapter 171
DEVELOPMENT PERMITS AND FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations — See Ch. 180.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 294.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 169-7 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 169-7
1:150
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 171-1. Short title.
This chapter, as amended from time to time, may be cited as "The Fees
Ordinance of the City of Española," or simply as "The Fees Ordinance."
§ 171-2. Authority and enactment.
The City Council of the City of Española, New Mexico, in pursuance of
authority granted by the laws of the State of New Mexico (NMSA 1978
§§ 3-23-1A through C; 3-20-7C; 3-26-2A; 3-27-4A), hereby ordains and
enacts into law the following regulations.
§ 171-3. Jurisdiction.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply within the City limits of the City
of Española as well as any extraterritorial zone or jurisdiction that is or may
be put in place.
§ 171-4. General purposes.
The regulations contained herein are provided to promote the proper
management and development of land and structures, as well as land and
structures in combination, lying within and around the jurisdiction of the
City of Española. They are further intended to ensure the protection of the
health, safety and welfare of the general public during the development of
these lands and structures, as well as land and structure combinations.
§ 171-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all proposed development of lands, structures,
land and structures in combination, streets, easements and rights-of-way
lying within and around the City of Española, including lands belonging to
other public agencies, organizations and groups, including those belonging
or falling under the control of federal, state or other local governments.
§ 171-6. Conflict with other regulations.
It is not intended that this chapter interfere with, abrogate, annul or repeal
any ordinance, rules or regulations, previously adopted, and not in conflict
with any of the provisions of this chapter or which shall be adopted,
pursuant to law, relating to the use of buildings or premises, nor is it
intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any
easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties, except where
such use is in direct violation of this chapter. Should a conflict arise with
another ordinance, law, rule or regulation, the stricter of the two shall apply.
§ 171-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-6
1:151

ARTICLE II
Definitions and Interpretations
§ 171-7. Interpretation of certain words.
A. For the purpose of interpreting this chapter, certain words, terms or
phrases and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in the
code, regulation or ordinance to which they are related. Words used in
singular shall include the plural and the plural shall include the
singular.
B. Where these are not defined, the terms, words or phrases shall have
their ordinary acceptable meanings within the context with which they
are used. In these cases, the ordinary accepted meanings shall be
considered as they are presented within the most recent edition of
Webster's Dictionary of the English Language.
§ 171-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-7
1:153

ARTICLE III
Application, Records and Requirements
§ 171-8. Permit applications.
All permits for development require the completion and approval of a
permit application. Such application(s) shall be completed pursuant to the
requirements set forth in this chapter and the regulations specific to the
permit(s) being sought. An application for a permit is required for all
development lying within the jurisdiction of the City of Española. Such
applications shall be submitted first to the Planning and Zoning Department
for review and processing. The Planning Department shall cause these
applications to be submitted through the appropriate municipal
departments for additional review as required for each specific permit.
§ 171-9. Records.
A record of all permits shall be maintained by the Planning and Zoning
Department.
§ 171-10. Permit submittal requirements.
All permits submitted for review shall meet minimum submittal
requirements. These requirements shall be as follows:
A. Site plan: a plan indicating the property boundaries, all structures
located on the property and distances from the boundaries, buildings.
Such plan shall also indicate proposed locations of new structures,
utility tie-ins, pavement and/or curb cuts and all other proposed
development as it pertains to the permit being sought. Additionally, the
site plan shall indicate all easements and rights-of way on the subject
property.
B. Survey or legal description. A recent registered survey or survey
inspection report, conducted within five years from the date of the
request, must be presented with all applications for permit. Such
survey shall indicate points, bearings and distances for all property
lines.
C. Application. All permit requests must be submitted on forms available
from the Planning and Zoning Department and have all necessary
submittals attached thereto. Such submittals shall include but not be
limited to the above-referenced site plan and survey/legal description.
§ 171-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-10
1:155

ARTICLE IV
Application Fees
§ 171-11. Refunds; cumulative fees.
Application fees established hereunder are not refundable. If a particular
development requires more than one approval, then the applicant shall pay
the cumulative review fees for each review and approval sought.
§ 171-12. Fee schedule.
The following fee schedule is hereby established:
Table 1
Permit Fees Schedule
Zoning permits $25
Address verification $5
Temporary vendor permit
7-day $10
14-day $25
Business registration $35
Subdivisions
Alternate summary procedures $100
Family transfers $100/lot
Lot splits (up to four lots) $100/lot
Preliminary plat $50/lot up to 20 lots, plus $25/lot
after 20 lots
Final plat $50/lot up to 20 lots, plus $25/lot
after 20 lots
Board of Adjustment application
Variance $50
Special exception $50
Appeals N/A
Planning and Zoning Commission
application
Rezone requests $100
Annexations $50
Appeals N/A
Utility permits Established by Utility Ordinance8
Development permits Residential Commercial
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 311, Water and Sewers.
§ 171-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-12
1:157
Table 1
Permit Fees Schedule
P&Z review $50 $100
Water review $50 $100
Wastewater $50 $100
Police $50 $100
Fire $50 $100
Pavement cut permits $50, plus signed surety1
Parade/Gathering permits $25, plus police overtime costs2
Building permits Established per current Uniform
Building Code3
Reinspections $40/hour
Curb cut permits $50, plus signed surety1
Review of surveys $10
Additional plan reviews required by
changes, additions or revisions to
approved plans
$40/hour (minimum 1/2 hour)
NOTES:
1 Surety provides that work is done to municipal standards and
specifications as adopted or noted on permit; failure to provide
invalidates permit.
2 Overtime costs are calculated according to the hourly rate of employee
salaries used to provide requested duties.
3 Uniform Building Code fee structure is adopted as a portion of the
Code itself; the cost for residential remodel is calculated as half of total
standard fee.
§ 171-13. Adjustments of fees; availability of information.
The City Council may make adjustments to the fee schedule as necessary,
by ordinance. Copies of the current fee schedule shall be available to the
public at the offices of the City Clerk, Planning and Zoning Department,
Public Works Department and Utilities Office.
§ 171-14. Payment; voided applications.
The payment of fees shall be made at the time of application and prior
to review. Any application received without payment of fees shall not be
reviewed or approved. Applications for permits that have been reviewed
and approved but not issued to the applicant shall be deemed void 30
days after the initial review and approval and subject to additional reviews
§ 171-12 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 171-14
1:158
and fees. Applications and/or permits that have been voided and are
subsequently resubmitted shall be subject to double review fees.
§ 171-15. Additional fees for professional services.
A. In addition to the fees listed in Table 1 above, the project applicant shall
provide for a payment of 3% of the total project infrastructure cost,
inclusive of on-site and off-site improvements. Such costs shall cover
engineering review and inspection by the municipal engineers of record
and municipal staff. These fees do not cover the fees incurred by other
permits as outlined in Table 1 of this chapter.
B. When in the opinion of any of the officials and employees of the City of
Española, which are charged with the duty or authority to issue permits
or licenses, an additional review of the project is needed to ensure the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Española, such
official or employee shall notify the applicant of the need for such
additional information and review and provide the applicant with an
estimate of the cost for such review.
C. The applicant shall provide such additional information as is requested
at the applicant's sole expense or, in the alternative, authorize
municipal staff to obtain the additional information for review, inclusive
of a charge of an additional fee to cover the cost of such information
and review to the applicant. Alternatively, the applicant may withdraw
the application. No such withdrawals shall be entitled to any fees paid
for reviews initiated, whether such reviews have been completed or not.
§ 171-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-15
1:159

ARTICLE V
Penalties
§ 171-16. Restrictions on issuance of permits or licenses.
All departments, officials and employees of the City of Española which are
charged with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall issue
no permits or licenses for uses or purposes where same would be in conflict
with any provision, article or section of the Española Municipal Code. Any
permit issued in conflict with this Code shall be null and void.
§ 171-17. Expiration or cancellation of permits or approvals.
§ 171-18. Validity of permits and approvals.
Municipal staff members shall ensure that the development for which an
application for permit is submitted and approved is conducted and
completed only in accordance with the terms of such permit, including any
requirements or conditions established as a condition of issuance. Securing
one of the required reviews or approvals shall not exempt the recipient from
the necessity of securing any other required reviews or approvals, either
from additional staff, be they municipal, state and/or federal agencies,
departments and/or bureaus.
§ 171-19. Penalties; continuing violations.
A. Each permit or approval issued shall expire after 180 days if no work is
undertaken or such use or activity is not established. If obtained in
conjunction with or in addition to a building permit, such permit shall
carry a time limit of one year. Alternate time frames may be allowed
pending review and approval by the appropriate committee,
commission or board charged with reviewing the permit being sought,
and then only if provisions for time extension are permitted and
followed under the appropriate municipal ordinance.
B. Failure to comply fully with the terms of any permit or approval may be
grounds for cancellation or revocation. Action to cancel any permit or
approval may be taken on proper grounds by any member of the
municipal staff charged with approval or issuance of the permit.
Cancellation of a permit or approval may be appealed in the manner as
prescribed in the specific ordinance requiring such permit(s).
A. Every person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III, Violations and
Penalties. § 1-19, of the Española Municipal Code.
(1) In this section, the expression "violation of this Code" means any of
the following:
§ 171-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-19
1:161
§ 171-20. Remedies cumulative; liens.
All remedies prescribed under this chapter or under the provisions of the
law for collection and enforcement of the fees shall be cumulative and the
(a) Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful,
an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or
regulation authorized by ordinance.
(b) Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by
ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance.
(c) Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a
misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule
or regulation authorized by ordinance.
(2) In this section, "violation of this Code" does not include the failure
of a City officer or City employee to perform an official duty unless
it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as
provided in this section.
(3) Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a violation of
this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment. With respect to violations of this Code that
are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation
continues is a separate offense.
(4) The penalty for violations of an ordinance prohibiting driving a
motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
drugs shall be a fine of not more than $999 or imprisonment for not
more than 179 days, or both.
(5) The penalty for violations of an industrial user wastewater
pretreatment ordinance as required by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency shall be a fine of not more than
$999 a day for each violation.
(6) The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or
suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative
actions.
(7) Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are
a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other
equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty, however, does not
prevent the simultaneous granting of equitable relief in
appropriate cases.
B. The conviction and punishment of any person for a violation shall not
excuse or exempt such person from the payment of any fee due or
unpaid at the time of such conviction, and nothing herein shall prevent
a criminal prosecution of any violation of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 171-19 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 171-20
1:162
use of one or more remedies by the City shall not bar the use of any other
remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this or any other
ordinance created by the law. The fees authorized by this chapter shall be a
lien in favor of the City upon the real and personal property of the applicant
and/or person used in connection with the application or permit which gave
rise to the fee, and such lien shall be imposed, collected, enforced, and paid
as provided by the New Mexico state law. No property of any persons shall
be exempt from levy and sale on execution issued for the collection of a
judgment for any fee imposed by this chapter.
§ 171-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-20
1:163
Chapter 175
ELECTIONS
§ 175-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt a policy concerning election
campaign practices, candidate expenses, contribution reports, and
campaign ethics.
§ 175-2. Compliance with state and local law.
All municipal elections in the City shall be conducted in accordance with
this chapter and NMSA 1978 § 3-8-1 et seq.
§ 175-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
CAMPAIGN MATERIAL — Any circular, pamphlet, letter, poster, billboard,
placard, handbill, card, bumper sticker, decal or other printed or written
matter, or radio or television announcement.
CAMPAIGN REPORT — A report of all contributions made and expenditures
made.
CANDIDATE — Any individual listed on the ballot for election to any City
office or any person who has otherwise taken affirmative action to seek City
office.
COMMITTEE — A combination of two or more persons acting jointly in
support of or in opposition to a candidate or to the adoption or defeat of one
or more measures.
CONTRIBUTION — A gift, subscription, loan, advance, deposit, pledge,
contract, agreement or promise of money, service, or anything of value or
other obligation, made directly or indirectly to a campaign. Where goods,
materials, services, facilities or anything of value other than money is
contributed or expended, the monetary value thereof shall be the fair
market value.
ELECTION — Any regular or special election.
EXPENDITURE — A payment, pledge or promise of payment or money
for anything of value or other obligation, for goods, materials, services or
facilities.
MEASURE — Any proposition or question submitted to a popular vote at an
election, or circulated for purposes of submission to a popular vote at any
election, whether or not the proposition or question qualifies for the ballot.
PERSON — Any individual acting alone in support of or in opposition to a
candidate or to the adoption or defeat of one or more measures.
§ 171-20 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 175-4
1:164
§ 175-4. Printing, broadcasting or publishing campaign material.
§ 175-5. Circulation of campaign material without specifying
sponsor.
§ 175-6. Campaign Treasurer.
A. It is unlawful for any person, organization or political subcommittee to
publish, broadcast, or print any campaign advertising or
communication that does not specify the name of the sponsor or the
name of a responsible officer who authorized the printing, broadcasting
or publication of such material, in any election of the municipality.
B. Any printing establishment shall identify itself as the printer of the
campaign material.
C. Any person, organization or political committee violating these
provisions is guilty of a misdemeanor.
A. It is unlawful for any person, organization or political committee to
broadcast, circulate or distribute any campaign advertising or
communication which does not specify the full name and complete
mailing address of the sponsor or the full name and complete mailing
address of a responsible officer who authorized the printing,
broadcasting or publication of such material, in any election of the
municipality. This prohibition extends to broadcasts, newspapers,
handbills, petitions, circulars, letters or similar written material.
B. Any printing establishment shall identify itself as the printer of the
campaign material.
C. Any person, organization or political committee violating these
provisions is guilty of a misdemeanor.
A. Each candidate, person, or committee, shall appoint a Campaign
Treasurer. A candidate or person may appoint himself as Campaign
Treasurer.
B. The name, address, and telephone number of the Campaign Treasurer
shall be filed with the City Clerk not later than the first Monday after
filing for candidacy or issuance of a proclamation calling for election.
C. The Campaign Treasurer shall keep a true and full record of all
contributions and expenditures, to include:
(1) The name and address of every contributor whose total
contribution exceeds $50;
(2) The amount and form of every contribution;
(3) A full record of all disbursements;
§ 175-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-6
1:165
§ 175-7. Campaign reporting.
(4) Receipts exceeding $15, reflecting the purpose of each
expenditure, the date and method of payment; and
(5) All campaign bank records.
A. Each candidate, person or committee shall file a campaign report with
the City Clerk, on forms prescribed by the City Clerk.
B. Each campaign report which identifies contributions and expenditures
exceeding $250 shall itemize each item of contribution and
expenditure, including:
(1) The amount of contribution or expenditure or value of goods and
services contributed;
(2) The purpose of the contribution or expenditure;
(3) The date of the contribution or expenditure;
(4) The name and address of the person or entity from whom any
cumulative contribution exceeding $50 was received;
(5) The name and address of the person or entity to whom any
cumulative expenditure exceeding $50 was made; and
(6) The name of the person or entity to whom unpaid debt is owed; the
amount of the unpaid debt; and the date the debt was incurred.
C. Each campaign report shall contain the total of all contributions and
expenditures.
D. An itemized campaign report is not required if neither the total
contributions received nor the total expenditures exceed $250.
However, the campaign report shall contain a written declaration,
under oath, that neither the campaign contributions nor the
expenditures exceed $250.
E. Each campaign report shall contain a declaration that the campaign
report has been prepared with all reasonable diligence and that it is
true and complete.
F. Each campaign report shall be subscribed and sworn to by the
Campaign Treasurer.
G. Three mandatory campaign reports shall be filed during the following
periods:
(1) The first report shall be filed not later than 5:00 p.m. on the first
Monday in February. The first campaign report shall contain a total
listing of all contributions and expenditures made since the date
that an election resolution declaring a municipal election is
adopted by the governing body.
§ 175-6 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 175-7
1:166
Chapter 180
EXCAVATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building codes — See Ch. 150.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 290.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 294.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 311.
§ 180-1. Failure to complete project.
In case a permittee under this chapter shall fail to complete any project
within the time stated in his application or within a reasonable time
thereafter, or shall fail to construct the project of good and suitable
materials, or in a workmanlike manner, the City may complete or
reconstruct the project, and the permittee and his bondsmen shall be liable
therefor, together with all costs of enforcement, including a reasonable
attorney's fee.
(2) The second shall be filed not later than 5:00 p.m. on the first
Monday in March.
(3) The third shall be filed not later than 5:00 p.m. on the first Monday
in April.
(4) Any balance of contributions received that are not expended on the
campaign shall be disposed of by the last day of March, in one of
the following ways, at the option of the candidate:
(a) Return it to the contributors;
(b) Donate it to a local nonprofit or charity of the candidate's
choice; or
(c) Donate it to the City's general fund.
H. If any Campaign Treasurer files a report of expenditures and
contributions after the deadline, or if the report filed is incomplete, the
candidate shall pay to the City, at the time of filing, the sum of $10 per
day for each regular working day after the time required by this
chapter, until the complete report is filed. No candidate shall take office
with outstanding campaign reports.
I. It is unlawful for a candidate or Campaign Treasurer to knowingly and
willfully file a false report of expenditures and contributions.
§ 175-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-2
1:167
§ 180-2. Restoration of public way.
Upon the refilling of an excavation, the excavator shall restore the public
way to its prior condition. If the excavator fails to do so, the City may do so
and charge the excavator the reasonable value thereof.
§ 180-3. Protection of public.
All persons making excavations covered by this chapter within the City shall
mark the same in such a manner as to ensure the safety of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, and such warnings shall be clearly visible both day and
night.
§ 180-4. Permit required. [Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-02]
No person shall construct, reconstruct, repair, alter, grade, or make any
changes in any sidewalk, curb, driveway, street or alley of the City or
dig or make excavations therein, without first obtaining a permit from the
Planning Director.
§ 180-5. Permit application. [Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-02]
Any person desiring the permit required by this chapter shall file with the
Planning Director an application on a form to be furnished by such Planning
Director showing:
§ 180-6. Filing fee. [Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
A fee of $25 shall be paid to the City of Española for each application
received for the permit required by this chapter.
§ 180-7. Consideration of application; bond. [Amended 11-19-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-02]
Upon receipt of an application for a permit, the Planning Director shall
refer the application to the Street Superintendent, who is designated in this
chapter as the inspector, and who shall immediately make an inspection of
the proposed work, determine the propriety and feasibility of the proposed
work, and whether or not the estimated cost is in a sufficient amount to
cover the proper completion of the project. If he shall determine in the
A. Name and address of applicant.
B. Name and address of the person who will do the work.
C. Plan showing the details of the proposed work.
D. Estimated cost of the job.
E. Time of commencement and estimated date of completion of the work.
§ 180-2 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 180-7
1:168
affirmative, he shall so state in writing, endorsed upon the application. If he
shall disapprove the same, the applicant shall have the right to appeal to the
City Council, which may approve or disapprove the application. Should the
application be disapproved by the inspector and appealed before the City
Council, the City Council has the right to consider this application for 30
working days before giving the approval or disapproval to the application.
In any case the applicant shall, before undertaking such work, file with the
Planning Director a bond in a sum of at least twice the estimated cost of
the proposed work. Such bond shall guarantee prompt, faithful, skillful and
workmanlike performance, and that the work will endure in good condition
for the same length of time as the premises would have, had such work not
been done. The bond shall be issued by a surety company authorized to do
business in the state; provided, however, that the Planning Director may
accept a surety bond with two sureties who are property owners in the City.
Should the proposed work, in the opinion of the inspector, appear hazardous
to the public, he shall also require a comprehensive corporate indemnity
bond conditioned to save the City harmless from all claims for damages or
injury to persons or property by reason of such project. The provisions of
this section may be waived upon a showing of good cause.
Chapter 184
FAIR HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building codes — See Ch. 150.
Housing standards — See Ch. 222.
Offenses — See Ch. 260.
Zoning and development — See Ch. 350.
§ 184-1. Policy.
It is the policy of the City of Española to provide, within constitutional
limitations, for fair housing throughout the City of Española.
§ 184-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGGRIEVED PERSON — Includes any person who:
CHIEF ELECTED OFFICIAL — The person who holds the highest elected
position of the local unit of government and who is signatory to the Small
A. Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice; or
Believes that they will be injured by a discriminatory housing practice
that is about to occur.
B.
§ 180-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-2
1:169
Cities Community Development Block Grant agreement with the Local
Government Division.
COMPLAINANT — The person (including the chief elected official) who files
a complaint under § 184-10.
DISABLED — With respect to a person, a physical or mental impairment
which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities;
a record of having such an impairment; or being regarded as having such
an impairment, but such term does not include current, illegal use of
or addiction to a controlled substance [as defined in Section 102 of the
Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. § 802)].[Added 11-19-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-02]
DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE — An act that is unlawful under
§ 184-4, 184-5, or 184-6 of this chapter.
DWELLING — Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied
as, designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more
families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion
thereof.
FAMILIAL STATUS — One or more individuals (who have not attained the
age of 18 years) being domiciled with a parent or another person having
legal custody of such individual or individuals; or the designee of such
parent or other person having such custody, with the written permission
of such parent or other person. The protections afforded against
discrimination on the basis of familial status shall apply to any person who
is pregnant, or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual
who has not attained the age of 18 years.
FAMILY — Includes a single individual.9
PERSON — Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees,
trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries.
RESPONDENT —
TO RENT — Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for
a consideration the right to occupy premises owned by the occupant.
§ 184-3. Applicability and exemptions.
The person or other entity accused in a complaint of an unfair housing
practice; and
A.
Any other person or entity identified in the course of investigation and
notified as required with respect to respondents so identified under
§ 184-10.
B.
9. Editor's Note: The definition of "handicap," which immediately followed this definition,
was repealed 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02.
§ 184-2 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 184-3
1:170
A. Subject to the provisions of Subsection B and § 184-7, the prohibitions
against discrimination in the sale or rental of housing set forth in
§ 184-3 shall apply to all dwellings except as exempted by Subsection
B.
B. Nothing in § 184-4 shall apply to:
(1) Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that
such private individual owner does not own more than three such
single-family houses at any one time; provided, further, that in the
case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private
individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale,
or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such
sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with
respect to one such sale within any twenty-four-month period;
provided, further, that such bona fide private individual owner does
not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his
behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to, or any
right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of,
more than three such single-family houses at any one time;
provided, further, that the sale or rental of any such single-family
house shall be excepted from the application of this chapter only if
such house is sold or rented:
(a) Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities
or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent
or salesperson or of such facilities or services of any person in
the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee
or agent of any such broker, agent, salesperson or person; and
(b) Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any
advertisement or written notice in violation of § 184-4C of this
chapter, but nothing in this proviso shall prohibit the use of
attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and
other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or
transfer the title; or
(2) Rooms or units in dwellings contained living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four families living
independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and
occupies one of such living quarters as his or her residence.
C. For the purposes of Subsection B, a person shall be deemed to be in the
business of selling or renting dwellings if:
(1) He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental
of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
(2) He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence,
in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in
§ 184-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-3
1:171
§ 184-4. Discrimination in sale or rental of housing. [Amended
11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
As made applicable by § 184-3 and except as exempted by §§ 184-3B and
184-7, it shall be unlawful:
§ 184-5. Discrimination in residential real estate related
transactions. [Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein; or
(3) He or she is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for
occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.
A. To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse
to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or
deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
disability, familial status or national origin.
B. To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services
or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion,
sex, disability, familial status or national origin.
C. To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published,
any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial
status or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference,
limitation or discrimination.
D. To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
disability, familial status or national origin that any dwelling is not
available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so
available.
E. For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any
dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry
into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color,
religion, sex, disability, familial status or national origin.
A. In general. It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose
business includes engaging in residential real estate related
transactions to discriminate against any person in making available
such a transaction, or in the terms or conditions of such a transaction,
because of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status or national
origin.
B. Definition. As used in this section, the term "residential real estate
related transaction" means any of the following:
§ 184-3 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 184-5
1:172
§ 184-6. Discrimination in provision of brokerage services.
[Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers'
organization, or other service, organization, or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against them
in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation
because of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status or national
origin.
§ 184-7. Exemptions. [Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association
or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised
or controlled by, or in conjunction with, a religious organization, association
or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which
it owns or operates for other than a commercial propose to persons of
the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, national
origin or disability; nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private club
not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose
or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings
to its members or from giving preference to its members.
§ 184-8. Administration.
(1) The making or purchase of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
(a) For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or
maintaining a dwelling; or
(b) Secured by residential real estate.
(2) The selling, brokering or appraising of residential real property.
C. Appraisal exemption. Nothing in this chapter prohibits a person
engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property to take
into consideration factors other than race, color, religion, sex, disability,
familial status or national origin.
A. The authority and responsibility for administering this chapter shall be
in the chief elected official of the City of Española.
B. The chief elected official may delegate any of these functions, duties
and powers to employees of the City of Española or to boards of such
employees, including functions, duties and powers with respect to
investigating, conciliating, hearing, determining, ordering, certifying,
reporting or otherwise acting as to any work, business or matter under
this chapter. The chief elected official shall by rule prescribe such rights
§ 184-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-8
1:173
§ 184-9. Education and conciliation.
Immediately after the enactment of this chapter, the chief elected official
shall commence such educational conciliatory activities as will further the
purposes of this chapter. He or she shall call conferences of persons in
the housing industry and other interested parties to acquaint them with
the provisions of this chapter and the suggested means of implementing it
and shall endeavor, with their advice, to work out programs of voluntary
compliance and enforcement.
§ 184-10. Enforcement; confidentiality of information.
of appeal from the decisions of their hearing examiners, to other
hearing examiners or to other offices in the City of Española to boards
of officers or to themselves, as shall be appropriate and in accordance
with law.
C. All City of Española departments and agencies shall administer their
programs and activities relating to housing and community
development in a manner affirmatively to further the purpose of this
chapter and shall cooperate with the chief elected official to further
such purposes.
A. Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory
housing practice or who believes that he or she will be irrevocably
injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur
(hereafter "aggrieved person") may file a complaint with the chief
elected official. Complaints shall be in writing and shall contain such
information and be in such form as the chief elected official requires.
Upon receipt of such a complaint, the chief elected official shall furnish
a copy of the same to the person or persons who have committed, or are
about to commit, the alleged discriminatory housing practice. Within 30
days after receiving a complaint or within 30 days after the expiration
of any period referenced under Subsection C, the chief elected official
shall investigate the complaint and give notice in writing to the
aggrieved person whether he or she intends to resolve it. If the chief
elected official decides to resolve the complaints, he or she shall
proceed to try to eliminate or correct the alleged discriminatory
housing practice by informal methods of conference, conciliation and
persuasion. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal
endeavors may be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent
proceeding under this chapter without the written consent of the
persons concerned. Any employee of the chief elected official who shall
make public any information in violation of this provision shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than one year.
B. A complaint under Subsection A shall be filed within 180 days after the
alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred. Complaints shall be
in writing and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a
§ 184-8 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 184-10
1:174
§ 184-11. Investigations; subpoenas; evidence.
discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may be
reasonably and fairly amended at any time. A respondent may file
an answer to the complaint against him and with the leave of the
chief elected official, which shall be granted whenever it would be
reasonable and fair to do so, and may amend his answer at any time.
Both complaint and answers shall be verified.
C. If, within 30 days after a complaint is filed with the chief elected official,
the chief elected official has been unable to obtain voluntary
compliance with this chapter, the aggrieved person may, within 30 days
thereafter, file a complaint with the Secretary of the Department of
Housing and Urban Development. The chief elected official will assist in
this filing.
D. If the chief elected official has been unable to obtain voluntary
compliance within 30 days of the complaint, the aggrieved person may,
within 30 days thereafter, commence a civil action in any appropriate
court, against the respondent named in the complaint, to enforce the
rights granted or protected by this chapter, insofar as such rights relate
to the subject of the complaint. If the court finds that a discriminatory
housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, the court may enjoin
the respondent from engaging in such practice or order such
affirmative action as may be appropriate.
E. In any proceeding brought pursuant to this section, the burden of proof
shall be on the complainant.
F. Whenever an action filed by an individual comes to trial, the chief
elected official shall immediately terminate all efforts to obtain
voluntary compliance.
A. In conducting an investigation, the chief elected official shall have
access at all reasonable times to premises, records, documents,
individuals and other evidence or possible sources of evidence and may
examine, record and copy such materials and take and record the
testimony or statements of such persons as are reasonably necessary
for the furtherance or the investigation; provided, however, that the
chief elected official first complies with the provisions of the Fourth
Amendment relating to unreasonable searches and seizures. The chief
elected official may issue subpoenas to compel access to, or the
production of, such materials, or the appearance of such persons and
may issue interrogatories to a respondent, to the same extent and
subject to the same limitations as would apply if the subpoenas or
interrogatories were issued or served in aid of a civil action in the
United States District Court for the district in which the investigation is
taking place. The chief elected official may administer oaths.
B. Upon written application to the chief elected official, a respondent shall
be entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of subpoenas by and
§ 184-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-11
1:175
§ 184-12. Enforcement by private persons.
in the name of the chief elected official to the same extent and subject
to the same limitations as subpoenas issued by the chief elected official.
Subpoenas issued at the request of a respondent shall show on their
face the name and address of such respondent and shall state that they
were issued at their request.
C. Witnesses summoned by subpoena of the chief elected official shall be
entitled to the same witness and mileage fees as are witnesses in
proceedings in United States District Courts. Fees payable to a witness
summoned by a subpoena issued at the request of a respondent shall be
paid by the respondent.
D. Within five days after service of a subpoena upon any person, such
person may petition the chief elected official to revoke or modify the
subpoena. The chief elected official shall grant the petition if he or she
finds that the subpoena requires appearance or attendance at an
unreasonable time or place, that it requires production of evidence
which does not relate to any matter under investigation, that it does not
describe with sufficient particularity the evidence to be produced, that
compliance would be unduly onerous, or for other good reason.
E. In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena, the chief elected
official, or other person at whose request it was issued, may petition for
its enforcement in the municipal or state court for the district in which
the person to whom the subpoena was addressed resides, was served or
transacts business.
F. Any person who willfully fails or neglects to attend and testify, or to
answer any lawful inquiry, or to produce records, documents or other
evidence, if in his power to do so, in obedience to the subpoena or
lawful order of the chief elected official shall be fined not more than
$1,000 or imprisoned not more than one year, or both. Any person who,
with intent to mislead the chief elected official thereby, shall make or
cause to be made any false entry or statement of fact in any report,
account, record or other document submitted to the chief elected
official pursuant to his subpoena or other order, or shall willfully
neglect or fail to make or cause to be made full, true and correct entries
in such reports, accounts, records or other documents, or shall willfully
mutilate, alter or by any other means falsify any documentary evidence,
shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than one
year, or both.
G. The City of Española Attorney shall conduct all litigation in which the
chief elected official participates as a party or as amicus pursuant to
this chapter.
A. The rights granted by §§ 184-3, 184-4, 184-5, and 184-6 may be
enforced by civil actions in the appropriate United States district, state
or local court. A civil action shall be commenced within 180 days after
§ 184-11 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 184-12
1:176
§ 184-13. Interference, coercion or intimidation prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his having exercised
or enjoyed, or on account of his having aided or encouraged any other
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected
by §§ 184-3, 184-4, 184-5, or 184-6 of this chapter. This section may be
enforced by appropriate civil action.
§ 184-14. Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases.
[Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
Whoever, whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat
of force willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempts to
injure, intimidate or interfere with (1) any person because of that person's
race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin and
because he or she is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing,
occupying or contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental,
financing, or occupation of any dwelling, or applying for or participating
in any service organization or facility relating to the business of selling
or renting dwellings; or (2) any person because they are or have been,
or in order to intimidate such person or any other person or any class of
persons from participating, without discrimination because of race, color,
religion, sex, disability, familial status or national origin, or in any of the
activities, services organizations, or facilities described in Subsection (1);
or affording another person or class of persons opportunity or protection
so to participate; or (3) any citizen because he or she is or has been,
or in order to discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully
the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred; provided,
however, that the court shall continue such civil case brought pursuant
to this section or § 184-10D from time to time before bringing it to trial
if the court believes that the conciliation efforts of the chief elected
official are likely to result in satisfactory settlement of the alleged
discriminatory housing practice complained of in the complaint made
to the chief elected official and which practice forms the basis for the
action in court; and provided, however, that any sale, encumbrance or
rental consummated prior to the issuance of any court order issued
under the authority of this chapter and involving a bona fide purchaser,
encumbrances or tenant without actual notice of the filing of a
complaint or civil action under the provisions of this chapter shall not
be affected.
B. The court may grant as relief, as it deems appropriate, any permanent
or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order or other order
and may award to the plaintiff actual damages and not more than
$1,000 punitive damages, together with court costs and reasonable
attorney fees in the case of a prevailing plaintiff; provided that the
plaintiff, in the opinion of the court, is not financially able to assume
said attorney's fees.
§ 184-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-14
1:177
aiding or encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination
on account of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status or national
origin, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described
in Subsection (1), or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly
opposing any denial of the opportunity to so participate, shall be fined
not more than $1,000, or imprisoned not more than one year, or both;
and if bodily injury results shall be fined not more $10,000, or imprisoned
not more than 10 years, or both; and if death results shall be subject to
imprisonment for any term of years or for life and/or to other applicable
local, state or federal laws.
Chapter 192
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building codes — See Ch. 150.
Housing standards — See Ch. 222.
Nuisances — See Ch. 254.
Sprinkler systems — See Ch. 286.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 184-14 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 184-14
1:178
ARTICLE I
Flammable and Combustible Liquids
§ 192-1. Adoption of state rules; preexisting structures; service
stations; penalty.
A. The state rules and regulations relating to flammable and combustible
liquids, adopted by the State Fire Board, are hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated in this subsection as if set out in full detail.
B. The City Manager is directed to maintain at least one copy of the rules
and regulations adopted by this section on file at City Hall in the office
of the City Manager.
C. All persons operating any plant, station or establishment not
conforming with the standards provided in the regulations described in
Subsection A of this section, whether or not the same was in existence
prior to June 1, 1960, shall fully comply with all provisions of such
regulations no later than January 1, 1977.
D. All persons constructing or substantially remodeling a service station,
bulk plant or storage terminal shall submit a copy of his application to
the State Fire Marshal to the Fire Chief of the City. The written
approval of the Fire Chief shall be obtained before any new service
station or one substantially remodeled, bulk plant or storage terminal is
put into use.
E. Any person who shall fail to comply with any provision of this section or
who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made under this
section shall, severally for each and every such violation and
noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III, Violations and
Penalties, § 1-19. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall
not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons
shall be required to remedy such violation or defects within a
reasonable time. Each 10 days that prohibited conditions are
maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The application of such
penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions.
§ 192-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-1
1:179

ARTICLE II
Life Safety Code
[Added 6-13-1995 by Ord. No. 541; amended 9-1-1998 by Ord. No.
603]
§ 192-2. Adoption by reference.
The most current edition of the Life Safety Code, NFPA 101, is hereby
adopted by reference.
§ 192-3. Enforcement. [Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
The Fire Department and the Police Department shall enforce such code
and shall have the power to issue citations for violation of such code and
seek every form of judicial relief in order to enforce such code.
§ 192-4. Availability of copies.
A copy of such code shall be available for inspection by any person during
normal office hours at the main fire station across from City Hall on North
Oñate Street. Copies of the code or portions of such code shall be available
at the expense of the person requesting such copy.
§ 192-5. Notice of violation; misdemeanor penalty.
The owner and the lessee of a structure found to be in violation of such
code, when such structure remains in violation of such code after the time
specified for correction of the violation in a notice of violation issued by the
City, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 192-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-5
1:181

ARTICLE III
Fire Prevention Code
§ 192-6. Adoption of codes. [Amended 9-1-1998 by Ord. No. 603]
There is hereby adopted by the City, for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or
explosion, those certain codes known as the "Fire Prevention Code," NFPA
1, and the "Uniform Fire Code," in the most current editions of such codes,
and the whole of such codes, and any amendments or changes thereto,
and such codes are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out
verbatim in this section.
§ 192-7. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in the Fire Prevention
Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CHIEF OF THE BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION — The Fire Chief of the
City.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Española.[Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-02]
§ 192-8. Enforcement.
The Fire Prevention Code adopted by § 192-7 shall be enforced by the Fire
Chief.
§ 192-9. Modifications.
The Fire Chief shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the
Fire Prevention Code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee,
or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the
way of carrying out the strict letter of the Fire Prevention Code, provided
that the spirit of the Fire Prevention Code shall be observed, public safety
secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modifications
when granted or allowed and the decision of the Fire Chief thereon shall
be entered upon the records of the department, and a signed copy shall be
furnished to the applicant.
§ 192-10. Appeals.
Whenever the Fire Chief shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant
a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the Fire
Prevention Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the
Fire Prevention Code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the
applicant may appeal the decision of the Fire Chief to the City Council
within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed.
§ 192-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-11
1:183
§ 192-11. Availability of copies.
At least one copy of the Fire Prevention Code adopted by § 192-7 shall be
kept and maintained on file in the office of the City Manager and available
for inspection at all reasonable times that the office is open for business.
§ 192-12. Penalty.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention
Code adopted by § 192-7 or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate
or fail to comply with any order made under such code, or who shall build
in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted
and approved under such code, or any certificate or permit issued under
such code, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to
comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the City Council or by
a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed in this section, shall,
severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively,
be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article III, Violations and Penalties, § 1-19. The imposition of
one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it
to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy
such violations or defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise
specified, each 10 days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall
constitute a separate offense. The application of such penalty shall not be
held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
§ 192-11 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 192-12
1:184
Chapter 196
FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Regulation of businesses — See Ch. 158.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 192.
Parades and demonstrations — See Ch. 266.
Weapons and firearms — See Ch. 319.
§ 196-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
COMMON FIREWORKS — Any fireworks device suitable for use by the
public that complies with the construction, performance, composition and
labeling requirements promulgated by the United States Consumer Product
Safety Commission in CFR Title 16 and that is classified as a Class C
explosive by the United States Department of Transportation.
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person selling fireworks to wholesalers and retailers
for resale.
FIREWORK — Any composition or device for the purpose of producing
a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration or detonation.
Fireworks are further classified in this chapter as "common fireworks"
and "special fireworks," as defined by the United States Department of
Transportation, 49 CFR 173.88(d) and 173.100(r).
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and City Council.
GROUND AUDIBLE DEVICE — A fireworks device intended to function on
the ground that primarily produces an audible effect.
HELICOPTER; AERIAL SPINNER — A tube not exceeding 1/2 inch in inside
diameter that may contain up to 20 grams of pyrotechnic composition. Some
type of propeller or blade device is attached, and upon ignition the rapidly
spinning device lifts into the air.
IMPORTER — Any person importing or causing fireworks to be imported
into the City from another county, state, or a foreign country for subsequent
sale.
MANUFACTURER — Any person engaged in the manufacture of fireworks.
MISSILE-TYPE ROCKET — A tube not exceeding 1/2 inch in inside diameter
that may contain up to 20 grams of pyrotechnic composition, contains fins
for guidance and stability and rises into the air upon ignition.
PERMISSIBLE FIREWORKS — Fireworks legal for sale and use in the City
under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 192-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-1
1:185
RETAILER — Any person purchasing fireworks for resale to consumers.
ROMAN CANDLE — A heavy paper or cardboard tube not exceeding 3/8
inch in inside diameter, not exceeding 10 balls spaced uniformly in the tube,
with a total pyrotechnic composition not to exceed 20 grams each in weight.
SPECIAL FIREWORKS — Fireworks devices primarily intended for
commercial displays which are designed to produce visible or audible
effects by combustion, deflagration or detonation, including salutes
containing more than 130 milligrams (two grains) of explosive composition,
aerial shells containing more than 40 grams of chemical composition
exclusive of lift charge and other exhibition display items that exceed the
limits contained in this chapter for common fireworks.
SPECIALTY RETAILER — Any person purchasing fireworks for year-round
resale in permanent retail stores whose primary business is tourism.
STICK-TYPE ROCKET — A tube not exceeding 1/2 inch in inside diameter
that may contain up to 20 grams of pyrotechnic composition. Sky rockets
contain a wooden stick for guidance and stability and rise into the air upon
ignition.
WHOLESALER — Any person purchasing fireworks for resale to retailers.
§ 196-2. Penalty.
Any individual, firm, partnership or corporation that violates any provision
of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III, Violations
and Penalties, § 1-19.
§ 196-3. Applicability.
Nothing in this chapter shall apply to or prohibit any employees of the
Department of Game and Fish or the United States Fish and Wildlife Service
from possessing fireworks in the performance of their duties or to prohibit
any organization therein from sponsoring and conducting, in connection
with any public celebration, an officially supervised and controlled
fireworks display.
§ 196-4. Revocation or suspension of licenses and permits.
If a person is found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter,
that person's license or permit may be revoked or suspended by the Police
Chief, his deputies or designees.
§ 196-5. Possession of unauthorized fireworks; revocation of permit;
seizure and destruction of evidence.
No individual, firm, corporation or partnership shall possess any fireworks
for sale within the City, other than those authorized in this chapter. The
Police Chief, his deputies or designees may at reasonable hours enter
and inspect the permittee's premises, building, mobile or motor vehicle,
§ 196-1 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 196-5
1:186
or temporary or permanent structure to determine compliance with this
chapter. If any person has in his possession any fireworks in violation of
this chapter, his permit shall be revoked and all such fireworks seized, and
the fireworks shall be kept to be used as evidence. If any person has in
his possession any fireworks in violation of this chapter, a warrant may be
issued for the seizure of fireworks, and the fireworks shall be safely kept
to be used as evidence. Upon conviction of the offender, the fireworks shall
be destroyed, but if the offender is discharged, the permissible fireworks
shall be returned to the person in whose possession they were found;
provided, however, that nothing in this chapter applies to the transportation
of fireworks by regulated carriers.
§ 196-6. License or permit required; fees.
§ 196-7. Possession, sale or use of unauthorized fireworks.
No individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association shall possess for
retail sale in the City, sell or offer for sale at retail, or use any fireworks
other than permissible fireworks.
A. Required. No person may sell, hold for sale, import, distribute or offer
for sale, as manufacturer, distributor, wholesaler, importer or retailer,
any fireworks in the City unless such person has first obtained the
appropriate license or permit.
B. Enforcement and administration. The Police Department shall enforce
this chapter. All license applications shall be submitted to the office of
the Police Chief. All retailers shall be required to purchase a retail
fireworks permit for each retail location.
C. Fees. An applicant for a license or permit under this chapter shall pay to
the Police Chief's office the following fees, which shall not be
refundable:
(1) Manufacturer license: $50.
(2) Distributor license: $50.
(3) Wholesaler license: $50.
(4) Importer license: $50.
(5) Specialty retailer license: $50.
(6) Retailer permit: $25.
D. Duration. All licenses and permits shall be issued for 60 days beginning
on June 1 of each year. All licenses and permits shall be issued within
five days from the date of receipt of application.
E. Number. Licenses issued under this chapter shall not be restricted in
number or limited to any person without cause.
§ 196-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-8
1:187
§ 196-8. Exportation from City.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit licensed wholesalers, distributors,
importers, specialty retailers, or manufacturers from storing, selling,
shipping or otherwise transporting fireworks as defined by the United
States Department of Transportation to any person outside the City.
§ 196-9. Permissible fireworks.
Permissible fireworks for sale to the general public, as such term is used in
this chapter, shall be understood to mean fireworks legal for sale and use
in the state under the provisions of the Fireworks Licensing and Safety Act,
NMSA 1978 § 60-2C-1 et seq., as amended, with the exception of ground
audible devices, helicopters, aerial spinners, missile-type rockets, Roman
candles, and stick-type rockets.
§ 196-10. Retail sales or storage; regulation of activities.
A. Permit required. No fireworks may be sold at retail without a retail
permit. The permit must be at the location where the retail sale takes
place.
B. Sales to children under 12 years of age or intoxicated persons. It is
unlawful to offer for sale or to sell any fireworks to children under the
age of 12 years without parental or guardian permission or to any
intoxicated person.
C. Posting of "no smoking" signs in places of sales, storage or display. At
all places where fireworks are stored, sold or displayed, the words "no
smoking" must be posted in letters at least four inches in height.
Smoking is prohibited within 25 feet of any fireworks stock.
D. Storage, sale or discharge near gasoline supply. No fireworks shall be
stored, kept, sold or discharged within 50 feet of any gasoline pump or
gasoline bulk station or any building in which gasoline or volatile
liquids are sold in quantities in excess of one gallon, except in stores
where cleaners, paints and oils are handled in sealed containers only.
E. Fire extinguishers required. All fireworks permittees and licensees
shall keep and maintain upon the premises a fire extinguisher bearing
an Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. rated capacity of at least 4-ABC.
F. Age of sales clerks; sales only by licensed firms. A sales clerk who is at
least 16 years of age must be on duty to serve consumers at the time of
purchase or delivery. All fireworks sold and shipped to consumers
within the City shall be sold and shipped only by an individual, firm,
partnership or corporation holding the proper City fireworks license or
permit.
G. Discharge near sales location. No fireworks shall be discharged within
150 feet of any fireworks retail sales location.
§ 196-8 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 196-10
1:188
§ 196-11. Public display.
Chapter 200
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building codes — See Ch. 150.
Development permits and fees — See Ch. 171.
Excavations — See Ch. 180.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 294.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 311.
Zoning and development — See Ch. 350.
§ 200-1. Findings.
H. Discharge in or near motor vehicles. No person shall ignite any
fireworks within a motor vehicle or throw fireworks from a motor
vehicle, nor shall any person place or throw any ignited article of
fireworks into or at a motor vehicle, or at or near any person or group of
people.
I. Protection of exposed fuses. Any fireworks devices that are readily
accessible to handling by consumers or purchasers in a retail sales
location must have their exposed fuses protected in a manner to protect
against accidental ignition of any item by spark, cigarette ash or other
ignition source. If the fuse is a thread-wrapped safety fuse which has
been coated with a nonflammable coating, only the outside end of the
safety fuse shall be covered. If the fuse is not a safety fuse, then the
entire fuse shall be covered.
J. Dates of sales. Fireworks may be sold at retail between June 20 and July
6 of each year and three days preceding and including New Year's Day,
Chinese New Year and Cinco de Mayo of each year, except that
fireworks may be sold all year in permanent retail stores whose primary
business is tourism.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the public display of fireworks,
except that any individual, association, partnership, corporation, or
organization shall secure a written permit from the Office of the Police
Department and the fireworks shall be purchased from a distributor
licensed by the City, the State Fire Marshal and the Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco and Firearms at the United States Department of the Treasury.
B. The Police Chief may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the use
of special fireworks in public displays.
A. The flood hazard areas of the City of Española are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and
§ 196-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-1
1:189
§ 200-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 200-3. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following
methods:
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of
which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities,
and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods
and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage.
C. There are areas of special flood hazard within the City at this time, and
there exists the potential for localized flooding due to rainfall, irrigation
waters, ditch breaks, and future annexations of lands within areas of
special flood hazard.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, television cable, telephone, and sewer lines, streets and
bridges located in the floodplain;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize
future flood blight areas; and
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
A. Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property, in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities;
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
§ 200-1 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 200-3
1:190
§ 200-4. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING — Flooding occurring on the surface of an
alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is
characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment
transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
APEX — A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow
path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and
alluvial fan flooding can occur.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Floodplain Manager's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, or VO Zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent chance
or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one foot to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard
Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed rate-making has been completed in
preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zone
A, AE, AH, AO, A1-A99, VO, V1-V30, VE or V.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
CRITICAL FEATURE — An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change in improved and unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
E. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands.
§ 200-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-4
1:191
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building:
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION — For the purpose of determining rates,
structures for which the start of construction commenced before the
effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective
before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing
structures."
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated the boundaries of the flood, mud slide (i.e., mud flow) related
erosion areas having special hazards have been designated as Zones A, M,
and/or E.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community,
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both
Built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH,
B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of
building in Zone V1-V30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest
horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the
ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear
walls parallel to the flow of the water; and
A.
Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of
the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood.
In the case of Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D,
"elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or
solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate
the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of Zone V1-V30,
VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting
the definition of "elevated building," even though the lower area is
enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls meet
the standards of Section 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance
Program Regulations.
B.
§ 200-4 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 200-4
1:192
the areas of special flood hazards and the risk-premium zones applicable to
the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water
surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the Flood Boundary-Floodway
Map.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGER — That person so designated by the governing
body of the City of Española. If this person is an elected official, he may
designate to another person some or all of the duties of the office of
Floodplain Manager. The Floodplain Manager shall be a Certified Floodplain
Manager (CFM) by the New Mexico Floodplain Managers Association
(NMFMA), or shall obtain such certification within 12 months of
employment by the City of Española.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM — Those physical structural works for
which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which
have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce
the extent of the area with a community subject to a special flood hazard
and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically
includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These
specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed in conformance
with sound engineering standards.
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-4
1:193
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY) — The channel of a river or other
watercourses and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than a designated height.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship
building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or
related manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LEVEE — A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed
and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM — A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices,
which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
By the Secretary of the Interior directly in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 200-4 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 200-4
1:194
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National
Flood Insurance Program Regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other
datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For the purpose of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is
later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for
which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of
a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub.L.
97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The "actual start" means either the first placement of
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-4
1:195
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any
work beyond the state of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. "Permanent construction" does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation
for basement, footings, piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start
of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, rehabilitation, addition,
reconstruction, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the
start of construction of the improvement. This includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this
chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner
otherwise prohibited by this chapter. (For full requirements see § 200-8
below, and Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program
Regulations.)
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the National Flood
Insurance Program Regulations is presumed to be in violation until such
time as that documentation is provided.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
or to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 200-4 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 200-4
1:196
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION — The height, in relation to the North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified),
of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal
or riverine areas.
§ 200-5. General provisions.
A. Lands to which this chapter applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas
within the jurisdiction of the City of Española.
B. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of
special flood hazard are identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering reports
entitled:
(1) "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Santa Fe County, New Mexico
and Incorporated Areas," dated December 4, 2012, with
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated
December 4, 2012;
(2) "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the City of Española," dated
February 16, 2006, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRMs) dated February 16, 2006; and
(3) "The Flood Insurance Study for Rio Arriba County, New Mexico and
Incorporated Areas," dated March 15, 2012, with accompanying
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated March 15, 2012.
C. Development permit required. A development permit shall be required
within areas of special flood hazard to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or
have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations.
E. Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance,
easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
F. Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all
provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-5
1:197
§ 200-6. Administration.
G. Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On
rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur, and flood heights may
be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made hereunder.
A. Appointment. The current Floodplain Manager from the Planning and
Zoning Department is hereby appointed the Floodplain Manager to
administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other
appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program
Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
B. Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Manager. Duties and
responsibilities of the Floodplain Manager shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining
to the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Review permit applications to determine whether proposed
building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this chapter.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all
necessary permits (including those authorized by Section 404 of
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33
U.S.C. § 1334) have been obtained from those federal, state, or
local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example,
where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary
and actual field conditions), the Floodplain Manager shall make the
necessary interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state
coordinating agency, which is the New Mexico Department of
Homeland Security and Emergency Management (DHSEM), prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
§ 200-5 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 200-6
1:198
§ 200-7. Development permit procedures.
(7) Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in
accordance with § 200-5B, the Floodplain Manager shall obtain,
review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and
floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in
order to administer the provisions of § 200-9.
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the
Floodplain Manager must require that no new construction,
substantial improvements, or other development (including fill)
shall be permitted within Zone AE on the community's FIRM,
unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within
the community.
(10) Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter I, Section 65.12, of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may
approve certain development in Zones A1-A30, AE, AH, on the
community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevations of
the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community
first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA
(conditional letter of map revision).
A. An application for a development permit shall be presented to the
Floodplain Manager on forms furnished by him and may include, but
not be limited to, plans in duplicate and drawn to scale showing the
location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations,
existing and proposed structures, and the location of the foregoing in
relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following
information is required:
(1) Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved
structures.
(2) Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any nonresidential
structure shall be floodproofed.
(3) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that
the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the
floodproofing criteria of § 200-9B(2).
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed
development.
§ 200-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-7
1:199
§ 200-8. Variance procedures.
(5) A record of all such information in accordance with § 200-6B(1).
B. Approval or denial of a development permit by the Floodplain Manager
shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following
relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and
bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as telephone, sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems;
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or
erosion damage, for the proposed use; and
(10) The relationship of the proposed use to the most current City of
Española Master Plan.
A. The appeal board is the Planning Commission, which shall hear and
render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of
this chapter.
B. The appeal board (Planning Commission) shall hear and render
judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any
requirement, decision or determination made by the Floodplain
Manager in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
C. Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board
(Planning Commission) may appeal such decision to the City Council of
the City of Española. Such appeal shall be taken as an appeal of the
record, with no new evidence not previously presented to the Planning
§ 200-7 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 200-8
1:200
Commission allowed or considered in the determination of the City
Council.
D. Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the City Council of
the City of Española may appeal such decision in the courts of
competent jurisdiction.
E. The Floodplain Manager shall maintain a record of all actions involving
an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
F. Variances may be issued for reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the
procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter.
G. Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided the relevant factors in
§ 200-7B have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond
the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases. Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent
of this chapter, the City Council may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and
objectives of this chapter.
H. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
I. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
J. Prerequisites for granting variances.
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
§ 200-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-8
1:201
§ 200-9. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local
laws or ordinances.
(3) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the
lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the
cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased
risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
K. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(1) The criteria outlined in Subsections A through J are met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threats to public safety.
A. General standards. In all areas of special flood hazards in the City of
Española, the following provisions are required for all new construction
and substantial improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and airconditioning
equipment and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
§ 200-8 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 200-9
1:202
B. Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base
flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in §§ 200-5B,
200-6B(8), or 200-9C(4), the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor
(including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation.
A licensed professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall
submit a certification to the Floodplain Manager that the standard
of this subsection as proposed in § 200-7A(1), is satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other
nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed
so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A
licensed professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or
review structural design specifications and plans for the
construction and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice
as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification, which
includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to
which such structures are floodproofed, shall be maintained by the
Floodplain Manager.
C. Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement
and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement
must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters.
D. Manufactured homes.
§ 200-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-9
1:203
(1) All manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a FIRM shall
be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood
damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured
homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are
not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(2) Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved
within Zones A1-A30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on
sites outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; in a new
manufactured home park or subdivision; in an expansion to an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision; in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured
home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood, shall
be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of
the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood
elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement.
(3) Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on sites in
an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones
A1-A30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject
to the provisions of Subsection D(1) of this section shall be elevated
so that either:
(a) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the
base flood elevations; or
(b) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade
and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement.
E. Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within
Zones A1-A30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM shall either be on
the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; be fully licensed and ready
for highway use; or meet the permit requirements of § 200-7, and the
elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in
Subsection D of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway
use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick-disconnect-type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions.
F. Standards for subdivision proposals.
§ 200-9 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 200-9
1:204
§ 200-10. Standards for areas of shallow flooding.
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in § 200-5B
are areas designated as areas of shallow flooding. These areas have special
flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one foot to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following
provisions apply:
(1) All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with §§ 200-5,
200-6, and 200-7 of this chapter.
(2) All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall
meet development permit requirements of § 200-7; and the
provisions of § 200-9 of this chapter.
(3) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development, including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which are
greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, if not otherwise
provided pursuant to § 200-5B or 200-6B(8) of this chapter.
(4) All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(5) All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, which
are otherwise required, located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
A. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified).
B. All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no
depth number is specified); and
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed
so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
§ 200-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-10
1:205
§ 200-11. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 200-5B are
areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris,
potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall
apply:
§ 200-12. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the current certified
Floodplain Manager. Such citations shall be heard by the City of Española
Municipal Court. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed,
located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the
terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the
provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements
(including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection
with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates
this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not less than $50 nor more than $1,000 or
imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for each violation, and a
separate violation shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues; in addition, such person shall pay all
structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and the hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy.
C. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification
to the Floodplain Manager that the standards of this section, as
proposed in § 200-9B are satisfied.
D. Within Zone AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes will be required to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures.
A. Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted
regulatory floodway, unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would
not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during
the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If Subsection A above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction
provisions of § 200-9. Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter I, Section
65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Regulations, a community may
permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that
would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the
community first applies for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision
through FEMA.
§ 200-10 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 200-12
1:206
costs and expenses involved in the prosecution of the case. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the City of Española from taking such other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
Chapter 204
FRANCHISES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations — See Ch. 180.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 290.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 200-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-12
1:207

ARTICLE I
General
§ 204-1. Short title.
This chapter, as amended from time to time, may be cited as "The Franchise
Act of the City of Española," or simply as "The Franchise Act Ordinance."
§ 204-2. Authority and enactment.
The City Council of the City of Española, New Mexico, in pursuance of
authority granted by the laws of the State of New Mexico (NMSA 1978
§ 3-42-1), hereby ordains and enacts into law the following regulations.
§ 204-3. Jurisdiction.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply within the City limits of the City of
Española as well as any right-of-way maintenance within an extraterritorial
zone or jurisdiction that is or may be put in place or negotiated through
and with third-party governments. This will include any and all proposed or
future agreements entered into by the City and County, including the right
to permit work done within the specified rights-of-way as specified in the
Española Right-of-Way Ordinance.10
§ 204-4. General purposes.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the proper management of public
rights-of-way and their relation to the development of the City of Española.
It is further the purpose of this chapter to manage public rights-of-way,
easements and other public ways, lying within, above, below and around
the jurisdiction of the City of Española, and to ensure the protection of
the health, safety and welfare of the general public and as a matter of
public policy to promote the preservation, protection and enhancement of
buildings, lands, and lands and structures that lie within said jurisdiction.
§ 204-5. Applicability to public lands.
This chapter shall apply to all lands, and their associated rights, lying
within, above, below and around the City of Española, including lands
belonging to other public agencies, organizations and groups, including
those belonging or falling under the control of federal, state or other local
governments. This will include any and all proposed or future agreements
entered into by the City and county and may include all applicable fees
authorized by agreements between the City of Española and other
jurisdictions.
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 290, Streets and Sidewalks.
§ 204-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-6
1:209
§ 204-6. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety,
health, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare. Questions or
conflicts regarding the actual and/or intended meaning of terms, sections or
articles of this chapter shall be reviewed utilizing the Española Municipal
Code, Chapter 158, Businesses, Regulation of, Chapter 180, Excavations,
Chapter 290, Streets and Sidewalks, and Chapter 350, Zoning and
Development. Additional interpretive assistance can and may be garnered
from the Uniform Zoning Code as published by the International Conference
of Building Officials, 1997 Edition; the Zoning Encyclopedia, the Zoning
Dictionary and the Zoning Compendium, all published by Lehman &
Associates and known and referenced more commonly as the "Zoning
Trilogy." Each of these documents and publications shall be maintained
and kept on file for public review in the office of the Planning and Zoning
Department.
§ 204-7. Conflicts with other regulations.
§ 204-8. Reports by utilities.
All utility companies are required to provide access on an as-needed basis
to all maps, plans or other documents, verified by an authorized agent
of the utility company. Such reports shall be utilized by municipal staff
in order to provide for proper utility planning and shall be subject to
any confidentiality requirements negotiated by each company for security
or proprietary reasons. Such reports will identify the public rights-of-way
which the utility company is utilizing under the scope of the franchise
A. It is not intended that this chapter interfere with, abrogate, annul or
repeal any ordinance, rules or regulations previously adopted and not
in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in this chapter, this chapter shall not abrogate,
annul, repeal, modify or amend any franchise ordinance, easement,
covenant or other agreement granted or existing on the date of
enactment of this chapter.
B. It is not the intent that this chapter, as passed, nullify or otherwise
repeal any previous franchise entered into to legally by the City and the
utility company. It is the intent that this chapter require that any future
franchise negotiated by the City and a utility company meet the
minimum requirements set herein, or which shall be adopted, pursuant
to law relating to the use of buildings or premises. Nor is it intended by
this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements,
covenants, or other agreements between parties, except where such
use is in direct violation of this chapter. Should a conflict arise with
another ordinance, law, rule or regulation, the stricter of the two shall
apply, unless provisions for exception to that law, rule or regulation are
provided for in the franchise agreement.
§ 204-6 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 204-8
1:210
agreement proposed or adopted, and may be used in establishing the scope
and amounts of right-of-way being utilized by said company.
§ 204-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-8
1:211

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 204-9. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESS VAULT — Any structure containing one or more ducts, conduits,
manholes, handholes or other such facilities in the utility company's
facilities.
APPURTENANCES — Transformers, switching boxes, gas regulator
stations, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, junction boxes,
handholes, substations, system amplifiers, power supplies, pump stations,
manholes, valves and valve housings and other devices that are necessary
to the function of electric, communications, cable television, water, sewer,
stormwater, natural gas and other utilities and services.
CABLE COMPANY — The business, company, corporation or other entity,
organized under the laws of the State of New Mexico, that has entered or is
negotiating to enter into a franchise agreement to offer CATV service to the
residents of the City of Española, under the terms of this chapter.
CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM or CATV — A facility that receives and
amplifies the signals broadcast by one or more television stations and
redistributes the signals through residential and institutional systems to
subscribing members of the public for a fixed or periodic fee, employing
wires or cables passing along, over, under, across and upon streets, public
ways, alleys, highways and other public places, including facilities that, in
addition to providing such reception, amplification and redistribution, are
also used to originate and distribute programs or other material to such
subscribers; and in particular, the cable television system to be operated
and maintained in the City in accordance with the terms and provisions of
this chapter.
CITY — The City of Española, New Mexico.
CITY COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Española.
COMPENSATION — The transfer of money from a utility company to the
City of Española, and includes other forms of services or products.
CONTRACTOR — A person, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity
who or which undertakes to construct, install, alter, move, remove, trim,
demolish, repair, replace, excavate, or add to any improvements covered
by this chapter, that requires work, workers, and/or equipment to be in
the public right-of-way in the process of performing the above-named
operations.
DEGRADATION — A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way or
damage to any landscaping within the rights-of-way caused by excavation in
or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to reconstruct the
§ 204-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-9
1:213
surface and/or subsurface structure of such right-of-way earlier than would
be required if the excavation or disturbance did not occur.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works of the City of Española or his/
her authorized representative.
DUCT or CONDUIT — A single enclosed raceway for cables, fiber optics or
other wires, or a pipe or canal used to convey fluids or gases.
ELECTRICAL SYSTEM — The construction, maintenance and operation of
electric lights, power lines, with all necessary or desirable appurtenances,
including underground conduits, poles, towers, wires, substations,
distribution and transmission lines for the purpose of supplying electricity
to the citizens of the City of Española, for heat, power or other purposes as
allowed by law.
ELECTRIC COMPANY — A business, company, corporation or other entity,
organized under the laws of the State of New Mexico, which has entered or
is negotiating to enter into a franchise agreement to offer electrical service
to the residents of the City of Española, under the terms of this chapter.
EMERGENCY — Any event that may threaten public health or safety, or
that results in an interruption in the provision of services, including, but
not limited to, damaged or leaking water or gas conduit systems, damaged,
plugged, or leaking sewer or storm drain conduit systems, damaged
electrical and communications facilities, and advanced notice of needed
repairs is impracticable under the circumstances.
EXCAVATE — Any digging into or in any way removing or penetrating any
part of a right-of-way.
FACILITIES — Includes, without limitation, any pipes, conduits, wires,
cables, amplifiers, transformers, fiber optic lines, antennas, poles,
streetlights, ducts, fixtures and appurtenances and other like equipment
used in connection with transmitting, receiving, distributing, offering, and
providing utility and other services.
FENCE — Any artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire,
metal, or any other manufactured material or combination of materials
erected to enclose, partition, beautify, mark, or screen areas of land.
FRANCHISE ACT — The ordinance passed and approved by the City Council
of the City of Española, which outlines and enumerates the requirements
and process of negotiating a franchise agreement with the City of Española,
but does not include the basis of a fee schedule. Such fees are to be
approached by and through a separate mechanism.
FRANCHISE FEE — The fee which is charged to utility companies, as
defined herein, to operate within and to utilize the municipal rights-of way
and easements.
INFRASTRUCTURE — Any public facility, system, or improvement,
including, without limitation, water and sewer mains and appurtenances,
storm drains and structures, streets, alleys, traffic signal poles and
§ 204-9 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 204-9
1:214
appurtenances, conduits, signs, landscape improvements, sidewalks, and
public safety equipment.
LANDSCAPING — Materials including, without limitation, grass, ground
cover, shrubs, vines, hedges, or trees and nonliving natural materials
commonly used in landscape development, as well as attendant irrigation
systems.
NATURAL GAS COMPANY — The business, company, corporation or other
entity, organized under the laws of the State of New Mexico, that has
entered or is negotiating to enter into a franchise agreement to offer natural
gas service to residents within the City of Española, under the terms of this
chapter.
NATURAL GAS SYSTEM — The construction, maintenance and operation of
natural gas lines, with all necessary or desirable appurtenances, including
underground pipes or conduits, substations, and transmission lines for the
purpose of supplying natural gas to the citizens of the City of Española, for
heat, power or other purposes as allowed by law.
PERMIT — Any authorization for use of the public rights-of-way granted in
accordance with the terms of this chapter, and the laws and policies of the
City of Española.
PERSON — A person, firm, partnership, special, metropolitan, or general
district, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHT-OF-WAY or PUBLIC WAY — Any public
street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, easement, park, square, plaza, and City
of Española owned right-of-way dedicated to public use.
SPECIFICATIONS — Engineering regulations, construction specifications,
and design standards adopted by the City of Española.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location below,
on, or above grade, including, without limitation, foundations, fences,
retaining walls, awnings, balconies, and canopies.
SURPLUS DUCTS OR CONDUITS — Conduits or ducts other than those
occupied by utility company or any prior utility company, or unoccupied
ducts held by a utility company as emergency-use spares, or other
unoccupied ducts that a utility company reasonably expects to use within
three years from the date of a request for use.
TELEPHONE COMPANY — The business, company, corporation or other
entity, organized under the laws of the State of New Mexico, that has
entered or is negotiating to enter into a telephone franchise agreement to
offer telephone service to the residents of the City of Española, under the
terms of this chapter.
TELEPHONE SYSTEM — The construction, maintenance and operation of
poles, wires, anchors, cables, conduits and other appurtenances, either
above or below ground, for the purpose of supplying telephone and/or
telecommunication service to the citizens of the City of Española.
§ 204-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-9
1:215
UTILITY COMPANY — A business, company, corporation or other legal
entity authorized to do business in the State of New Mexico and deliver
utility services including, but not limited to, natural gas, electricity and
telephone. For purposes of this chapter, CATV shall be considered a utility
company. Utilities may include the operation of transit, telegraph and other
"public" services, either for-profit or not-for-profit.
WORK — Any labor performed on or any use or storage of equipment
or materials, including, but not limited to, construction of streets and
all related appurtenances, fixtures, improvements, sidewalks, driveway
openings, bus shelters, bus loading pads, streetlights, and traffic signal
devices. It shall also refer to construction, maintenance, and repair of all
underground structures such as pipes, conduit, ducts, tunnels, manholes,
vaults, buried cable, wire, or any other similar structure located below
surface, and installation of overhead poles used for any purpose.
§ 204-9 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 204-9
1:216
ARTICLE III
Franchise Agreements
§ 204-10. Granting of franchises.
The City of Española may permit any person, firm or corporation to operate
a franchise for the following purposes:
§ 204-11. Application; franchise requirements.
A. To construct, maintain and operate a natural gas system; or
B. To construct, maintain and operate and operate a telephone system; or
C. To construct, maintain and operate a CATV system; or
D. To construct, maintain and operate an electrical distribution and
transmission system; or
E. To construct, place or maintain pipes for the operation of a water plant
or water distribution system; or
F. To construct, place or maintain a wastewater treatment facility and
affiliated collection system; or
G. To operate maintain or otherwise conduct a solid waste collection
business; or
H. To utilize the public rights-of-way for the purpose of conducting any
business that is not prohibited by law.
A. Application requirements.
(1) No formal application form is required. Each utility company shall
submit a letter with the required information and submittals.
(2) All applications for franchise agreements shall have the following
information:
(a) Name of the company.
(b) Copy of Articles of Incorporation.
(c) Name of company representative to the City of Española.
(d) Statement of intent to apply for a franchise, including the type
of franchise sought and the term for which the applicant is
applying.
B. Franchise requirements. If the City Council permits a franchise for any
activity specified in § 204-10 of this article, such franchise shall be
subject to the following provisions:
(1) All contracts granting or giving any such original franchise, right or
privilege, or extending or renewing or amending any existing
§ 204-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-11
1:217
grant, right, privilege or franchise to engage in such franchise,
shall be made by ordinance, and not otherwise.
(2) A franchise complying with the provisions of the Act shall be
deemed reasonable and shall be adopted by the City Council,
absent a showing that approval of the franchise violates public
health, safety and welfare.
(3) No contract, grant, right, privilege or franchise to engage in such
an activity, hereafter granted, shall be extended for a period of time
not more than 10 years from the date of such grant or extension.
Options for renewal may be negotiated within individual
agreements.
(4) Any contract, grant, right, privilege or franchise to engage in such
activity hereafter granted shall include a mid-term review, not to
exceed five years from the date of approval of the franchise. The
intent of this provision is to ensure compliance with all aspects of
the franchise agreement as approved.
(5) No person, firm or corporation shall be granted any exclusive
franchise, right or privilege whatsoever. All franchise contracts
shall remain competitively neutral and may not be unreasonable or
discriminatory.
(6) No such grant, right, privilege or franchise shall be made to any
person, firm, corporation or association unless it provides for
adequate compensation or consideration therefor to be paid to the
City. Such grantee shall pay annually such charge as may be
prescribed in the franchise ordinance.
(7) A franchise agreement shall have the following provisions:
(a) That the utility company file reports listing the maps, plans and
documents available to the City of Española for use in
infrastructure planning, as required in Article I, § 204-8, of this
chapter.
(b) That the franchise agreement is transferable; however, should
the franchisee be sold or control of the original company be
merged with another company, a new agreement may be
required at the discretion of the City Council, which is not
under any obligation to approve said transfer.
(c) That the franchisee submit an economic development plan
showing how the utility company proposes to further the
economic development goals of the City of Española. Such plan
shall indicate, at minimum, the number of employees currently
serving the City of Española, the number of new employees
planned, if any, and any capital improvements intended to be
placed within the City of Española, as well as any explanation
as to any deficits from previous years. This is intended to be
§ 204-11 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 204-11
1:218
used as a development tool for the City of Española in
conjunction with its own infrastructure capital improvements
plan.
(d) That the utility company provide access and copies, if
necessary or as requested, of all spatial and analytical data in
the form of maps and databases to assist in the planning of
future service areas, in conformance with Article I, § 204-8, of
this chapter.
(e) That the utility company schedule a meeting to discuss
improvements to be considered within the City, such list to be
presented biannually. The improvement list shall be utilized to
coordinate repairs, maintenance and new service areas within
the City by all affected utility companies and the City of
Española, thereby providing for proper infrastructure planning
and providing minimal impact to municipal rights-of-way.
C. A contract franchise must be competitively neutral and may not be
unreasonable or discriminatory.
D. No franchise shall be denied or revoked without reasonable notice and
an opportunity for a public hearing before the City governing body.
§ 204-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-11
1:219

ARTICLE IV
Agreement Adoption and Amendment; Indemnification
§ 204-12. Approvals by City Council; public hearings; when
effective.
§ 204-13. Renegotiations, expansions and amendments.
All amendments, extensions or enlargements of any contract, right,
privilege or franchise previously granted to any person, firm or corporation
for the use of the streets and alleys of this City shall be subject to all
the conditions provided for in this Act for negotiating original grants and
franchises.
§ 204-14. Indemnification.
All franchise agreements shall address the issues of indemnification on an
individual basis. No franchise shall be presented to Council until such time
as an indemnification clause is included in the agreement itself.
A. No right, privilege or franchise shall be granted until the ordinance
granting the same has been read in full at three regular meetings of the
governing body. Immediately after the final passage, the ordinance
shall be published in a newspaper of local circulation City paper once a
week for two consecutive weeks. The expense to publish and post such
ordinance shall be paid by the City of Española.
B. No franchise ordinance shall become effective until at least 30 days
after its publication as provided above. During that time, the franchise
ordinance shall be twice published in full, not less than seven days
apart.
§ 204-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-14
1:221

ARTICLE V
Administration
§ 204-15. Administrative official; duties.
§ 204-16. Franchise required for use of rights-of-way.
It shall be unlawful for a utility company to operate, install, place or
otherwise utilize municipal rights-of-way without a franchise in place in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 204-17. Fees and expenses.
§ 204-18. Penalty.
A. The administrative official for this chapter shall be the City Manager,
his designee or assignee and may include members of the Business and
Economic Development Committee.
B. The administrative official shall have the responsibility and duties of
oversight for this chapter.
A. Schedule of fees, charges and expenses. The franchise agreement
negotiated with each utility company shall have within its scope the
provision for a franchise fee. That fee shall be determined on an
individual basis and shall serve as the authority to conduct business
within the City of Española. Such fee shall not preclude the utility from
obtaining a business license with the City of Española, or any other
permits which may be required to operate within municipal rights-ofway.
B. No action until fees paid. No permit, certificate or franchise shall be
issued or granted unless and until such costs, charges, fees or expenses
have been paid in full, or provisions for same have been established and
approved via written agreement by the City Council; nor shall any
action be taken on proposed amendments or on applicable changes
unless and until such costs, charges, fees or expenses have been paid in
full.
A. From and after the passage of this chapter, the violation of any section
of this chapter, as amended or recodified, shall constitute a
misdemeanor and upon conviction of such violation shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than $500.
B. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense, provided that any one or more of such offenses
may be set out in any complaint or information filed pursuant to the
provisions herein, provided further that separate and distinct proof of
each day's offense shall be required.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to, cover and affect any
person, firm, corporation or group of persons, acting together or in
§ 204-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-18
1:223
concert. Those who violate or refuse to comply with any of the
provisions, sections, rules or regulations of the above-mentioned codes
and sections, and any and all sections within said codes prescribing
penalties not in accord herewith are repealed insofar, but only insofar,
as said sections prescribe penalties different from those herein set
forth.
§ 204-18 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 204-18
1:224
ARTICLE VI
Interpretation
§ 204-19. Conflict with other regulations.
Whenever the regulations of another ordinance require or impose other
more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statutes,
ordinance, policies, regulations or rules, the regulations and requirements
of this chapter shall govern, except those legally adopted franchise
agreements in place at the time this chapter is passed.
§ 204-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-19
1:225
Chapter 209
GAMBLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult entertainment and uses — See Ch. 128.
Carnivals and circuses — See Ch. 163.
Public dances — See Ch. 169.
Offenses — See Ch. 260.
Parades and demonstrations — See Ch. 266.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 270.
§ 209-1. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
§ 209-2. Distribution of prizes by lot at places of amusement.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any theater, motion-picture show or
other place of amusement to distribute or offer to distribute any prize or
other thing of value by lot or chance among persons who have secured
the chance to obtain such prize or other thing of value by the purchase
of an admission to such theater, motion-picture show or other place of
amusement.
Chapter 213
GRAFFITI
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building codes — See Ch. 150.
Housing standards — See Ch. 222.
Minors — See Ch. 241.
Nuisances — See Ch. 254.
Offenses — See Ch. 260.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 294.
Zoning and development — See Ch. 350.
A. Play any game of chance for money or any other thing of value, or for
anything which can or may be exchanged for any article of value, or
operate or play any game of chance, whether by or with cards,
mechanical devices or otherwise;
B. Operate or knowingly permit the same to be operated or played, upon
the premises owned, leased or in the possession or occupancy of any
such person; or
C. Possess any evidence of illegal gambling.
§ 204-19 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 213-1
1:226
§ 213-1. Title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Anti-Graffiti Ordinance."
§ 213-2. Findings and intent; conflict with state law.
Graffiti is a public nuisance and form of vandalism which injures and stains
Española, causes neighborhoods to deteriorate, encourages other crimes,
erodes property values, and undermines the sense of well being, safety and
pride citizens feel for their community. It is a public purpose and the intent
of this chapter to eradicate or minimize this visual blight. Unless the City
acts to remove graffiti from public and private property, the graffiti tends
to remain. Other properties then become the target of graffiti, and entire
neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places in which to
be, all to the detriment of the City. The City Council intends, through the
adoption of this chapter, to provide additional enforcement tools to protect
public and private property from acts of graffiti vandalism and defacement.
The Council does not intend for this chapter to conflict with any existing
anti-graffiti state laws. If there is such a conflict in specific fact situations,
the Council intends the state law to prevail and the remainder of the chapter
to be enforced along with the state law.
§ 213-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABATE — To permanently remove or cover graffiti.
AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER or SPRAY PAINT — Paint in an aerosol
container.
GRAFFITI — Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting, other
defacement or gang mark or symbol of any type that is written, marked,
etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise
affixed to any surface of public or private property by any graffiti
implement, to the extent that the graffiti was not authorized in advance by
the owner or occupant of the property, or, despite advance authorization,
is otherwise deemed a public nuisance by the City Council. Graffiti consists
of intentionally and maliciously defacing any real or personal property of
another with graffiti or the use of any graffiti implement without the consent
or reasonable grounds to believe there is consent of the owner of the
property. When a single occurrence of graffiti is committed by more then
one individual, the court may apportion the amount of restitution owed by
each offender in accordance with each offender's degree of culpability.
GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT — An aerosol paint container, a broad-tipped
marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching materials or
equipment, brush or any other device capable of scarring or leaving a
visible mark on any natural or man-made surface.
MINOR — An individual who is less than 18 years of age.
§ 213-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-3
1:227
PERMANENT GLASS ETCHER — A product purposely sold to permanently
etch glass such as Armour Etch and etchall® dip 'n etch.
PROVISION OF GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS — Giving, selling or otherwise
making available graffiti implements to minors.
§ 213-4. Prohibited conduct; sale restrictions and requirements;
forfeitures.
§ 213-5. Rewards for information.
A. Furnishing to minors. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a
parent or legal guardian, to sell, exchange, give, loan, or otherwise
furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged, given, loaned, or otherwise
furnished, any graffiti implement to any person under the age of 18
years without the written consent of the parents or guardian of the
person.
B. Display and storage. A commercial retail establishment shall store
aerosol paint containers, paint sticks, broad-tipped markers, and
etching devices or equipment in an area not accessible to the public in
the regular course of business without employee assistance.
C. Signage required. Every person who operates a retail commercial
establishment selling graffiti implements shall:
(1) Place a sign in clear public view at or near the display of such
products stating: "Graffiti is against the law. Any person who
defaces real or personal property with paint or any other liquid or
device is guilty of a crime punishable by imprisonment of up to 90
days and/or a fine of up to $500."
(2) Place a sign in the direct view of such persons responsible for
accepting customer payment for graffiti implements stating:
"Selling graffiti implements, spray paint, paint sticks, broad-tipped
markers, or etching devices to persons less than 18 years of age is
against the law and punishable by imprisonment up to 90 days and
a fine of up to $500."
D. Forfeiture of personal property. All personal property, including, but not
limited to, automobiles, motorcycles and bicycles, used or intended to
be used in violating this chapter shall be forfeitable to the City. In
forfeiting such personal property, the City shall follow the procedures
outlined in law concerning forfeitures of personal property. In any
forfeiture proceeding under this section, the court shall not order a
forfeiture unless it finds that the forfeiture is commensurate with the
severity of the violation to the extent required by the New Mexico and
United States Constitutions.
A. The City may offer a reward in an amount to be established by
resolution of the City Council for information leading to the
§ 213-3 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 213-5
1:228
§ 213-6. Removal.
identification and apprehension of any person who willfully damages or
destroys any public or private property by the use of graffiti.
B. Claims for rewards under this section shall be filed with the City in the
manner specified by the City Council.
C. No claim for a reward shall be allowed unless the City investigates and
verifies the accuracy of the claim and determines that the requirements
of this section have been satisfied.
A. The existence of graffiti on public or private property in violation of this
chapter is expressly declared to be a public nuisance and, therefore, is
subject to the removal and abatement provisions specified in this
chapter.
B. It is the duty of both the owner of the property to which the graffiti has
been applied and any person who may be in possession of or who has
the right to possess such property to at all times keep the property clear
of graffiti.
C. Removal by the perpetrator. Any person applying graffiti on public or
private property shall have the duty to remove the graffiti within 24
hours after notice by the City or private owner of the property involved.
Such removal shall be done in a manner prescribed by the Chief of
Police, the Director of the Department of Public Works, or any City
Manager designee. Any person applying graffiti shall be responsible for
the removal or for the payment for the removal. Failure of any person to
remove graffiti or pay for the removal shall constitute an additional
violation of this chapter.
D. Property owner responsibility. If graffiti is not removed by the
perpetrator according to the subsection above, graffiti shall be removed
pursuant to the following provisions. It is unlawful for any person who is
the owner or who has primary responsibility for control of property or
for repair or maintenance of property in the City to permit property that
is defaced with graffiti to remain defaced for a period of 10 days after
service by first class mail of notice of the defacement. The notice shall
contain the following information:
(1) The street address and general description of the property
sufficient for identification of the property;
(2) A statement that the property is a potential graffiti nuisance
property, with a concise description of the conditions leading to the
finding;
(3) A statement that the graffiti must be removed within 10 days after
receipt of the notice and that if the graffiti is not abated within that
time the City will declare the property to be a public nuisance,
subject to the removal procedure in this chapter; and
§ 213-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-6
1:229
§ 213-7. Right of City to remove.
(4) An information sheet identifying any graffiti removal assistance
programs available through the City and private graffiti removal
contractors.
E. Exceptions to property owner responsibility. The removal requirements
above shall not apply if the property owner or responsible party can
demonstrate that:
(1) The property owner or responsible party lacks the financial ability
to remove the defacing graffiti; or
(2) The property owner or responsible party has an active program for
the removal of graffiti and has scheduled the removal of the graffiti
as part of that program, in which case it shall be unlawful to permit
such property to remain defaced with graffiti for a period of 15 days
after service by first class mail of notice of the defacement.
A. Whenever the City becomes aware of the existence of graffiti on any
real property within the City and visible from the public right-of-way or
City-owned land, the City shall make a reasonable, good faith effort to
give notice to the property owner or agent that the graffiti should be
abated within five days. Reasonable, good faith effort to give notice
consists of delivery by mail or hand delivery or posting in a conspicuous
place on the property of notice to the owner or agent. If the person
advises the City within five days of receipt of the notice of his intent to
abate the graffiti, the City will work with him to come up with a
reasonable time schedule. Within a similar period, the person may
advise the office that the marking identified was authorized and thus is
not graffiti as herein defined. In that event, the City may either
discontinue its efforts to remove the graffiti or pursue abatement and
cost recovery proceedings under Subsection E.
B. If the property owner or agent requests the City's assistance, the City
may engage in graffiti abatement using materials provided or
authorized by the property owner. Any color used shall be similar to
that of the structure affected.
C. Use of public funds. Whenever the City becomes aware or is notified
and determines that graffiti is located on publicly or privately owned
property viewable from a public or quasi-public place, the City shall be
authorized to use public funds for the removal of the graffiti, or for the
painting or repairing of the graffiti, but shall not authorize or undertake
to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive an area than
that where the graffiti is located, unless the City Manager, or the
designee of the City Manager, determines in writing that a more
extensive area is required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid
an aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless
the property owner or responsible party agrees to pay for the costs of
repainting or repairing the more extensive area.
§ 213-6 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 213-7
1:230
D. Right of entry on private property. Prior to entering upon private
property or property owned by a public entity other than the City for
the purpose of graffiti removal, the City shall attempt to secure the
consent of the property owner or responsible party and a release of the
City from liability for property damage or personal injury. If the
property owner or responsible party fails to remove the offending
graffiti within the time specified by this chapter, or if the City has
requested consent to remove or paint over the offending graffiti and the
property owner or responsible party has refused consent for entry on
terms acceptable to the City and consistent with the terms of this
section, the City shall commence abatement and cost recovery
proceedings for the graffiti removal according to the provisions
specified below.
E. Abatement and cost recovery proceedings.
(1) Notice of due process hearing. The City Manager, or the designee
of the City Manager, serving as the hearing officer, shall provide
the property owner of record and the party responsible for the
maintenance of the property, if a person different from the owner,
not less than 48 hours' notice of the City's intent to hold a due
process hearing at which the property owner or responsible party
shall be entitled to present evidence and argue that the property
does not constitute a public nuisance. Notice shall be served in
person or by first class mail to the address carried on the City
utility accounts. If the owner of record cannot be found after a
diligent search, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof
in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of 10 days
and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation
published in the area in which the property is located.
(2) Determination of hearing officer. The determination of the hearing
officer after the due process hearing shall be final and not
appealable. If, after the due process hearing, regardless of the
attendance of the owner or the responsible party or their
respective agents, the hearing officer determines that the property
contains graffiti viewable from a public or quasi-public place
(authorized or not), the hearing officer shall give written notice in
an eradication order that unless the graffiti is removed within 10
days, the City shall enter upon the property, cause the removal,
painting over (in such color as shall meet with the approval of the
hearing officer), or such other eradication thereof as the hearing
officer determines appropriate, and shall provide the owner and
the responsible party thereafter with an accounting of the costs of
the eradication effort on a full cost recovery basis.
(3) Eradication effort. Not sooner than the time specified in the order
of the hearing officer, the City Manager, or the designee of the City
Manager, shall implement the eradication order and shall provide
an accounting to the owner and the responsible party of the costs
thereof.
§ 213-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-7
1:231
§ 213-8. Design of new developments to prevent graffiti or ease
removal.
(4) Cost hearing. The owner or responsible party may request a cost
hearing before the hearing officer on the eradication accounting,
and appropriate due process must be extended to the owner or
responsible party. If, following the cost hearing or, if no hearing is
requested, after the implementation of the eradication order, the
hearing officer determines that all or a portion of the costs are
appropriately chargeable to the eradication effort, the total amount
set forth in the eradication accounting, or an amount thereof
determined as appropriate by the hearing officer, shall be due and
payable by the owner or responsible party within 30 days. Any
amount of eradication charges assessed by the hearing officer that
is less than the total amount set forth in the eradication accounting
shall be explained by written letter from the hearing officer to the
City Council.
(5) Lien. As to such property where the responsible party is the
property owner, if all or any portion of the assessed eradication
charges remains unpaid after 30 days, pursuant to the authority
created by New Mexico law, the portion thereof that remains
unpaid shall constitute a lien on the property that was the subject
of the eradication effort. The City Manager shall present a
resolution of lien to the City Council and, upon passage and
adoption thereof, shall cause a certified copy of the lien to be
recorded with the City Clerk and the County Clerk.
A. In approving tentative or parcel maps, conditional use permits,
variances, site plans, building or renovation permits or other similar
land use entitlements, at the public hearing required by law for
approval or at the building permit issuance, the City shall consider
imposing any or all of the following conditions, or other similar or
related conditions:
(1) Use of anti-graffiti material. The developer shall apply an antigraffiti
material of a type and nature that is acceptable to the City
Manager, or designee, to the publicly viewable surfaces on the
improvements to be constructed at the site deemed by the City to
be likely to attract graffiti;
(2) Right of access to remove graffiti. The developer shall grant, prior
to transfer of any of the parcels that are within the development
site, the right of entry over and access to such site by the City, upon
48 hours' posting of notice by the City, to the City for the purpose of
removing or painting over graffiti;
(3) Supply City with graffiti-removal material. The developer shall, for
a period of two years after the sale of the final portion of the
development, provide the City with sufficient matching paint and/or
§ 213-7 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 213-8
1:232
§ 213-9. Retrofitting of existing development.
anti-graffiti material and removal equipment on demand for use in
the painting over or removal of graffiti; or
(4) Owner to immediately remove graffiti. The developer shall, either
as part of the general conditions, covenants and restrictions, or
separate covenants recorded against the development and
individual lots, prior to sale of any of the development or parcels,
covenant in a form satisfactory to the City that the owner of the lots
shall immediately remove any graffiti placed thereon.
B. Design of potential graffiti-attracting surfaces. Any applicant for design
review approval, a conditional use permit, special use permit,
unclassified use permit, development agreement, or other form of
development or building permit shall, to the extent deemed feasible by
the City Manager or designee, have any building structures visible from
any public or quasi-public place designed in such a manner as to
consider prevention of graffiti, including, but not limited to, the
following:
(1) Use of a protective coating to provide for the effective and
expeditious removal of graffiti;
(2) Use of additional lighting;
(3) Use of nonsolid fencing:
(4) Use of landscaping designed to cover large expansive walls, such
as ivy or similar clinging vegetation; or
(5) Use of architectural design to break up long, continuous walls or
solid areas.
A. Retrofit existing graffiti-attracting surfaces; nonresidential structures.
The following provisions may be incorporated in a graffiti eradication
order during an abatement hearing, at the discretion of the hearing
officer:
(1) At owner's expense. Any surface of a structure on a parcel of land
used for nonresidential purposes that has been defaced with
graffiti more than five times in 12 months shall be declared a public
nuisance and required to be retrofitted, at the cost of the property
owner, with features or qualities as may be established by the City
as necessary to reduce the attractiveness of the surface for graffiti,
or as necessary to permit more convenient or efficient removal of
graffiti.
(2) At City's cost. The owner of property used for nonresidential
purposes on which is located a surface of a structure that has been
defaced with graffiti more than five times in 12 months shall permit
the City to enter the property and, at the City's cost, make
§ 213-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-9
1:233
§ 213-10. Violations and penalties for applying graffiti or possession
of graffiti implements; fees.
modifications as necessary to reduce the attractiveness of the
surface for graffiti, or as necessary to permit more convenient or
efficient removal of graffiti.
B. Enforcement of this section shall be in accordance with procedures in
§ 213-7.
A. Any minor in possession of graffiti implements between 6:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m. commits a violation of this chapter and shall be punished by
imprisonment up to 90 days and be fined up to $500, or both.
B. Whoever places graffiti on real or personal property or whoever
commits possession, sale or use of graffiti implements in violation of
this chapter shall be punished by imprisonment up to 90 days and be
fined up to $500, or both. It shall not be a defense to placing graffiti on
real or personal property that the owner or responsible party has
authorized it unless the accused shows written evidence of the
authorization and proof by a preponderance of the evidence that in fact
it was the owner or responsible party who authorized it.
C. Community service. In lieu of, or as part of, the penalties specified, the
person convicted of a violation of this chapter may be required to
perform mandatory community service of at least 30 hours of
community service. Whoever commits graffiti to real or personal
property when the damage to the property is $500 to $1,000, but in any
event less than $1,000, is guilty of a petty misdemeanor and shall be
required to perform a mandatory 100 hours of community service
within a continuous six-month period immediately following his
conviction and shall be required to make restitution to the property
owner for the cost of damages and restoration.
(1) The entire period of community service shall be performed under
the supervision of a community service provider approved by the
Chief of Police.
(2) Each violation shall be a separate and distinct offense.
(3) Reasonable effort shall be made to assign community service that is
reasonably expected to have the most rehabilitative effect,
including community service that involves graffiti removal.
D. Any person perpetrating graffiti, and engaging in property damage
estimated at more than $1,000 should be referred to the District
Attorney's Office for prosecution as a felony at the higher penalties
afforded that office.
E. All juveniles perpetrating graffiti shall be referred to the New Mexico
Juvenile Probation Office for prosecution.
§ 213-9 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 213-10
1:234
§ 213-11. Penalties for providing graffiti implements to minors.
Any person convicted of providing graffiti implements in violation of this
chapter shall be subject to the penalties set forth in § 213-15.
§ 213-12. Documentary evidence of age and identity.
Evidence of the age and identity of the person may be shown by any
document that contains a picture of the person issued by a federal, state,
county or municipal government, including a motor vehicle driver's license
or an identification card issued to a member of the Armed Forces.
§ 213-13. Refusal to sell graffiti implements.
Any person selling goods at retail or wholesale may refuse to sell graffiti
implements to any person who is unable to produce an identity card as
evidence that the person is 18 years of age or over.
§ 213-14. Inspection of retailers.
The City shall conduct random, unannounced inspections of facilities where
graffiti implements, spray paint or permanent glass etchers are sold to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 213-15. Violations and penalties for prohibited sales.
Whoever sells or provides, by gift or otherwise, spray paint or permanent
glass etchers to any minor is in violation of this chapter. Each violation shall
be a separate and distinct offense. Any person convicted of this chapter
may be fined up to $500 or imprisoned for a period of 90 days, or both.
As a condition of probation, the perpetrator may be required to perform
mandatory community service, including graffiti abatement. In addition,
the perpetrator shall pay all court costs required by law as well as fees
associated with the abatement of graffiti.
F. In an effort to remediate graffiti vandalism and maintain the beauty of
Española, the court shall assess the following fees in reimbursement for
costs incurred by the City for abatement:
(1) Less than 16 square feet of graffiti: $250.
(2) Between 16 square feet and 64 square feet of graffiti: $500.
(3) Over 64 square feet of graffiti: $750.
G. The fees collected shall be used to abate graffiti.
H. The fines, penalties and fees imposed as a result of this chapter shall be
deposited with the City of Española and earmarked for the purpose of
defraying the costs of graffiti removal, including the purchase of tools
and materials, and the development of outreach programs.
§ 213-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-15
1:235
Chapter 218
HANDBILLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 235.
§ 218-1. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Deposit, place, throw, scatter, drop or cast any handbill, poster, dodger
or advertising matter of any kind on any street, sidewalk, alley, wharf,
levee or other public place, or in the yard of any private residence or
other private property.
B. Distribute any handbill, poster, dodger or advertising matter of any kind
in or upon any private residence which is inhabited, except by handing
or transmitting such matter directly to the occupant or other person
then present upon such premises; provided, however, that, unless
requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, a person
distributing such matter may place or deposit it in or upon such
premises if placed or deposited so as to secure or prevent it from being
blown or drifted about, except that mailboxes may not be so used when
prohibited by federal postal laws or regulations.
C. Distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter, drop or cast any handbill,
poster, dodger, or advertising matter of any kind in or upon any
automobile or other vehicle. The provisions of this subsection shall not
be deemed to prohibit the handing, transmitting or distributing of any
such matter to the owner or other occupant of any automobile or other
vehicle who is willing to accept the same or the placement of any such
material on vehicles in a manner such that the material cannot be
blown about or scattered by the elements.
D. Paste, post, nail or attach in any manner any handbill, dodger, sign,
card, placard or advertisement of any kind, business or political, to any
pole, post or object on any public street, alley, sidewalk, or other public
way.
§ 213-15 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 218-1
1:236
Chapter 222
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building codes — See Ch. 150.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 158.
Fair housing — See Ch. 184.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 192.
Nuisances — See Ch. 254.
Solid waste — See Ch. 282.
Sprinkler systems — See Ch. 286.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 311.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 218-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-1
1:237

ARTICLE I
Generally
§ 222-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A subordinate building, attached or
detached from the main building, the use of which is incidental to that
of the main building and not used as a place of habitation.
BASEMENT — A portion of a building located partly or wholly
underground.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The legally designated Building Inspector of
the City or his authorized representative.
DWELLING — Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended
to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided,
however, that temporary housing shall not be regarded as a dwelling.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are
used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents,
or other pests by eliminating their harborage places by removing or
making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food by
poisoning, spraying, fumigating, or trapping; or by any other
recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the City
inspector.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space used or intended
to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding
bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, or
communicating corridors, closets, storage spaces, photographer's
darkroom, or other rooms designed for special uses where daylight is
not desirable.
INFESTATION — The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents, or other pests of such kind or in such numbers as to
cause a hazard to health or to be a nuisance.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any dwelling containing more than two
dwelling units.
OCCUPANT — Any person over the age of four years, living, sleeping,
cooking, or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or
rooming unit.
§ 222-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-1
1:239
§ 222-2. Conflict with other ordinances.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance
or code of this City existing on the effective date of Ordinance No. 199,
the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and
protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. In any case
where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care, or control of a
building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are
let.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others,
shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or shall have charge, care, or
control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner.
PLUMBING — Includes all of the following facilities and equipment:
gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, water closets, sinks,
garbage disposal units, waste pipes, installed dishwashers, lavatories,
bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines, catch
basins, drains, vents, and any other similar supplied fixtures, together
with all connections to water, sewer, or gas lines.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms for a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping but not for
cooking or eating purposes.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling
containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the
owner or operator to three or more persons who are not husband or
wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner
or operator.
RUBBISH — Includes, but is not limited to, combustible and
noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; and the term shall
include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other
combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
minerals, materials, glass, crockery, dust, refrigerators and iceboxes.
SUPPLIED — Paid for, furnished, or provided by, or under the control
of, the owner or operator.
TEMPORARY HOUSING — Any tent, trailer, or other structure used for
human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not
affixed to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on
the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days.
B. Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "rooming house,"
"rooming unit," or "premises" are used in this chapter, they shall be
construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part
thereof."
§ 222-1 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 222-2
1:240
of any other ordinance or code of this City existing on the effective date of
Ordinance No. 199 which establishes a lower standard for the promotion
and protection of the health and safety of the people, the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed to prevail, and such other ordinances or codes are
hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be found in
conflict with this chapter.
§ 222-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-2
1:241

ARTICLE II
Administration and Enforcement
§ 222-3. Inspections; right of entry.
The City Manager or his authorized representative is hereby authorized
and directed to make inspections to determine the condition of dwellings,
dwelling units, rooming units, and premises located within this City in order
that he may perform his duty of safeguarding the health, safety, or morals
of the occupants of dwellings and of the general public. For the purpose of
making such inspections, the City Manager or his authorized representative
is hereby authorized to enter, examine, and survey at all reasonable times
for the purpose of such inspection, examination, and survey. Every occupant
of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or his agent
or employee, access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit, or its
premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs
or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with provisions of this
chapter or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful order
issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that
all such entries shall be made in a manner as to cause the least possible
inconvenience to the persons in possession, and the City Manager or his
authorized representative shall obtain an order for this purpose from a
court of competent jurisdiction if entry is denied or resisted.
§ 222-4. Delegation of authority; adoption of rules and regulations.
The City Manager or his authorized representative shall be responsible for
the administration and enforcement of this chapter, and the City Manager
or his authorized representative may fix the duties of any officers, agents,
and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this
chapter, and may delegate any of his functions and powers in this chapter
to such officers, agents and employees as he may designate. Rules and
regulations to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter shall be
prescribed by the City Manager or his authorized representative pursuant
to the standards created in this chapter.
§ 222-5. Abatement.
A. Complaints. Whenever it appears to the City Manager or his authorized
representative, on his own motion or otherwise, that any dwelling is
unfit for human habitation, he shall, if his preliminary investigation
discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon
the owner, every mortgagee of record, and all parties in interest in the
dwelling, including persons in possession, a complaint stating the
charges in that respect. The complaint shall contain a notice that a
hearing will be heard before the City Manager or his authorized
representative at a place therein fixed not less than 10 days nor more
than 30 days after the serving of the complaint.
B. Order to correct violations.
§ 222-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-5
1:243
(1) If, after the notice and hearing provided for in Subsection A, the
City Manager or his authorized representative determines that the
dwelling under consideration is not fit for human habitation, he
shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such
determination and shall cause to be served upon the owner an
order in writing which advises the owner of his rights under
Subsection F, and which:
(a) If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling can be
made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the
dwelling, requires the owner, in the time specified by the order,
to repair, alter, or improve the dwelling to render it fit for
human habitation or to vacate and close the dwelling as a
human habitation; or
(b) If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling cannot
be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the
dwelling, requires the owner, within the time specified in the
order, to remove or demolish the dwelling.
(2) The reasonable percentage of the value as provided in this section
shall be 50%.
C. Power of City upon owner's failure to comply with order to abate.
(1) Repair or vacate. If the owner fails to comply with an order
pursuant to Subsection B(1) to repair, alter, or improve or to vacate
and close the dwelling, the City Manager or his authorized
representative may cause the dwelling to be vacated or closed.
(2) Remove or demolish. If the owner fails to comply with an order
pursuant to Subsection B(2) to remove or demolish a dwelling, the
City Manager or his authorized representative may cause the
dwelling to be removed or demolished.
(3) Dwellings ruined, damaged, or dilapidated. If any such dwelling is
ruined, damaged or dilapidated, the City shall act pursuant to
NMSA 1978 § 3-18-5.
D. Lien for work performed by City. The amount of the cost of vacating and
closing, or removal or demolition by the City Manager or his authorized
representative pursuant to Subsection C shall be a lien against the real
property upon which the cost was incurred.
E. Service of complaints and orders. Complaints or orders issued by the
City Manager or his authorized representative pursuant to this chapter
shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered mail,
but if the whereabouts of the persons are unknown, and cannot be
ascertained by the City Manager or his authorized representative in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, and the City Manager or his
authorized representative shall make an affidavit to that effect, then
service of the complaint or order upon the persons may be made by
§ 222-5 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 222-5
1:244
§ 222-6. Condemnation.
publishing the same, once each week for two consecutive weeks in a
newspaper printed and published in the municipality. A copy of the
complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
premises affected by the complaint or order. A copy of the complaint
or order shall also be filed with the County Clerk, and filing of the
complaint or order shall have the same force and effect as other lis
pendens notices provided by law.
F. Hearing before City Council. Any person affected by an order issued by
the City Manager or his authorized representative pursuant to this
chapter may petition the City Council for a hearing to consider the
actions of the City Manager or his authorized representative within 30
days after issuance of service of such order, in accordance with the
procedures set out in Subsection B, and the City Council shall grant a
hearing thereon, giving reasonable notice of the time and place of such
hearing to all parties concerned. Pending the outcome of the hearing
before the City Council, no action shall be taken by the City Manager or
his authorized representative to enforce his order. The ruling of the City
Council shall be final insofar as the City Manager or his authorized
representative is concerned.
A. Designation of dwellings as unfit for human habitation. The designation
of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation and the
procedure for the condemnation and placarding of such unfit dwellings
or dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance with the
requirements of this section.
B. Condemnation. Any dwelling or dwelling unit which shall be found to
have any of the following defects shall be condemned as unfit for human
habitation and shall be so designated and placarded by the City
Manager or his authorized representative:
(1) One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe,
or vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health,
safety, or morals of the occupants or of the public.
(2) One which lacks illumination, ventilation, or sanitation facilities
adequate to protect the health, safety, or morals of the occupants or
of the public.
(3) One which because of its general condition or location is
unsanitary, a fire hazard, or otherwise dangerous to the health,
safety, or morals of the occupants or of the public.
C. Condemned dwellings to be vacated. Any dwelling or dwelling unit
condemned as unfit for human habitation, and so designated and
placarded by the City Manager or his authorized representative as
provided in this chapter, shall be vacated within a reasonable time as
ordered by the City Manager or his authorized representative.
§ 222-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-6
1:245
D. Approval for reuse. No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been
condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation shall again be
used for human habitation until written approval is secured from, and
such placard is removed by, the City Manager or his authorized
representative. The City Manager or his authorized representative shall
remove such placard whenever the defects upon which the
condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated.
E. Defacing or removal of placards. No person shall deface or remove the
placard from any dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned
as unfit for human habitation and placarded as such except as provided
in Subsection D.
F. Hearing before City Council. Any person affected by any notice or order
relating to the condemning and placarding of a dwelling or dwelling
unit as unfit for human habitation may request and shall be granted a
hearing on the matter before the City Council under the procedure set
forth in this chapter.
§ 222-6 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 222-6
1:246
ARTICLE III
Minimum Standards
§ 222-7. Basic equipment and facilities.
A. Compliance with section prerequisite to occupancy or leasing. No
person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living, sleeping,
cooking, or eating therein, which does not comply with the
requirements of this section.
B. Kitchen sink. Every dwelling shall contain a kitchen sink in good
working condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system
according to the standards set forth in this section or any rules or
regulations promulgated under this section.
C. Water closet. Every dwelling unit, except as otherwise permitted under
Subsection D, shall contain a room which affords privacy to a person
within such room and which is equipped with a flush water closet and a
lavatory basin in good working condition and properly connected to a
water and sewer system according to the standards set forth in this
section or any rules or regulations promulgated under this section.
D. Bathroom. Every dwelling unit shall contain, within a room which
affords privacy to a person within such room, a bathtub or shower in
good working condition and properly connected to a water and sewer
system according to the standards set forth in this section or any rules
or regulations promulgated under this section.
E. Hot and cold water. Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, and bathtub or
shower required under the provisions of Subsections B through D shall
be properly connected with both hot and cold water lines.
F. Water heating facilities. Every dwelling shall have supplied waterheating
facilities which are properly installed, and maintained in safe
and good working condition, are properly connected with the hot water
lines required and are capable of heating water to such temperature as
to permit an adequate supply of water so that it may be drawn at any
time at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, or shower
at a temperature of not less than 120° F.
G. Plumbing Code.11
(1) No dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to comply with the
requirements of this chapter relating to plumbing and plumbing
fixtures unless it complies with the Plumbing Code of the City.
(2) Any additions or alterations to the plumbing or plumbing fixtures of
dwellings shall be in accordance with the Plumbing Code of the
City.
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Building Codes, Art. IV, Plumbing Code.
§ 222-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-7
1:247
§ 222-8. Light, ventilation and heating.
H. Garbage and rubbish. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with
adequate rubbish and garbage storage facilities as required by other
City ordinances.12
I. Means of egress. Every dwelling unit shall have access to at least two
remote means of egress at ground level which are, at all times,
unobstructed; an unobstructed window may serve as one such means of
egress. This shall not be required for apartments at ground level having
less than 250 square feet of habitable floor area. [Amended
11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
J. Accessory buildings. An accessory building shall comply with all
requirements of the Uniform Building Code,13 Chapter 350, Zoning and
Development, and any other ordinances or codes of the City.
A. Compliance as a prerequisite to occupancy or leasing. No person shall
occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling
or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does not comply
with the requirements of this section. Light, ventilation and heating, as
required by this section, are hereby required for every habitable room.
[Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
B. Window to outside. Every habitable room shall have at least one
window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total
window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall
equal at least 10% of the floor area of such room. Whenever walls or
other portions of structures face a window of any such room and such
light-obstruction structures are located less than five feet from the
window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such
window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall
not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window
area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in
the top of such room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal
at least 15% of the total area of such room.
C. Windows to open. Every habitable room shall have at least one window
or skylight which can easily be opened to 45% of total window area, or
such other device as will adequately ventilate the room and is approved
by the City Manager or his authorized representative.
D. Bathrooms. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall
comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms
contained in Subsections B and C, except that no window or skylight
shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet
compartments equipped with a ventilation system which is kept in
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 282, Solid Waste.
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Building Codes.
§ 222-7 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 222-8
1:248
continuous operation while in use and approved by the City Manager or
his authorized representative.
E. Electrical outlets and fixtures. Where there is electric service available
from power lines which are not more than 300 feet away from a
dwelling, every habitable room of such building shall contain at least
two separate floor or wall-type electric convenience outlets, or one such
convenience outlet and one supplied ceiling-type electric light fixture.
Every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace
room, and public hall shall contain at least one supplied ceiling or walltype
electric light fixture.
F. Halls and stairways to be lighted. Every public hall and stairway in
every multiple dwelling shall be adequately lighted at all times.
G. Electrical Code compliance. No dwelling or dwelling unit shall be
deemed to comply with the requirements of this chapter relating to
electric wiring and facilities unless they comply with the Electrical
Code of the City.14
H. Heating facilities. Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are
properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition,
and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms,
bathrooms, water closet compartments in every dwelling unit located
therein to a temperature of at least 70° F., at a distance three feet above
floor level. No dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to comply with
the requirements of this chapter relating to heating facilities unless:
(1) Central heating systems. When the dwelling or dwelling unit is
heated by a central heating system, every heat duct, steam pipe,
and hot water pipe is free of leaks and functions so that adequate
heat is delivered where intended.
(2) Space heaters; venting. When the dwelling or dwelling unit is
heated by space heaters, every space heater burning solid, liquid,
or gaseous fuel shall be properly vented to a chimney or duct
leading to outdoor space.
(3) Space heaters; coal or wood burning; fire prevention. Every coal or
wood-burning space heater has a fire-resistant panel beneath it.
(4) Space heaters; insulation against overheating. Every space heater
located close to a wall is equipped with insulation sufficient to
prevent overheating of the wall.
(5) Space heaters; smoke pipes. Every space heater smoke pipe is
equipped with guards made of metal or other nonflammable
material at the point where the pipe goes through the wall, ceiling
or partition.
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Building Codes, Art. II, Electrical Code.
§ 222-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-8
1:249
§ 222-9. Maintenance.
(6) Chimneys and smoke pipes. Every smoke pipe and every chimney is
adequately supported, reasonably clean, and maintained in such
condition that there will be no leak or backing up of noxious gases.
(7) Alterations. Any additions or alterations to the heating or heating
facilities of any dwelling shall be in compliance with the Building
Code of the City.15
I. Protection against insects. For protection against mosquitoes, flies, and
other insects, every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to
outdoor space shall have a screen with a closing device; an exception to
this requirement will be made where the dwelling unit is equipped with
a central refrigerated air system. Every window or other device with
openings to outdoor space, used or intended to be used for ventilation,
shall likewise be supplied with screens. [Amended 11-19-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-02]
J. Basement windows; rodentproofing. Every basement window used or
intended to be used for ventilation, and every other opening to a
basement or crawl space which might provide an entry for rodents,
shall be supplied with a screen or such other device as will effectively
prevent their entrance.
A. Compliance with section prerequisite to occupancy or leasing. No
person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which
does not comply with the requirements of this section.
B. Engineering requirements. The premises of every dwelling or dwelling
unit shall comply with all requirements of the City Engineer with
respect to grading, drainage and finish elevations.
C. Dwelling units to be fit for occupancy. No owner shall occupy or let to
any other occupant any vacant dwelling unit unless it is clean, sanitary,
and fit for human occupancy.
D. Foundations, floors, walls and roof.
(1) Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling, and roof shall be reasonably
weathertight, watertight, and rodentproof; shall be capable of
affording privacy; and shall be kept in good repair.
(2) No dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to comply with the
requirements of this chapter relating to foundations, floors, walls,
and roofs unless:
(a) The foundation elements adequately support the building at all
points.
15.Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Building Codes.
§ 222-8 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 222-9
1:250
(b) Every floor is free of holes and wide cracks which might admit
rodents, or which constitute a possible accident hazard.
(c) Every floor is free of loose, warped, protruding, and rotting
floor boards.
(d) Every exterior wall is free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting
boards and timbers, and any other conditions which might
admit rodents, rain, or snow to the interior portions of the wall
or to the interior spaces of the dwellings.
(e) Every interior wall and ceiling is free of holes and large cracks.
(f) Every interior wall and ceiling is free of loose plaster or other
structural material, the collapse of which might constitute an
accident hazard.
(g) Plaster, paint, and all other surface materials are of such
character as to be easily cleanable and are reasonably smooth,
clean, and tight.
(h) The roof is tight and has no defects which might admit rain or
snow.
(i) Any additions or alterations to the dwelling structure shall be
in compliance with the Building Code of the City.16
E. Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door, and basement
hatchway shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight, and
rodentproof, and shall be kept in sound working condition and good
repair.
F. Stairs and porches. Every inside and outside stair, every porch, and
every appurtenance thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use
and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be
placed thereon.
G. Bathroom floors. Every water closet compartment floor surface shall be
constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water
and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.
H. Discontinuance of services or facilities. No owner, operator, or occupant
shall cause any service, facility, equipment, or utility which is required
under this chapter to be removed from or shut off or discontinued for
any occupied dwelling, let or occupied by him, except for such
temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or
alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies when
discontinuance of service is approved by the City Manager or his
authorized representative.
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Building Codes.
§ 222-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-9
1:251
§ 222-10. Space, use and location.
I. Housing built before 1978 may contain lead-based paint. Lead from
paint, paint chips, and dust can pose health hazards if not managed
properly. Lead exposure is especially harmful to young children and
pregnant women. Before renting pre-1978 housing, lessors must
disclose the presence of known lead-based paint and lead-based paint
hazards in the dwelling. Lessees must also receive a federally approved
pamphlet on lead poisoning prevention. [Added 11-19-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-02]
A. Compliance with section prerequisite to occupancy or leasing. No
person shall sell for occupancy or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does
not comply with the requirements of this section.
B. Floor space per occupant. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150
square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof, and at least 100
additional square feet of floor space for every additional occupant
thereof, the floor space to be calculated on the basis of total habitable
room area.
C. Sleeping room floor space. In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms,
every room occupied for living, dining and sleeping purposes by one
occupant shall contain at least 80 square feet of floor space, and every
room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall
contain at least 45 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
D. Ceiling height. At least 1/2 of the floor area of every habitable room
shall have a ceiling height of at least seven feet, and the floor area of
that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall
not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor
area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum
permissible occupancy thereof.
E. Basement dwelling units. Dwelling units located in basements shall be
provided with not less than two separate means of egress.
F. Care of premises. Open storage of abandoned automobiles, scrap metal,
household appliances, junk and building materials not being used in
conjunction with a current, ongoing project will not be permitted. It will
be the responsibility of the landowner to ensure compliance with this
section and the responsibility of the City Manager or his authorized
representative to ensure adherence to the requirements contained
herein. [Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
§ 222-9 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 222-10
1:252
ARTICLE IV
Responsibilities of Owners and Occupants
§ 222-11. Shared and public areas.
Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall be
responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or
public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
§ 222-12. Occupied portions.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and
sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, and premises
thereof which he occupies and controls.
§ 222-13. Rubbish disposal.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his rubbish
in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish containers
required by § 222-7H.
§ 222-14. Garbage disposal.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his garbage
and any other organic waste which might provide food for rodents in a
clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the garbage disposal facilities
or garbage storage containers required by § 222-7H. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner to supply such facilities or containers for all
dwelling units in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit and for
all dwelling units located on premises where more than one dwelling unit
shares the same premises. In all other cases, it shall be the responsibility of
the occupant to furnish such facilities or containers.
§ 222-15. Screens.
Every owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for hanging
all screens whenever required under the provisions of this chapter or of any
rule or regulation adopted pursuant hereto.
§ 222-16. Pest control.
Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests
therein or on the premises. Every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling
containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such
extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, whenever
infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a
rodentproof or reasonably insectproof condition, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of
the dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any
§ 222-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-16
1:253
dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall
be the responsibility of the owner.
§ 222-17. Plumbing fixtures.
Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in
a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of
reasonable care of the proper use and operation of such plumbing fixtures.
§ 222-16 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 222-17
1:254
ARTICLE V
Rooming Houses
§ 222-18. Compliance required; exceptions.
No person shall operate a rooming house, or shall occupy or let to another
for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house except in compliance
with the provisions of every section of this chapter except the provisions of
Articles III and IV.
§ 222-19. Inspection and violation notices.
Whenever, upon inspection of any rooming house, the City Manager or his
authorized representative finds that conditions or practices exist which are
in violation of any provision of this chapter or of any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, the City Manager or his authorized
representative shall give notice in writing to the operator of such rooming
house that such conditions or practices will be corrected within a
reasonable period of time to be determined by the City Manager or his
authorized representative. At the end of such period, the City Manager or
his authorized representative shall reinspect the rooming house, and if he
finds that such condition or practices have not been corrected, he shall give
notice in writing to the operator. Upon receipt of notice, such operator shall
immediately cease operations of such rooming units, and no person shall
occupy for sleeping or living purposes any rooming unit therein condemned
for occupancy.
§ 222-20. Bathroom facilities.
At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower
properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the City
Manager or his authorized representative and in good working condition
shall be supplied for each eight-person capacity or fraction thereof residing
within a rooming house, including members of the operator's family
whenever they share the use of the facilities; provided, however, that in
a rooming house where rooms are let only to males, flush urinals may be
substituted for not more than 1/2 of the required number of water closets.
"Rooming house capacity" means the total bed capacity. All such facilities
shall be so located within the dwelling as to be reasonably accessible from
a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. Every
lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold
water at all times. No such facilities shall be located in a basement except
by written approval of the City Manager or his authorized representative.
§ 222-21. Bed linen and towels.
The operator of every rooming house shall change supplied bed linen and
towels therein at least once each week, and prior to the letting of any room
to any occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of
all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner.
§ 222-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-22
1:255
§ 222-22. Space for sleeping.
Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at
least 80 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 60 square feet of
floor space for each occupant thereof.
§ 222-23. Egress. [Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
Every rooming unit shall have access to at least two remote, safe,
unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and open space at ground
level, as required by the laws of this state and the City. An unobstructed
window may serve as one such means of egress.
§ 222-24. Maintenance.
The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary
maintenance of all floors, walls, and ceilings, and for maintenance of a
sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming house, and he shall
be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises
where the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the operator.
§ 222-25. Hotels and motels.
Every provision of this chapter which applies to rooming houses shall also
apply to motels and hotels.
§ 222-22 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 222-25
1:256
Chapter 232
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
§ 222-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-25
1:257

ARTICLE I
Bail Bondsmen
[Adopted 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-05]
§ 232-1. Findings and intent; authority.
§ 232-2. Authorization to use services.
Therefore, the governing body creates this article to allow individuals
accused of a criminal offense the opportunity to utilize the services of a bail
bondsman, consistent with New Mexico Statutes and Court rules.
A. The governing body recognizes a person's right to bail pending trial
under Article II, § 13, of the New Mexico Constitution.
B. The members of the governing body recognize that there are several
forms of bail bonds that an accused may present to the Municipal Court
Judge for consideration.
C. The governing body recognizes that a bail bondsmen is one of several
forms that an accused may utilized pursuant to the Bail Bondsmen
Licensing Law, NMSA 1978 § 59A-51-1 et seq.
§ 232-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-2
1:259
Chapter 235
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Handbills — See Ch. 218.
Nuisances — See Ch. 254.
Solid waste — See Ch. 282.
§ 235-1. Deposit in streets prohibited.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or on any street, sidewalk or
other public place within the City except in public receptacles, in authorized
private receptacles or in the City sanitary landfill.
§ 235-2. Throwing from vehicles prohibited.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter on any private property, any street or other public place within the
City.
§ 235-3. Placing in receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements on any street, sidewalk or other public or
private place.
§ 235-4. Deposit in parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the City except
in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements on any part of the park
or on any street or other private or public place. Where public receptacles
are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
§ 235-5. Handbills.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill, unsolicited newspapers, or literature in or on any sidewalk, street
or other public place within the City.
§ 235-6. Maintenance of private property.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall maintain the
premises free of litter, refuse and weeds, provided that this section shall
not prohibit the storage of litter, refuse and weeds in authorized private
receptacles.
§ 232-2 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 235-7
1:260
§ 235-7. Disposition on vacant, private property.
Disposition of litter on vacant, private property shall be as follows:
Chapter 237
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Indecent behavior — See Ch. 128, Art. I.
Graffiti — See Ch. 213.
Minors — See Ch. 241.
Offenses — See Ch. 260.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 270.
Panhandling — See Ch. 272.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 290.
§ 237-1. Prohibited conduct on private property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to lurk, lie in wait or be concealed on the
property of another without physical or lawful business with the owner or
occupant thereof.
§ 237-2. Prohibited conduct on school grounds.
It shall be unlawful for any person to lurk, lie in wait or loiter on school
grounds or any area immediately contiguous to school grounds.
§ 237-3. Voyeurism prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to perform any act of voyeurism (peeping through
windows or doors, or other like places situated on or about the premises of
another for the purpose of spying upon or invading the privacy of persons
spied upon without the consent of persons spied upon). The defendant need
not be on the premises of the person spied upon.
A. The City Manager is authorized to notify the owner of any open or
vacant private property within the City, or the agent of the owner, to
properly dispose of litter located on the owner's property. Such a notice
shall be by certified mail, addressed to the owner or agent at his last
known address, or by personal delivery.
B. On the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent so notified to
properly dispose of the litter within five days after receipt of written
notice or within 10 days after the date of such notice if the same is
returned to the post office, the City Manager is authorized to pay for the
disposing of such litter or to order its disposal by the City. The cost of
removal shall be imposed by placing a lien on the property and shall
remain in full force and effect for the amount due plus interest and
costs. Such lien shall be enforced according to applicable state law.
§ 235-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-4
1:261
§ 237-4. Prohibited conduct in public places.
It shall be unlawful for any person, after first being warned by a police
officer, or where "No Loitering" signage is posted, to loiter, stand, sit, or
lie in or upon any public place so as to hinder or obstruct unreasonably
the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon. It shall be unlawful for
any person to block, obstruct, or prevent free access to the entrance to any
public place.
§ 237-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC PLACE — An area generally visible to public view, including streets,
sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots,
automobiles (whether moving or not), and buildings open to the public,
including those which serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and
the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds
enclosing them.
§ 237-6. Investigation of activity.
A person commits a violation if he or she loiters or prowls in a public
place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under
circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property
in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in
determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes
flight upon appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify himself or
herself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object.
Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it impractical, a
police officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this chapter,
question the person and give the person full opportunity to dispel any alarm
which would otherwise be warranted. The inquiry shall include requesting
the person to identify himself or herself and to explain his or her presence
or conduct. If the police officer fails to do so the person is free to go. If the
explanation given by the person was true and a reasonable person would
have accepted it as dispelling the alarm, the person is free to go. Any person
suspected of being a loiterer, prowler or voyeur may be arrested without a
warrant if it reasonably appears that delay in arresting the suspect would
result in the suspect's escape.
§ 237-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be fined in a sum of not less than $50 but not to exceed $500 or by
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 237-4 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 237-7
1:262
Chapter 241
MINORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult entertainment and uses — See Ch. 128. Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 133.
§ 241-1. Misrepresentation of age prohibited.
No person shall make a false representation of his age, whether by words,
acts or conduct, for the purpose of illegally obtaining or attempting to
obtain any alcoholic beverage or spirituous liquor or for any other illegal
purpose in the City.
§ 241-2. Curfew; penalty.
A. Different meanings of section's terminology. When in this specific
section a different meaning is given for a term defined for the general
purposes in this section (Subsections A through F of this section), the
specific section's meaning and the application of the term shall control.
B. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CHILD — Any person under the age of 18 years.
CURFEW — That period of time between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 5:00 a.m.; provided, however, that on Friday and Saturday nights,
"curfew" shall mean that period of time between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 5:00 a.m., or such other time as the Mayor may proclaim
in the event of an emergency.
CUSTODY — The power of taking physical custody of a child or the
taking of the immediate charge and control of the person for his
protection and care, or for violation of this section. "Custody" does not
mean a person is being detained or that he is under arrest and, as
such, that child shall not be booked, fingerprinted or photographed.
The child's identity may be ascertained along with the child's parents'
or guardian's names and addresses and a record of that information
may be made but may not be released to the public. It may be released
to other law enforcement agencies and to the juvenile probation
authorities.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any officer employed by the Police
Department, or any other law enforcement agency officer, including
juvenile probation officers.
LEGAL GUARDIAN or GUARDIAN — The person to whom the legal
or physical custody of a child under the age of 18 years has been
§ 237-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-2
1:263
transferred by a court of competent jurisdiction, the Department of
Human Services, the child's parents, or other authorized entity.
PARENT — The naturally or legally adopted parent of any person under
the age of 18 years.
PUBLIC PLACE OR STREETS — Any part or place within the City,
including places where the public may usually be, such as retail
businesses, parking lots, streets and roads, highways, alleys, parks,
playgrounds, and other public places or buildings, places of
amusement, and entertainment, or vacant lots, inside any motor vehicle
in a public place, on any bike, or other mode of transportation on a
public place, but shall not include a child's own place of residence.
It shall include, however, private property within the City if the child
who is on that property does not reside thereon, or is not invited or
authorized to be there by the owner or resident thereof.
RESPONSIBLE ADULT — Any person to whom the parents or legal
guardians or guardians of a child have transferred that child's custody,
or presently consent to transferring that child's custody, or in the
judgment of the City Police Department, the child's custody may be
transferred, since that person is related to the child, knows the child,
or is deemed, in the sole discretion of the City Police Department, to
be a responsible person to whom the child's custody may safely be
transferred.
SOCIAL, PATRIOTIC, RELIGIOUS, EDUCATIONAL, ATHLETIC, AND
CIVIL EVENTS — Those events which may be attended by the public,
which are planned, organized, and produced or performed in
accordance with the City ordinances and the state statutes, but shall
not include spontaneous or unplanned gatherings by children in public
places or streets. It shall include any time a person is at his place of
employment at work or on duty.
C. Curfew hours; exceptions. It shall be unlawful for the parent or legal
guardian of a child under the age of 18 years to knowingly allow such
child to be upon the streets or other public places within the City
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.; provided, however, on
Friday and Saturday nights it shall be unlawful for the parent or legal
guardian of a child under the age of 18 years to knowingly allow such
child to be upon the streets or other public places within the City
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m., except under the
following conditions:
(1) When accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or by a responsible
adult to whom the child's physical custody has been entrusted by
such parent or guardian; or
(2) When attending a social, patriotic, religious, educational, athletic,
civic or other similar activity sponsored by a recognized school,
church, fraternal or community organization, but in such event not
§ 241-2 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 241-2
1:264
later than 10:00 p.m. or 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday
nights or 30 minutes after such event terminates.
D. Sounding of signal at beginning of curfew period. The Chief of Police
may cause a fire siren or other appropriate signal to be sounded for a
reasonable time at 9:45 p.m. each night to give warning notice of the
beginning of the curfew period.
E. Penalty for violation of section. A violation of this section by a parent or
legal guardian occurs when the parent or legal guardian has actual or
constructive knowledge of his child violating the curfew law, and the
violation is a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article III, Violations and Penalties, § 1-19, and may
be prosecuted in municipal court by the complaining officer and/or the
City's attorneys.
F. Taking into custody, release. A law enforcement officer may take into
custody any child or youth who remains at a public place or on the
streets in or out of a vehicle, within the City limits, in violation of this
chapter, except as otherwise provided in this section. The child's
custody shall be transferred to the City juvenile detention facility,
whereupon the child may be released only to his parents, guardians, or
a responsible adult, a juvenile probation officer, or by court order as
follows:
(1) As soon as possible, the law enforcement officer shall notify the
child's parents, guardians, or a responsible adult that:
(a) The child is in the custody of the Police Department for curfew
violation;
(b) The location of the child is at the juvenile detention facility;
(c) The child's custody will be retained by the City Police
Department until a parent, guardian or a responsible adult
comes for the child, and if the child's parents, guardians, or a
responsible adult do not come for the child, then the State
Juvenile Probation Office shall be notified of the child's status
as soon as possible for appropriate action by said department
as may be required by the Children's Code;17 and
(d) A complaint may be filed by the law enforcement office or the
City's attorney against the child's parents or guardians for
allowing their child to be on the streets or other public places
during curfew contrary to this section.
(2) If the child's parents, guardians, or the responsible adult live within
the City limits or within a proximity of three miles of the corporate
boundaries, the City Police Department may, but is not required to,
17.Editor's Note: See NMSA 1978 Ch. 32A, § 32A-1-1 et seq.
§ 241-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-2
1:265
§ 241-3. Criminal sexual contact; penalty.
§ 241-4. Contributing to delinquency of minor; penalty.
Chapter 249
NOISE
transport the child to the parents', guardian's, or responsible
adult's residence and transfer custody to them.
(3) If the child's parents, guardians, or the responsible adult resides
outside the City limits, the City Police Department may, but is not
required to, transport the child to the parents', guardian's, or
responsible adult's residence and transfer custody to him. The City
Police Department may request the services of other law
enforcement agencies to transport children who live outside the
City limits to that child's parents', or guardian's or the responsible
adult's residence.
A. Criminal sexual contact of a minor is the unlawful and intentional
touching or applying force to the intimate parts of a minor or the
unlawful and intentional causing a minor to touch one's intimate parts.
For the purposes of this section, the expression "intimate parts" means
the primary genital area, groin, buttocks, anus or breast. Criminal
sexual contact of a minor in the third degree consists of all criminal
sexual contact of a minor perpetrated:
(1) On a child under 13 years of age; or
(2) On a child 13 years of age to 18 years of age when:
(a) The perpetrator is in a position of authority over the child and
uses this authority to coerce the child to submit;
(b) The perpetrator uses force or coercion which results in
personal injury to the child;
(c) The perpetrator uses force or coercion and is aided or abetted
by one or more persons; or
(d) The perpetrator is armed with a deadly weapon.
B. Whoever commits criminal sexual contact in the third degree is guilty of
a misdemeanor.
A. Contributing to the delinquency of a minor consists of any person
committing any act or omitting the performance of any duty, which act
or omission causes or tends to cause or encourage the delinquency of
any person under the age of 18 years.
B. Whoever commits contributing to the delinquency of a minor is guilty of
a misdemeanor.
§ 241-2 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 249-1
1:266
§ 249-1. Definition.
Section 10-2.3 ESPCC 1998: "Retarder/Jake Brake®" means any engine
device used as braking power, to slow down a motor vehicle's rate of speed.
§ 249-2. Prohibited noises.
Section 10-2.4 ESPCC 1998 (Ordained as Code 1998) is to read:
10-2.4. Noises prohibited.
A. In addition to the specific prohibitions outlined in Subsection B below
and Subsections 10-2.5 and 10-2.9 of this Code, it is unlawful for any
person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any noise
disturbance within the City limits.
B. The following are in violation of this section:
(1) The sounding of any horn or audible signaling device on any
truck, automobile, motorcycle, emergency vehicle or other
vehicle on any street or public place within the City, except as
a danger warning signal as provided in the State Motor Vehicle
Code,18 or the sounding of any signaling device for an
unnecessary period of time;
(2) The sounding of any device or piece of equipment, including
but not limited to a retarder/Jake brake®, which helps slow a
motor vehicle's rate of speed (braking power). When activated, a
retarder/Jake brake® creates noise through the motor vehicle's
dilapidated or defective exhaust system. All motor vehicles on
any municipal street, roadway and highway within its corporate
limits must have a working muffler; and or resonator in
accordance to NMSA 1978 § 66-3-844;
(3) Using, operating or permitting the use or operation of any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, television, phonograph, drum
or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of
sound, except as provided for in Subsection B(4) below:
(a) Which violates the zone district noise levels set out in
Subsection 10-2.5, or causes a noise disturbance.
(b) Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following
day in such a manner as to be plainly audible at the property
boundary of the source; or 1) is plainly audible at 50 feet
from such device when operated within a vehicle parked on a
public right-of-way; or 2) is plainly audible through partitions
common to two occupants within a building or structure;
[Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
18.Editor's Note: See NMSA 1978 Ch. 66, § 66-1-1 et seq.
§ 249-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-2
1:267
(4) Using or operating a loudspeaker or sound-amplifying equipment
in a fixed or movable position or mounted upon any sound vehicle
in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park, place or public
property for the purpose of commercial advertising, giving
instructions, directions, talks, addresses, lectures, or
transmitting music to any persons or assemblages or persons
in a manner which violates Subsection 10-2.5 or causes a noise
disturbance, unless a permit provided by Subsection 10-2.8 has
been obtained;
(5) Operating, or causing to be used or operated, any equipment
used in construction, repair, alteration or demolition work on
buildings, structures, streets, alleys or appurtenances thereto:
(a) In residential or commercial zone areas between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day; and
(b) In any other areas of the City where such operation exceeds
the sound level limits for an industrial land use as set forth in
Subsection 10-2.5;
(6) Operating or permitting to be operated any power equipment
rated five horsepower or less used for home or building repair or
grounds maintenance, including but not limited to power saws,
sanders, lawn mowers, garden equipment or snow removal
equipment, in residential or commercial zoned areas:
(a) Outdoors between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the
following day; and
(b) Which emits a sound pressure level in excess of 80 dBA
measured at a distance of 25 feet; [Amended 11-19-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-02]
(7) Operating or permitting to be operated any power equipment,
except construction equipment used for construction activities,
rated more than five horsepower, including but not limited to
chain saws, pavement breakers, log chippers and powered hand
tools:
(a) In residential or commercial zoned areas between the hours
of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day; and
(b) In any other areas of the City, if such equipment emits a
sound pressure level in excess of 88 dBA measured at a
distance of 25 feet; [Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-02]
§ 249-2 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 249-2
1:268
(8) Operating or permitting to be operated in any place of public
entertainment any loudspeaker or other source of sound which
produces, at a point this is normally occupied by a customer,
maximum sound pressure levels of 100 dBA as read with the
slow response on a sound level meter, unless a conspicuous and
legible sign at least 225 square inches in area is posted near each
public entrance stating:
"WARNING: SOUND LEVELS MAY CAUSE HEARING
IMPAIRMENT." This provision shall not be constructed to allow
the operation of any loudspeaker or other source of sound in such
a manner as to violate Subsection 10-2.5;
(9) Operating or permitting to be operated or used any truck,
automobile, motorcycle or other motor vehicle which, by virtue
of disrepair or manner of operation, violates Subsection 10-2.5 or
causes a noise disturbance;
(10) Operating or causing or permitting to be operated any refuse
compacting vehicle which creates a sound pressure level in
excess of 79 dBA at 25 feet from the vehicles; [Amended
11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
(11) Operating or causing or permitting to be operated any motor
vehicle or any auxiliary equipment attached thereto in a manner
which violates Subsection 10-2.5 or causes a noise disturbance
for a consecutive period longer than 10 minutes during which
such vehicle is stationary in a residential zone;
(12) Creating noise in excess of the residential standard as defined
in Subsection 10-2.5 within the vicinity of any school, hospital,
institution of learning, court or other designated area where
exceptional quiet is necessary, while the same is in use, provided
conspicuous signs are displayed in the streets indicating a quiet
zone;
(13) Sounding, operating or permitting to sound or operate an
electronically amplified signal from any burglar alarm, bell,
chime, or clock, including but not limited to bells, chimes or
clocks in schools, house of religious workshop or governmental
buildings, which fail to meet the standards set forth in Subsection
10-2.5 for more than 15 minutes in any hour, and
(14) Operating a recreational vehicle or snowmobile in a manner
which violates Subsection 10-2.5 or causes a noise disturbance.
§ 249-3. Exemptions.
Section 10-2.7 ESPCC 1998 is to read:
10-2.7. Exemptions. The following uses and activities shall be exempt from
noise level regulations:
A. Noise of safety signals and warning devices;
§ 249-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-3
1:269
B. Noise resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when
responding to a emergency call or acting in time of emergency;
C. Noise resulting from emergency work;
D. Noise resulting from lawful fireworks and noisemakers used for a
celebration of an official holiday;
E. Noise resulting from activities of temporary duration permitted by law
for which a license or permit has been approved by the City Manager or
appointed designee in accordance with Subsection 10-2.8 of this Code;
and
F. Noise resulting from the use of a retarder/Jake brake® in an
emergency situation.
Chapter 254
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals and animal facilities — See Ch. 137.
Building codes — See Ch. 150.
Excavations — See Ch. 180.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 192.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 200.
Graffiti — See Ch. 213.
Littering — See Ch. 235.
Noise — See Ch. 249.
Offenses — See Ch. 260.
Solid waste — See Ch. 282.
§ 254-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
NUISANCE — Any person doing an unlawful act, or omitting to perform a
duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which
act, omission, condition or thing either:
A. Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others;
B. Offends decency;
C. Is offensive to the senses;
Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders
dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway, sidewalk,
stream, ditch or drainage;
D.
In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property;
or
E.
§ 249-3 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 254-1
1:270
§ 254-2. Nuisances enumerated.
The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or
remain on any public or private property of any of the following items,
conditions or actions are hereby declared to be and constitute a nuisance;
provided, however, that this enumeration shall not be deemed or construed
to be conclusive, limiting or restrictive:
Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and
property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.
F.
A. Any owner or occupant planting or allowing to grow weeds and noxious
vegetable growth on the owner's or occupant's lot or parcel of ground,
or on the sidewalks and lawn-strips or land areas abutting such lot or
parcel of ground.
B. Accumulation of rubbish, trash, refuse, litter, junk and other abandoned
materials, metals, lumber or other things.
C. Any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes and
other vermin.
D. Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated condition
that it is unfit for human habitation, or kept in such an unsanitary
condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the
vicinity thereof, or presents a more than ordinarily dangerous fire
hazard in the vicinity where it is located; any condition that is attractive
and dangerous to children, such as a vacant accessible building,
excavation, dilapidated wall and fences and barbed wire fences along
public ways, wood piles and debris on vacant lots which may constitute
a hazard to the health and welfare of children who may not be able to
recognize those dangers.
E. The infestation of trees or shrubbery by the cocoon (bags) of all
members of the genus Thyridopteryx (bagworms) and the webs (nests)
of all members of the genus Malacosoma of the family Lasiocampidae
(tent caterpillars) and of all members of the genus Hyphantria of the
family Arctiidae (webworms) and all members of the genus Pyrrhalta
Luteola (leaf beetles).
F. All unnecessary or unauthorized noises and annoying vibrations,
including animal noises.
G. All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the
conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission
or generation of such odors and stenches.
H. The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a reasonable
time after death.
§ 254-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-2
1:271
§ 254-3. Causing, permitting or maintaining nuisances prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain or allow the
creation or maintenance of a nuisance.
§ 254-4. Notice to abate.
Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the City or within the City's
extraterritorial jurisdiction, the City Manager or some other duly
designated officer of the City shall give 10 days' written notice to the owner,
his agent, or occupant of the property upon which such nuisance exists or
upon the person causing or maintaining the nuisance.
I. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of
water by sewage, dead animals, creamery, industrial wastes or other
substances.
J. Any building, structure or other place or location where any activity
which is in violation of local, state or federal law is conducted,
performed or maintained.
K. Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot
or piece of ground.
L. The keeping of honey bees and hives and the keeping of hornets.
M. Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders, in unreasonable
quantities.
A. Contents of notice. The notice to abate a nuisance issued under the
provisions of this chapter shall contain:
(1) An order to abate the nuisance or to request a hearing within a
stated time, which shall be reasonable under the circumstances.
(2) The location of the nuisance, if the nuisance is stationary.
(3) A description of what constitutes the nuisance.
(4) A statement of acts necessary to abate the nuisance.
(5) A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and no
request for a hearing is made within the prescribed time, the City
will abate such nuisance and assess the cost of such abatement
against such person.
(6) Any person receiving notice of an order to abate a nuisance may
request a hearing before the Municipal Court on such matter
within three days from the date of filing of the notice. Any notice of
abatement served by the City shall advise the person allegedly
committing the nuisance of his right to request a hearing before the
Municipal Court.
§ 254-2 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 254-4
1:272
§ 254-5. Abatement by City.
Upon the failure of the person upon whom notice to abate a nuisance was
served pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to abate the nuisance, the
designated officer of the City shall proceed to abate such nuisance and shall
prepare a statement of costs incurred in the abatement of such nuisance.
§ 254-6. City's costs declared lien.
Any and all costs incurred by the City in the abatement of a nuisance under
the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a lien against the property
upon which such nuisance existed, which lien shall be filed, proven and
collected as provided for by law. Such lien shall be notice to all persons from
the time of its recording, and shall bear interest at the legal rate thereafter
until satisfied.
§ 254-7. Alternative method of abatement.
Chapter 260
OFFENSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 270.
B. Service. The notice to abate a nuisance shall be served as any other
legal process may be served pursuant to law.
A. Except as provided in this section, an action for the abatement of a
public nuisance shall be governed by the general rules of civil
procedure.
B. A civil action to abate a public nuisance may be brought, by verified
complaint in the name of the City, without cost, by any public officer or
private citizen, in the Municipal Court against any person who shall
create, perform or maintain a public nuisance.
C. When judgment is against the defendant in an action to abate a public
nuisance, he shall be adjudged to pay all court costs and a reasonable
fee for the complainant's attorney, when the suit is not prosecuted
exclusively by the City Attorney.
§ 254-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-7
1:273

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted as Ch. 70, Art. I, §§ 70-1, 70-2 and 70-3, of the Code of
Ordinances]
§ 260-1. General offenses.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act or fail to perform any
requirement which is prohibited or required by state law, insofar as such
laws are applicable to municipal government.
§ 260-2. Accessory to offense.
A person may be charged with and convicted of the crime as an accessory
if he procures, counsels, aids or abets in its commission, although he did
not directly commit the crime and although the principal who directly
committed such crime has not been prosecuted or convicted, or has been
convicted of a different crime or degree of crime, or has been acquitted, or
is a child under the Children's Code (NMSA 1978 § 32A-1-1 et seq.). It shall
be unlawful to commit the crime of being an accessory.
§ 260-3. Engaging in illegal occupations.
No person shall engage in or offer or solicit to engage in any illegal
occupation, business or calling or any other form of vice or illegal act which
is prohibited by any provision of this Code or other City ordinance or by
state law, nor shall any person be found in or about any place where any
such illegal occupation, business or calling or other form of vice or illegal
act is conducted, practiced or allowed. No person shall act as a guard
or lookout or informant for any building, trailer, motor vehicle, premises
or establishment used for any illegal occupation, business or calling or
any other form of vice or illegal act, or for any person offering, soliciting
or engaging in such; nor shall any person give any signal intended to or
calculated to warn or give warning of the approach of any police officer to
any person in or about such premises or places mentioned in this section.
§ 260-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-3
1:275

ARTICLE II
Offenses Against Persons
[Adopted as Ch. 70, Art. II, of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 260-4. Assault.
§ 260-5. Battery.
§ 260-6. False imprisonment.
It shall be unlawful to intentionally confine or restrain another person
without his consent and with knowledge that he has no lawful authority to
do so.
A. Assault consists of either:
(1) An attempt to commit a battery on the person of another;
(2) Any unlawful act, threat, or menacing conduct which causes
another person to reasonably believe that he is in danger of
receiving an immediate battery; or
(3) The use of insulting language toward another impugning his honor,
delicacy, or reputation.
B. Assault is a misdemeanor.
A. Battery is the unlawful, intentional touching or application of force to
the person of another when done in a rude, insolent or angry manner.
B. Battery is a misdemeanor.
§ 260-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-6
1:277

ARTICLE III
Offenses Against Property Rights
[Adopted as Ch. 70, Art. III, of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 260-7. Petit larceny.
§ 260-8. Shoplifting.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit petit larceny. Every person
who shall steal any property, goods or chattels of whatever kind or
character shall be guilty of petit larceny.
B. If any person who shall be entrusted with any property which may be
the subject of larceny shall embezzle or fraudulently convert to his own
use, or shall secrete with intent to embezzle or fraudulently convert to
his own use, any such property, within the City, he shall be deemed
guilty of petit larceny.
A. Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful to commit any one of the following
acts wilfully:
(1) Take possession of any merchandise with the intention of
converting it without paying for it;
(2) Conceal any merchandise with the intention of converting it
without paying for it;
(3) Alter any label, price tag or marking upon any merchandise with
the intention of depriving the merchant of all or some part of the
value of it; or
(4) Transfer any merchandise from the container in or on which it is
displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving the
merchant of all or some part of the value of it.
B. Presumption created. Any person who wilfully conceals merchandise on
his person or on the person of another or among his belongings or the
belongings of another or on or outside the premises of the store shall be
prima facie presumed to have concealed the merchandise with the
intention of converting it without paying for it. If any merchandise is
found concealed upon any person or among his belongings, it shall be
prima facie evidence of wilful concealment.
C. Reasonable detention. If any law enforcement officer, special officer or
merchant has probable cause for believing that a person has wilfully
taken possession of any merchandise with the intention of converting it
without paying for it, or has wilfully concealed merchandise, and that
he can recover the merchandise by detaining the person or taking him
into custody, the law enforcement officer, special officer or merchant
may, for the purpose of attempting to effect a recovery of the
merchandise, take the person into custody and detain him in a
reasonable manner for a reasonable time. Such taking into custody or
§ 260-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-8
1:279
§ 260-9. Fraud.
§ 260-10. Receiving stolen property.
§ 260-11. Arson.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or willfully start a fire
or cause an explosion with the purpose of destroying or damaging any
detention shall not subject the officer or merchant to any criminal or
civil liability.
D. Arrest without warrant. Any law enforcement officer may arrest without
warrant any person he has probable cause for believing has committed
the crime of shoplifting. Any merchant who causes such an arrest shall
not be criminally or civilly liable if he has probable cause for believing
the person so arrested has committed the crime of shoplifting.
A. Fraud consists of the intentional misappropriation or taking of anything
of value which belongs to another by means of fraudulent conduct,
practices or representations.
B. Whoever commits fraud is guilty of a misdemeanor.
A. Receiving stolen property means intentionally to receive, retain or
dispose of stolen property knowing that it has been stolen or believing it
has been stolen, unless the property is received, retained or disposed of
with intent to restore it to the owner.
B. The requisite knowledge or belief that property has been stolen is
presumed in the case of a dealer who:
(1) Is found in possession or control of property stolen from two or
more persons on separate occasions;
(2) Acquires stolen property for a consideration which the dealer
knows is far below the property's reasonable value. A dealer shall
be presumed to know the fair market value of the property in which
he deals; or
(3) Is found in possession or control of five or more items of property
stolen within one year prior to the time of the incident charged
pursuant to this section.
C. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DEALER — A person in the business of buying or selling goods or
commercial merchandise.
STOLEN PROPERTY — Any property acquired by theft, larceny, fraud,
embezzlement, robbery or armed robbery.
D. Whoever commits receiving stolen property is guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 260-8 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 260-11
1:280
building, occupied structure or property of another, or bridge, utility line,
fence or sign; or with the purpose of destroying or damaging any property,
whether the person's own or another's to collect insurance for such loss.
§ 260-12. Criminal damage to property.
§ 260-13. Damaging public property.
It shall be unlawful for any person, unless authorized by any provision of
this Code or other ordinance of this City or a permit issued by the Mayor or
a duly authorized official, department or employee of this City, to remove,
carry away, tamper with, write upon, interfere with, advertise on, change or
alter in any manner any:
§ 260-14. Issuing worthless checks.
A. Criminal damage to property consists of intentionally damaging any
real or personal property of another without the consent of the owner of
the property.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit criminal damage to
property within the City.
A. Park or public square property, including the grass, flowers, shrubs,
bulbs or any other property growing in or upon any of the parks or
public squares of the City, or any property in or upon the public squares
or parks.
B. Library property, including any book, periodical, map, newspaper,
place, engraving or other property belonging to the City and
constituting part of the property devoted to public library use.
C. Public utility property, whether owned by the City or by any public
utility located on, in or along, any street or sidewalk, or operating in or
using any area in the City.
D. Public property, including any building or part of a building; any
material, apparatus, fixture, appliance or document belonging to the
City; any parts or appurtenances of a fire alarm, telegraph or police
signal system, or any street or traffic light system; any water, hydrant,
reservoir or sewer system; any public bridge, viaduct or tunnel; any
tree, shrub, tree stake or guard in any public street or place; or any
other property of whatever kind or character, owned or leased by the
City, the county, the state or the United States government or any
political subdivisions or departments thereof and not specifically
enumerated in this section.
A. It shall be unlawful for a person to issue in exchange for anything of
value, with intent to defraud, any check, draft or order for payment of
money upon any bank or other depository, knowing at the time of the
issuing that the offender has insufficient funds in or credit with the
§ 260-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-14
1:281
§ 260-15. Forgery.
It shall be unlawful to:
§ 260-16. Falsely obtaining services or accommodations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain any service, food, drink, goods,
wares, merchandise, or other thing of value without paying therefor, and
with the intent to cheat or defraud the owner or person supplying such
service, food, drink, goods, wares, merchandise, or other thing of value.
§ 260-17. Fraudulent avoidance of payment of admission fees.
It shall be unlawful for any person fraudulently to enter any theater,
ballroom, lecture, concert or other place without payment of the proper
admission fee; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section
shall be deemed to prohibit or restrict the free admission of police officers
engaged in the performance of police duties to any place of public
amusement or entertainment.
§ 260-18. Polluting water.
§ 260-19. Criminal trespass.
bank or depository for the payment of such check, draft or order in full
upon its presentation.
B. This section does not apply to:
(1) Any check where the payee or holder knows or has been expressly
notified prior to the drawing of the check or has reason to believe
that the drawer did not have on deposit or to his credit with the
drawee sufficient funds to insure payment on its presentation; or
(2) Any postdated check.
A. Falsely make or alter any signature to, or any part of, any writing
purporting to have any legal efficacy with intent to injure or defraud.
B. Knowingly issue or transfer a forged writing with intent to injure or
defraud.
A. Polluting water consists of knowingly and unlawfully introducing any
object or substance into any body of public water causing it to be
offensive or dangerous for human or animal consumption or use.
Polluting water constitutes a public nuisance.
B. For the purpose of this section, the expression "body of water" means
any public river or tributary thereof, stream, lake, pond, reservoir,
acequia, canal, ditch, spring, well or declared or known groundwaters.
It shall be unlawful to pollute water.
§ 260-14 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 260-19
1:282
§ 260-20. Wrongful use of public property.
A. Criminal trespass consists of unlawfully entering or remaining upon
posted private property without possessing written permission from the
owner or person in control of the land. The provisions of this subsection
do not apply if:
(1) The owner or person in control of the land has entered into an
agreement with the Department of Game and Fish granting access
to the land to the general public for the purpose of taking any game
animals, birds or fish by hunting or fishing; or
(2) A person is in possession of a landowner license given to him by the
owner or person in control of the land that grants access to that
particular private land for the purpose of taking any game animals,
birds or fish by hunting or fishing.
B. Criminal trespass also consists of unlawfully entering or remaining
upon the unposted lands of another knowing that such consent to enter
or remain is denied or withdrawn by the owner or occupant thereof.
C. Criminal trespass also consists of unlawfully entering or remaining
upon lands owned, operated or controlled by the state or any of its
political subdivisions knowing that consent to enter or remain is denied
or withdrawn by the custodian thereof.
D. Any person who enters upon the lands of another without prior
permission and injures, damages or destroys any part of the realty or its
improvements, including buildings, structures, trees, shrubs or other
natural features, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and he shall be liable to the
owner, lessee or person in lawful possession for civil damages in an
amount equal to double the value of the damage to the property injured
or destroyed.
E. Whoever commits criminal trespass is guilty of a misdemeanor.
A. Wrongful use of property defined. Wrongful use of public property
consists of:
(1) Knowingly entering any public property without permission of the
lawful custodian or his representative when the public property is
not open to the public;
(2) Remaining in or occupying any public property after having been
requested to leave by the lawful custodian, or his representative,
who has determined that the public property is being used or
occupied contrary to its intended or customary use or that the
public property may be damaged or destroyed by the use; or
(3) Depriving the general public of the intended or customary use of
public property without a permit.
§ 260-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-20
1:283
B. Permits to occupy or use public property. Permits to occupy or use
public property may be obtained from the lawful custodian or his
representative upon written application which:
(1) Describes the public property to be occupied or used; and
(2) States the period of time during which the public property will be
occupied or used. The applicant shall pay in advance a reasonable
fee or charge for the use of the public property. The fee or charge
shall be prescribed by the lawful custodian or his representative.
C. Issuance of permit. The lawful custodian or his representative may
issue the permit if he believes that the use or occupation of the public
property will not unreasonably interfere with the intended or customary
use of the public property by the general public and that the use will not
damage or destroy the public property.
D. Search. Any person occupying or using public property under the
authority of a permit shall submit to a search for firearms or other
weapons and surrender any firearms or other weapons to any peace
officer, who has jurisdiction, upon request.
E. Public property defined. As used in this section, the term "public
property" means any public building, facility, structure or enclosure
used for a public purpose or as a place of public gathering, owned or
under the control of the state or one of its political subdivisions or a
religious, charitable, educational or recreational association.
F. Misdemeanor. Any person who commits wrongful use of public property
is guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 260-20 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 260-20
1:284
ARTICLE IV
Offenses Against Public Authority
[Adopted as Ch. 70, Art. VI, of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 260-21. Resisting, evading or obstructing officers.
§ 260-22. Refusing to obey or assist officers.
No person shall fail or refuse to obey or comply with a lawful order of
any police officer in the performance of his duty or refuse to aid or assist,
without justifiable cause, any police officer in the execution of his office
when called upon to do so in any criminal case, or in the preservation of the
peace, or in the apprehending or securing of any person for the breach of
the peace.
§ 260-23. Concealing identity.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal his true name or identity
or disguise himself with intent to obstruct the due execution of the law or
with intent to intimidate, hinder or interrupt any public officer or any other
person in a legal performance of his duty or the exercise of his rights under
the laws of the United States or of the state or of the City.
§ 260-24. Impersonating public officer.
It shall be unlawful for any person:
A. Resisting, evading or obstructing an officer consists of:
(1) Knowingly obstructing, resisting or opposing any officer of this
state or any other duly authorized person serving or attempting to
serve or execute any process or any rule or order of any of the
courts of this state or any other judicial writ or process;
(2) Intentionally fleeing, attempting to evade or evading an officer of
this state when the person committing the act of fleeing,
attempting to evade or evasion has knowledge that the officer is
attempting to apprehend or arrest him;
(3) Willfully refusing to bring a vehicle to a stop when given a visual or
audible signal to stop, whether by hand, voice, emergency light,
flashing light, siren or other signal, by a uniformed officer in an
appropriately marked police vehicle; or
(4) Resisting or abusing any judge, magistrate or peace officer in the
lawful discharge of his duties.
B. Whoever commits resisting, evading or obstructing an officer is guilty
of a misdemeanor.
A. Without due authority, to exercise or attempt to exercise the functions
of any peace officer; or
§ 260-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-24
1:285
§ 260-25. False reports and alarms.
§ 260-26. Unauthorized use of certain words and insignia.
It shall be unlawful to display on any vehicle, whether moving or parked, the
words "police," "police department," "Española Police Department," "fire
department," "Española Fire Department," or words or insignia of similar
import without the authority of the City Council; provided, however, that
nothing in this section shall apply to any state police, county sheriff, or
county fire department vehicles.
§ 260-27. Escape from jail or custody.
§ 260-28. Unlawful rescue.
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally and without lawful
authority rescue any person lawfully in custody or confinement.
§ 260-29. Assault by prisoner.
It shall be unlawful to intentionally:
B. To falsely assume or pretend to be a peace officer, justice of the peace,
coroner, police magistrate or judge with intent to deceive another.
A. No person shall make or cause to be made any false report or complaint
to the Chief of Police, the Municipal Judge, the Police Department or
any officer thereof, knowing the same to be false, for the purpose of or
with the intention, not in good faith, to vex, harass or injure any other
person, or for any purpose whatsoever.
B. No person shall give or cause to be given or turn in a false alarm of fire,
knowing the same to be false, nor shall any person knowingly aid or
assist in any manner in creating a false alarm of fire.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person arrested on, charged with or
convicted of a misdemeanor or other crime, who is confined in jail or
prison, or who has otherwise been lawfully committed to jail or who is
in the custody of any police officer or other person, to escape or attempt
to escape from such jail or prison, or from the custody of such officer or
other person having him in lawful custody.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to aid or assist any person confined
in jail or prison to escape or attempt to escape from such confinement,
nor shall any person aid or assist any person in the custody of any police
officer or other person having him in lawful custody to escape or
attempt to escape from such officer or other person.
A. Place an officer or employee of any penal institution, reformatory, jail or
prison farm or ranch, or a visitor therein, in apprehension of an
immediate battery likely to cause bodily harm;
§ 260-24 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 260-29
1:286
§ 260-30. Assault upon peace officer.
Assault upon a peace officer consists of:
B. Cause or attempt to cause bodily harm to an officer or employee of any
penal institution, reformatory, jail or prison farm or ranch, or a visitor
therein; or
C. Confine or restrain an officer or employee of any penal institution,
reformatory, jail or prison farm or ranch, or a visitor therein, with intent
to use such person as a hostage.
A. An attempt to commit a battery upon the person of a peace officer while
he is in the lawful discharge of his duties; or
B. Any lawful act, threat, or menacing conduct which causes a peace
officer, while he is in the lawful discharge of his duties, to reasonably
believe that he is in danger of receiving an immediate battery.
§ 260-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-30
1:287
Chapter 266
PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Carnivals and circuses — See Ch. 163.
Handbills — See Ch. 218.
Littering — See Ch. 235.
Noise — See Ch. 249.
Offenses — See Ch. 260.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 270.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 305.
§ 266-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
PARADE — Any parade, demonstration, march, ceremony, show, exhibition,
pageant or procession of any kind or any similar display, in or upon any
street, park, or other public place in the City.
§ 266-2. Interference prohibited.
No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere
with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal
participating or used in a parade. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between
the vehicles or persons comprising a parade, when such vehicles or persons
are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade.
§ 266-3. Parking on parade route.
The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to
prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part of a
highway constituting a part of the route of a parade.
§ 266-4. Effect on powers of City.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to repeal, replace or
limit any other ordinance of this City or to limit the authority and power
vested in the City Council, the Mayor, or any law enforcement officer. It
is the intention of the City Council that this chapter supplement all legal
powers otherwise conferred by law.
§ 266-5. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to:
A. Funeral processions; or
§ 260-30 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 266-5
1:288
§ 266-6. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful to conduct any parade in or on any public street, alley
or other public way or place in the City, or to engage in, participate in, aid,
form or start any parade or demonstration within the City, unless a permit
is first obtained therefor.
§ 266-7. Restriction on permits for parades over Rio Grande Bridge.
It is the policy of the City Council not to grant permits for parades to be
conducted over the Rio Grande Bridge, because of the serious effect such
use has on fire and police protection and ambulance service, except on a
very restricted basis when a parade on both sides of the river is of great and
sufficient interest to the community as a whole to warrant such use.
§ 266-8. Permit applications.
Application for a parade permit required by this chapter shall be made in
conformance with this chapter and shall be submitted to the Chief of the
City Police Department. An application shall be filed with the Chief of Police
at least five days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the
parade.
B. Students going to and from school classes, provided such conduct is
under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school
authorities.
A. The application for a permit shall include the following information,
where applicable:
(1) The name and address and telephone number of the person seeking
to conduct such parade or demonstration.
(2) If the parade or demonstration is proposed to be conducted for, on
behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone
number of the headquarters of the organization and of the
authorized and responsible heads of such organization.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade or demonstration chairman and who will be responsible
for its conduct.
(4) The date when the parade or demonstration is to be conducted.
(5) The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point.
(6) The approximate number of persons who, and vehicles which, will
constitute such parade or demonstration, together with a
description of the vehicles.
(7) The hours when such parade will start and terminate.
§ 266-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-8
1:289
§ 266-9. Standards for permit issuance.
The City shall issue a parade permit when, from a consideration of the
application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained,
it finds that:
(8) A statement as to whether the parade or demonstration will occupy
all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be
traversed.
(9) The location by streets and other public places of any assembly
areas for such parade or demonstration.
(10) The time at which parade units of the parade or demonstration will
begin to assemble at any such assembly area.
(11) The interval of space to be maintained between units of such
parade.
(12) Whenever the applicant desires to conduct the parade on both
sides of the Rio Grande, the applicant must submit detailed and
specific reasons to justify the interruption of traffic over the Rio
Grande Bridge.
B. Action by Chief; referral to Mayor. The Chief of Police must act upon the
request for a permit under this section within 48 hours from receipt,
and forward the application, together with his recommendations, to the
City Manager. The City Manager shall approve or disapprove the
application within 48 hours from receipt from the Chief of Police. Upon
approval, the City Manager shall submit the application to the City
Clerk, who shall issue a permit for the parade on payment of the
required fee.
A. The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and
orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route.
B. The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers to properly police the line of movement and
the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection.
C. The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to
portions of this City other than that to be occupied by the proposed line
of march and areas contiguous thereto.
D. The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points
of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such
assembly areas.
E. The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting
equipment en route to a fire.
§ 266-8 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 266-9
1:290
§ 266-10. Appeal from denial of permit.
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of the parade
permit required by this chapter to the City Council. The appeal shall be
taken by notifying the City Clerk of such an appeal in writing at least
eight hours before a City Council meeting. The appeal shall be heard and
determined at the City Council meeting.
§ 266-11. Fees.
A fee of $10 shall be charged by the City Clerk for each parade permit
required by this chapter, unless waived in the discretion of the City
Manager.
§ 266-12. Possession of permit.
The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall
carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade,
and shall make it available at the request of any City police officer.
Chapter 270
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult entertainment and uses — See Ch. 128.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 133.
Animals and animal facilities — See Ch. 137.
Fireworks — See Ch. 196.
Graffiti — See Ch. 213.
Noise — See Ch. 249.
Nuisances — See Ch. 254.
Offenses — See Ch. 260.
Parades and demonstrations — See Ch. 266.
§ 270-1. Disorderly conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in fighting, quarreling or
disorderly conduct of any kind within the City. The term "disorderly
conduct" shall include, but shall not be limited to, the doing or commission
of any of the following acts, which are specifically made unlawful in this
section:
F. The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to
persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a
disturbance.
G. The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of
termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route.
§ 266-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-1
1:291
§ 270-2. Invasions of privacy.
§ 270-3. Unlawful assembly.
It shall be unlawful for three or more persons to assemble together with
intent to do any unlawful act with force or violence against the person or
property of another, and who shall make any overt act to carry out such
unlawful purposes.
§ 270-4. Disorderly business establishments.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, conduct, or maintain a
business establishment in such a manner as to contribute to a public
disturbance, fighting, loud noises, violence or any other offense or
unwholesome conduct on the public streets or create any dangerous or
offensive public conduct. Such operation, conduct and maintenance is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
§ 270-5. False bomb scares.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make a false report of a bomb or other
public hazard knowing that no such condition exists.
§ 270-6. Unlawful use of telephone.
A. Engaging in violent, abusive, indecent, profane, boisterous,
unreasonably loud or otherwise disorderly conduct which tends to
disturb the peace; or
B. Maliciously disturbing, threatening or, in an insolent manner,
intentionally touching any house occupied by any person.
A. No person shall perform such acts as will make him a "peeping Tom" on
or about the premises of another, or go upon the premises of another for
the purpose of becoming a "peeping Tom."
B. The expression "peeping Tom" as used in this section means one who
peeps through windows or doors, or other like places, situated on or
about the premises of another for the purpose of spying upon or
invading the privacy of persons spied upon without the consent of the
persons spied upon. It is not a necessary element of this offense that the
peeping Tom is upon the premises of the person being spied upon.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to terrify, intimidate,
threaten, harass, annoy or offend, to telephone another and use any
obscene, lewd or profane language or suggest any lewd, criminal or
lascivious act, or threaten to inflict injury or physical harm to the
person or property of any person.
B. It shall also be unlawful for any person to attempt by telephone to
extort money or other thing of value from any person, or to otherwise
disturb by repeated anonymous telephone calls the peace, quiet or right
§ 270-1 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 270-6
1:292
§ 270-7. Abandonment of dangerous containers.
It shall be unlawful to:
Chapter 272
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 237.
Offenses — See Ch. 260.
Parades and demonstrations — See Ch. 266.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 270.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 290.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 305.
of privacy of any other person at the place where the telephone call or
calls were received, or to maliciously make a telephone call, whether or
not conversation ensues, with intent to annoy or disturb another, or to
disturb the telecommunications of another.
C. The use of obscene, lewd or profane language or the making of a threat
or statement as set forth in Subsection A of this section shall be prima
facie evidence of intent to terrify, intimidate, threaten, harass, annoy or
offend.
D. Any offense committed by use of a telephone, as set forth in this section,
shall be deemed to have been committed at either the place where the
telephone calls originated or at the place where the telephone calls
were received.
E. It shall be unlawful to use the telephone to terrify, intimidate, threaten,
harass, annoy or offend anyone as contemplated in this section.
A. Abandon, discard or keep in any place accessible to children any
refrigerator, icebox, freezer, airtight container, cabinet or similar
container, of a capacity of 1 1/2 cubic feet or more, which is no longer in
use, without having the attached doors, hinges, lids or latches removed
or without sealing the doors or other entrances so as to make it
impossible for anyone to be imprisoned therein; or
B. Knowingly permit, as owner, lessee or manager of any premises, any
abandoned or discarded refrigerator, icebox, freezer, airtight container,
cabinet, or similar container of a capacity of 1 1/2 cubic feet or more to
remain upon such premises in a condition whereby a child may be
imprisoned therein.
§ 270-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-7
1:293

ARTICLE I
Panhandling
[Adopted 10-26-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-09]
§ 272-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Safety in Public Places
Ordinance."
§ 272-2. Findings and intent.
The City Council finds and states its intent as follows:
A. It is the intent of the Council in enacting this article to improve the
quality of life and economic vitality of the City and to protect the safety
of the general public against certain abusive conduct of persons
engaged in panhandling by imposing reasonable time, place and
manner restrictions on panhandling while respecting the constitutional
rights of all citizens.
B. An increase in aggressive panhandling throughout the City has become
extremely disturbing and disruptive to residents and businesses, and
has contributed not only to the loss of access to and enjoyment of public
places, but also to an enhanced sense of fear, intimidation and disorder
among the general population.
C. Aggressive panhandling usually includes approaching or following
pedestrians, the use of abusive language, unwanted physical contact
and/or the intentional blocking of pedestrian and vehicular traffic and
such other conduct as identified and regulated in this article.
Aggressive panhandling has directly led to extreme violence and harm
to citizens in Española.
D. The presence of panhandlers soliciting money from persons at or near
banks or automated teller machines is especially threatening and
dangerous. Motorists also find themselves confronted by persons who,
without permission, wash their automobile windows at traffic
intersections despite explicit indications by drivers not to do so. Such
activity often carries with it an implicit threat of harm to motorists,
passengers and their property. People driving or parking on City streets
frequently find themselves faced with panhandlers seeking money by
offering to perform "services" such as opening car doors or locating or
holding parking spaces. Such face-to-face solicitation presents risks of
duress and is a particularly intrusive and disruptive form of
communication and is therefore appropriately regulated by this article.
The restrictions on panhandling in this article are for times and at
places where citizens are more likely to be vulnerable to harassment
and intimidation.
§ 272-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-2
1:295
§ 272-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING — Aggressive panhandling occurs only when
the panhandler:
E. Many panhandlers are in fact not homeless, but instead are confidence
operators, who prey on the elderly, tourists and others who are
uncertain about the genuine needs of the panhandler.
F. The solicitation of people in places where they are a "captive audience"
in which it is impossible or difficult for them to exercise their own right
to decline to listen or to avoid solicitation from panhandlers is abusive
and dangerous. Such places include public transportation vehicles,
public transportation termination points and points of entry to and exit
from public transportation, indoor and outdoor dining areas, parking
lots and structures, and those places where people are standing in line
to enter a commercial or public facility. Restricting panhandling in such
places will provide a balance between the rights of panhandlers and the
rights of persons who wish to decline or avoid the panhandling and will
help avoid or diminish the threat of violence in such unwarranted and
unavoidable confrontations and provide for the safety and security of
the commuting public, tourists, and those citizens wishing to use public
places and commercial facilities.
G. The panhandling prohibited by this article constitutes a nuisance that
deprives the citizens of the City of an acceptable environment in which
they may live.
H. The City does not seek to discourage street performances to the extent
that they do not interfere with the reasonable expectation of residents
and businesses to the enjoyment of peace and quiet in their homes and
businesses or pose a safety risk to the public and passersby. This article
seeks to balance the interests of the street performers with those of the
other residents and the businesses within the City.
I. This article is timely and appropriate because current laws and City
ordinances are insufficient to address the aforementioned problems.
The restrictions contained herein are neither overbroad nor vague and
are narrowly tailored to serve a substantial government interest. In
enacting this article, the Council recognizes the availability of
community service and other sentencing alternatives that may be
appropriate remedies for violations of this article. The goal of this
article is to protect citizens from the fear, harassment and intimidation
accompanying certain kinds of panhandling that have become an
unwelcome, overwhelming and dangerous presence in the City.
Comes closer than three feet to the person solicited unless and until the
person solicited indicates that he or she wishes to make a donation;
A.
§ 272-2 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 272-3
1:296
BUSKING; BUSKER — To play music or perform entertainment, usually
in a public place while soliciting money.[Added 11-19-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-02]
PANHANDLER — Any person who engages in an act of panhandling.
PANHANDLING — [Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
Touches the solicited person without the consent of the solicited
person;
B.
Panhandles a person while such person is standing in a line of no
less than five people who are waiting to be admitted to a commercial
establishment or public facility;
C.
Blocks the path of a person being solicited as that person attempts to
walk away from the panhandler;
D.
E. Blocks the entrance to any building or vehicle while panhandling;
Continues to solicit while following behind, ahead or alongside of a
person who walks away from the panhandler after being solicited and
declining;
F.
Causes a person to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with
the panhandler who is panhandling;
G.
H. Threatens the person solicited with physical harm by word or gesture;
Directs profane or abusive language toward the solicited person either
during the solicitation or following a refusal to make a donation;
I.
Makes any statement, gesture, or other communication which would
cause a reasonable person to be fearful or feel compelled to donate;
J.
Immediately continues to solicit from a person after receiving a
negative response;
K.
Panhandles in a group in which two or more persons panhandle the
same person at the same time; or
L.
Returns to the same location to continue panhandling after being asked
to leave by an authorized representative of the owner or occupier of
said location. [Added 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
M.
Panhandling occurs when the panhandler performs any solicitation,
soliciting of alms, begging or any other form of asking for donations,
made in person upon any public place or on private property in the
City, in which a person requests an immediate donation of money, other
gratuity or thing of value from another person or solicits the sale of
goods or services.
A.
Panhandling includes but is not limited to seeking donations by vocal
appeal.
B.
§ 272-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-3
1:297
PUBLIC PLACE — A place to which the public or members of the public
with lawful have access, and includes, but is not limited to, any street,
highway, sidewalk, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place
of amusement, park, playground, and any doorway, entrance, hallway, lobby
and other portion of any business establishment, an apartment house or
hotel not constituting a room or apartment designated for actual residence.
STREET PERFORMANCE — The act of reciting or singing, acting, dancing,
miming, pantomiming, playing a musical instrument or performing a
theatrical or literary work.
§ 272-4. Restrictions. [Amended 2-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
Panhandling shall not include street performances, buskers or licensed
door-to-door solicitations. Panhandling violations pursuant to this
article shall not include the act of passively standing or sitting with a
sign or other nonauditory indications that a donation is being sought.
The prohibition of vocal requests for donations shall not include any
responses by the panhandler to any inquiry by another person.
Panhandling shall not include solicitations of charitable contributions
by persons having a valid permit issued by the City to do so.
Panhandling shall also not include sales of newspapers, provided such
sales are done in a manner as to not endanger the vendor or motoring
public.
C.
A. Time. It shall be unlawful to engage in an act of panhandling in a public
place on any day from after sunset until sunrise.
B. Specific places. It shall be unlawful to engage in an act of panhandling
at any time when either the panhandler or the person being solicited is
located at any of the following locations:
(1) In any public transportation vehicle or public transportation
facility.
(2) Within 20 feet of any public transportation stop that is identified by
signage.
(3) Within 20 feet of a public transportation facility.
(4) In public parking lots or public parking structures.
(5) Within 15 feet of any sidewalk café.
(6) Within 50 feet in any direction from an automatic teller machine or
an entrance to a bank.
(7) Within 40 feet of people standing in a line of no fewer than two
people who are waiting to be admitted to a commercial
establishment or public facility.
(8) On private property or residential property, without permission
from the owner or occupant.
§ 272-3 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 272-4
1:298
§ 272-5. Violations and penalties.
Each act of panhandling declared unlawful by this article shall constitute a
public nuisance and a separate violation of this article. Each violation shall
be punishable by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500 and up to
90 days in jail.
(9) On school property or off school property and within 150 feet of the
property line of a school.
C. Vehicles and vehicular traffic. It shall be unlawful to engage in an act of
panhandling at any time of any day:
(1) Involving any operator or occupant of a motor vehicle that is in
traffic on or entering any street, street intersection, alley or other
public passageway;
(2) In any manner that interferes with the visibility of motorists and
the sight distance of any motorist operating any vehicle on or
entering any street, street intersection, alley or other public
passageway;
(3) Involving any operator or occupant of a motor vehicle on a public
street in exchange for blocking, occupying, or reserving a public
parking space, or directing the operator or occupant to a public
parking space;
(4) In exchange for cleaning motor vehicle windows while the vehicle
is in traffic on or entering any street, a street intersection, alley or
other public passageway; and/or
(5) In exchange for protecting, watching, washing, cleaning, repairing,
or painting a motor vehicle or bicycle while it is parked on a public
street.
D. Aggressive panhandling. It shall be unlawful to engage in an act of
aggressive panhandling at any time in any place within the City.
§ 272-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-5
1:299
Chapter 275
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals and animal facilities — See Ch. 137.
Building codes — See Ch. 150.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 192.
Graffiti — See Ch. 213.
Housing standards — See Ch. 222.
Littering — See Ch. 235.
Solid waste — See Ch. 282.
Vacant structures — See Ch. 302.
§ 275-1. Adoption of code.
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the City Clerk
of the City of Española, being marked and designated as the "International
Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition," as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the City of Española, in the State of New Mexico,
pursuant to authority granted the City in NMSA 1978 § 3-17-6, for
regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities
and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure
that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and
use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms
of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the City Clerk
of the City of Española are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 275-2 of this chapter.
§ 275-2. Revisions.
The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Section 101.1. Insert: "the City of Española, New Mexico."
B. Section 103.5. Insert: "none."
C. Section 112.4. Failure to Comply. Any person who shall continue any
work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work
as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall, upon conviction, be liable for a fine of up to $500 and
90 days in jail for each day of violation.
D. Section 302.4. Insert: "eight inches."
§ 272-5 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 275-2
1:300
§ 275-3. Minimum requirements; conflict with other provisions.
The code adopted by this chapter provides for minimum requirements at
least equal to the state requirements on the same subject; and where a state
requirement is more stringent, it will prevail and is hereby substituted by
reference. All other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith
are hereby repealed.
§ 275-4. Terminology.
"Code official" or "enforcement officer" shall mean the City Manager of the
City of Española or designee, and "Board" or "appeal board" shall mean the
Planning Commission and thence the City Council of the City of Española,
New Mexico.
§ 275-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is, for
any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council of the
City of Española hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter, and
each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact
that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases
be declared unconstitutional.
§ 275-6. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any
court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of
action acquired or existing, under any ordinance hereby repealed by § 275-3
of this chapter; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character
be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
§ 275-7. Publication.
The City Clerk of the City of Española is hereby ordered and directed
to cause this chapter to be published once by summary and title in a
newspaper of general circulation.
§ 275-8. When effective.
This chapter and the rules, regulations, provisions, requirements, orders
and matters established and adopted hereby shall take effect and be in
full force and effect from and after five business days after the date of its
E. Section 304.14. Insert: "April 15 - October 15."
F. Section 602.3. Insert: "October 1 - May 1."
G. Section 602.4. Insert: "October 1 - May 1."
§ 275-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-8
1:301
final passage, adoption and publication by summary and title as provided in
§ 275-7 of this chapter.
§ 275-9. Recording.
This chapter shall be recorded in a book kept for that purpose, shall be
authenticated by the signature of the Mayor of the City of Española and
the City Clerk of the City of Española and shall bear the Seal of the City of
Española.
Chapter 278
SMOKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 49. Regulation of businesses — See Ch. 158.
§ 275-8 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 275-9
1:302
ARTICLE I
Smoking in Municipal Buildings
[Adopted 11-15-1994 by Ord. No. 524 (Ch. 54, Art. II, of the Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 278-1. State regulations adopted.
The laws and regulations promulgated and published by the State
Environmental Improvement Board and subsequent revisions thereof and
amendments thereto are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of
this chapter as if fully set forth in this section; provided, however, that the
penalty sections in such laws and regulations shall not be applicable to
violations thereof within this City.
§ 278-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CITY BUILDING — Any enclosed, indoor area owned, leased, or otherwise
under the control of the City to which any person has access during the
course of doing business of any kind, including, but not limited to, work
areas, employee lounges, conference rooms, offices, reception areas, and
public meeting rooms. The expression "City building" does not mean any
building owned by the City which is leased on a long-term basis to another
group, individual or entity; nor does it mean a building owned by another
group, individual, or entity but constructed on City-owned land.
SMOKE or SMOKING — Carrying, holding, inhaling, exhaling, or burning
any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other lighted combustible tobacco
product.
§ 278-3. Prohibition; exception.
It is unlawful for any person to smoke in a City-owned building, facility or
City-owned vehicles, except for designated areas in the jail facility to be
designated by the jail administrator.
§ 278-4. Required signs.
Wherever smoking is prohibited in City-owned buildings, facilities and
vehicles, signs shall be posted in conspicuous places near every public
entrance of that building stating "no smoking" or they shall bear the
international "no smoking" symbol.
§ 278-5. Penalty.
Any person convicted of violating this article shall be punished by a fine no
less than $10 for the first offense and no more than $50 for each subsequent
offense.
§ 278-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-6
1:303
§ 278-6. Enforcement.
Law enforcement personnel are authorized to issue citations in lieu of filing
complaints.
§ 278-6 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 278-6
1:304
ARTICLE II
Smoking in Public Places and Places of Employment
[Adopted 11-27-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-11]
§ 278-7. Short title.
This article may be cited as the "Española Smoke Free Ordinance."
§ 278-8. Findings and intent.
A. Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor
to indoor air pollution, and that breathing secondhand smoke (also
known as "environmental tobacco smoke") is a cause of disease in
healthy nonsmokers, including heart disease, stroke, respiratory
disease, and lung cancer. The Public Health Service's National
Toxicology Program (NTP) has listed secondhand smoke as a known
carcinogen.
B. Secondhand smoke is particularly hazardous to children, elderly
people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with
impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with
obstructive airway disease.
C. According to the United States Surgeon General's Report on the Health
Consequences of Involuntary Exposure to Tobacco Smoke, issued June
27, 2006, there is no risk-free level of exposure to secondhand smoke.
The United States Surgeon General has determined that the simple
separation of smokers and nonsmokers within the same air space may
reduce, but does not eliminate, the exposure of nonsmokers to
secondhand smoke.
D. Given the fact that there is no safe level of exposure to secondhand
smoke, the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air
Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) bases its ventilation standards on
totally smoke-free environments. ASHRAE has determined that there is
currently no air filtration or other ventilation technology that can
completely eliminate all the carcinogenic components in secondhand
smoke and the health risks caused by secondhand smoke exposure, and
recommends that indoor environments be smoke-free in their entirety.
E. Based on the accumulation of sound scientific data, the smoking of
tobacco must be considered a serious danger to public health, a form of
air pollution, and a material public nuisance.
F. Accordingly, the Española City Council finds and declares that the
proposes of this article are to:
(1) Protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in
public places and places of employment; and
§ 278-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-8
1:305
§ 278-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BAR — An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic
beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the
serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages,
including, but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and
cabarets.
BUSINESS — A sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation,
or other business entity, either for-profit or not-for-profit, including retail
establishments where goods or services are sold, professional corporations
and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural,
or other professional services are delivered; and private clubs.
EMPLOYEE — A person who is employed by an employer in consideration
for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers
his or her services for a nonprofit entity.
EMPLOYER — A person, business, partnership, association, and
corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity
that employs the services of one or more individual persons.
ENCLOSED AREA — All space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed
on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of doorways), which extend
from the floor to the ceiling.
HEALTH-CARE FACILITY — An office or institution providing care or
treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other
medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not
limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including
weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically
ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists,
physicians, dentists, and all specialists within these professions This
definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms,
semiprivate rooms, and wards within health-care facilities.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT — An area under the control of a public or
private employer that employees normally frequent during the course of
employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, private offices,
employee lounges, rest rooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms,
classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, and vehicles. A private
residence is not a "place of employment" unless it is used as a child-care,
adult day-care, or health-care facility.
PRIVATE CLUB — An organization, whether incorporated or not, which
is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used
exclusively for club purposes at all times, which is operated solely for a
(2) Guarantee the right of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air, and
to recognize that the need to breathe smoke-flee air shall have
priority over the desire to smoke.
§ 278-8 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 278-9
1:306
recreational, maternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic
purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and which only sells alcoholic
beverages incidental to its operation. The affairs and management of the
organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or
similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting. The organization
has established bylaws and/or a constitution to govern its activities. The
organization has been granted nonprofit status as a club under 26 U.S.C.
§ 501.
PUBLIC PLACE — An enclosed area to which the public is invited or
in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to, banks,
bars, educational facilities, gaming facilities, health-care facilities, hotels
and motels, laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception areas,
restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail
service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas,
theaters, and waiting rooms. A private club is a public place when being
used for a function to which the general public is invited. A private
residence is not a public place unless it is used as a child-care, adult daycare,
or health-care facility.
RESTAURANT — An eating establishment, including, but not limited to,
coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school
cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or
employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is
prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant"
shall include a bar area within the restaurant.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE — A retail store utilized primarily for the sale of
tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products
is merely incidental, including but not limited to smoke shops, cigar shops,
and hookah lounges, and shall not include establishments which offer for
sale alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises.
SERVICE LINE — An indoor line in which one or more persons are waiting
for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the
exchange of money.
SHOPPING MALL — An enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to
connect retail or professional establishments.
SMOKING — Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted cigar,
cigarette, pipe, or other lighted tobacco product in any manner or in any
form.
SPORTS ARENA — Sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas,
boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, and
other similar places where members of the general public assemble to
engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness
sports or other events.
§ 278-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-10
1:307
§ 278-10. Applicability to City-owned facilities.
All enclosed facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased, or
operated by the City of Española, shall be subject to the provisions of this
article.
§ 278-11. Smoking in enclosed public places prohibited.
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the City of
Española, including, but not limited to, the following places:
A. Areas available to and customarily used by the general public in
businesses and nonprofit entities patronized by the public, including,
but not limited to, banks, laundromats, professional offices, and retail
service establishments.
B. Bars.
C. Child-care and adult day-care facilities.
D. Convention facilities.
E. Educational facilities, both public and private.
F. Elevators and stairwells.
G. Galleries, libraries, and museums.
H. Health-care facilities.
I. Hotels and motels.
J. Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings,
condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and
other multiple-unit residential facilities.
K. Polling places.
L. Private clubs when being used for a function to which the general
public is invited.
M. Public transportation facilities, including buses and taxicabs, under the
authority of the City of Española, and ticket, boarding, and waiting
areas of public transit depots.
N. Restaurants and other eating establishments.
O. Rest rooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other common-use
areas in all buildings open to the public.
P. Retail stores.
Q. Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including
school buildings, under the control of an agency, board, commission,
committee or council of the City of Española or a political subdivision of
§ 278-10 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 278-11
1:308
§ 278-12. Prohibition in places of employment.
§ 278-13. Prohibition in seating areas at outdoor events.
Smoking shall be prohibited in the seating areas of all outdoor arenas,
stadiums, and amphitheaters, as well as in bleachers and grandstands for
use by spectators at sporting and other public events.
§ 278-14. Prohibition within reasonable distance of entrances.
Smoking is prohibited within a reasonable distance of 20 feet outside
entrances, operable windows, and ventilation systems of enclosed areas
where smoking is prohibited, so as to ensure that tobacco smoke does not
enter those areas and so that employees or members of the general public
are not required to walk through the smoking area to gain entrance to the
enclosed indoor workplace or enclosed indoor public place.
§ 278-15. Unregulated areas.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the
following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of §§ 278-11 and
278-12:
the state, to the extent the place is subject to the jurisdiction of the City
of Española.
R. Service lines.
S. Shopping malls.
T. Sports arenas, including enclosed places in outdoor arenas.
U. Theaters and other facilities primarily used for exhibiting motion
pictures, stage dramas, lectures, musical recitals, or other similar
performances.
V. Bingo parlors/games and bowling alleys not owned or located on tribal
land.
A. Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed facilities within places of
employment without exception. This includes common work areas,
auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private
offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee
lounges, stalls, rest rooms, vehicles, and all other enclosed facilities.
B. This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to any existing
employees by the effective date of this article and to all prospective
employees upon their application for employment.
A. Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as
smoking rooms; provided, however, that not more than 20% of rooms
rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated. All smoking
rooms on the same floor must be contiguous, and smoke from these
§ 278-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-15
1:309
§ 278-16. Declaration of establishment as nonsmoking.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an owner, operator;
manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor
area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a
nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign
conforming to the requirements of § 278-17A is posted.
§ 278-17. Posting of signs.
§ 278-18. Nonretaliation; nonwaiver of rights.
rooms must not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under
the provisions of this article.
B. Private residences, except when used as a child-care, adult day-care, or
health-care facility.
C. Private clubs that have no employees, except when being used for a
function to which the general public is invited. This exemption shall not
apply to any organization that is established for the purpose of avoiding
compliance with this article.
D. Casinos and gaming facilities.
E. Retail tobacco stores, provided that smoke from these places does not
infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of
this article.
F. A site that is being used in connection with the practice of cultural
activities, which include the smoking of tobacco, by American Indians
that is in accordance with the American Indian Religious Freedom Act,
42 U.S.C. §§ 1996 and 1996a.
G. Outdoor areas of places of employment, except those covered by the
provisions of §§ 278-13 and 278-14.
A. "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol
(consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed
in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and
conspicuously posted in every public place and place of employment
where smoking is prohibited by this article, by the owner, operator,
manager, or other person in control of that place.
B. Every public place and place of employment where smoking is
prohibited by this article shall have posted at every entrance a
conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited.
C. All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is
prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager, or other
person having control of the area.
§ 278-15 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 278-18
1:310
§ 278-19. Enforcement.
§ 278-20. Violations.
A. No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner
retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment, or customer
because that employee, applicant, or customer exercises any rights
afforded by this article or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of
this article.
B. An employee who works in a setting where an employer allows smoking
does not waive or otherwise surrender any legal rights the employee
may have against the employer or any other party.
A. The Española Fire Department or another authorized designee of the
City Manager shall enforce this article.
B. Notice of the provisions of this article shall be given to all applicants for
a business license in the City of Española.
C. The Española City Manager shall engage in a continuing program to
explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of this article to
citizens affected by it; and to guide owners, operators, and managers in
their compliance with it, the program may include publication of a
brochure for affected businesses and individuals explaining the
provisions of this article.
D. Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may
initiate enforcement with the City Manager or Fire Department.
E. The Fire Department, Health Department, or their designees shall,
while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections,
inspect for compliance with this article.
F. An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment
regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this article of the
appropriate provisions thereof.
G. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an employee or
private citizen may bring legal action to enforce this article.
H. In addition to the remedies provided by the provisions of this section,
the City Manager or any person aggrieved by the failure of the owner;
operator, manager, or other person in control of a public place or a
place of employment to comply with the provisions of this article may
apply for injunctive relief to enforce those provisions in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking
is prohibited pursuant to this article.
§ 278-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-20
1:311
§ 278-21. Penalty.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a petty
misdemeanor punishable by:
§ 278-22. Governmental agency cooperation.
The City Manager shall request other governmental and educational
agencies having facilities within the City to establish local operating
procedures in cooperation with this article. This includes urging all federal,
state, county, tribal, and school district agencies to update their existing
smoking control regulations to be consistent with the current health
findings regarding secondhand smoke.
§ 278-23. Other applicable laws.
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where
it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.
§ 278-24. Effective date.
This article shall be effective January 1, 2007.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or
otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to the provisions of
this article to violate any of its provisions.
C. The owner, manager, or operator of the premises shall not be subject to
a penalty, provided signs have been posted, the implementation of an
appropriate policy exists, and the individual violator has been informed
that he is in violation of the article.
A. A fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation within any consecutive
twelve-month period.
B. A fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation within any consecutive
twelve-month period.
C. A fine of $500 for the third and each subsequent violation of this article
within any consecutive twelve-month period.
§ 278-20 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 278-24
1:312
Chapter 280
SOCIAL HOSTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 133.
Minors — See Ch. 241.
Offenses — See Ch. 260.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 270.
§ 280-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOL — Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from
whatever source or by whatever process produced.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every
liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains
1/2 of 1% or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage
purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other
substances.
JUVENILE — Any person less than 18 years of age.
LOUD OR UNRULY GATHERING — A party or gathering of two or more
persons at or on a residence, other private property, or public property
where a license for it has not been obtained upon which loud or unruly
conduct occurs. A loud or unruly gathering shall constitute a public
nuisance. Loud or unruly conduct includes, without limitation:
A. Excessive noise;
B. Excessive traffic;
Obstruction of public streets or crowds that have spilled into public
streets;
C.
Public drunkenness or unlawful public consumption of alcohol or
alcoholic beverages;
D.
Service to or consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages by any
underage person, except as permitted by state law;
E.
Assaults, batteries, fights, domestic violence or other disturbances of
the peace;
F.
G. Vandalism;
H. Litter; and
§ 278-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-1
1:313
RESIDENCE OR OTHER PRIVATE PROPERTY — A home, yard, apartment,
condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or
meeting room, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis,
whether occupied as a dwelling, party or other social function, and whether
owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation.
RESPONSE COSTS — The costs associated with responses by law
enforcement, fire and other emergency response providers to loud or unruly
gatherings, including, but not limited to:
RESPONSIBLE PERSON — A person or persons with a right of possession
in the residence, other private property or public property on which a loud
or unruly gathering is conducted, including, without limitation:
UNDERAGE PERSON — Any person under 21 years of age.
§ 280-2. Responsibility.
Any other conduct which constitutes a threat to public health, safety,
quiet enjoyment of residential property or general welfare.
I.
Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, fire or other emergency
response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to,
remaining at, or otherwise dealing with loud or unruly gatherings, and
the administrative costs attributable to such response(s).
A.
The cost of any medical treatment to or for any law enforcement, fire or
other emergency response personnel injured responding to, remaining
at or leaving the scene of a loud or unruly gathering.
B.
The cost of repairing any City equipment or property damaged, and the
cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at
or leaving the scene of a loud or unruly gathering.
C.
A. An owner of the residence or other private property;
B. A tenant or lessee of the residence or other private property;
C. The landlord of another person responsible for the gathering;
D. The person(s) in charge of the residence or other private property; and
The person(s) who organizes, supervises, officiates, conducts or
controls the gathering or any other person(s) accepting responsibility
for such a gathering.
E.
A. Every owner, occupant, lessee, licensee or holder of any possessory
interest in a residence, other private or public property within the City
of Española is required to maintain, manage and supervise the property
and all persons thereon in a manner so as not to violate the provisions
of this chapter. The host remains liable for such violations regardless of
any contract or agreement with any third party regarding the property.
B. The host shall not conduct, aid, allow, permit or condone a loud or
unruly gathering at a residence or other private property.
§ 280-1 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 280-2
1:314
§ 280-3. Warning issued.
§ 280-4. Recovery of response costs.
When a law enforcement, fire or other emergency response provider
responds to a loud or unruly gathering at a premises within the City within
a twelve-month period of a warning given to a host for a loud or unruly
gathering, all responsible persons shall be jointly and severally liable for the
City's costs of providing response and for all subsequent responses during
the warning period according to the schedule of cost recovery established
by the Police Department. The cost recovery schedule shall be available at
the City's Police Department and at the City Clerk's office.
§ 280-5. Billing and collection.
C. If the host of the gathering is a juvenile, then the parents or guardians
of that juvenile and the juvenile will be jointly and severally liable for
the response costs incurred pursuant to this chapter.
D. To incur liability for response costs imposed by this chapter, the host of
the loud or unruly gathering need not be present at such gathering
resulting in the response giving rise to the imposition of response costs.
This chapter therefore imposes vicarious as well as direct liability upon
a responsible person.
A. When a law enforcement, fire or other emergency response provider
official makes an initial response to a loud or unruly gathering at a
residence or other private or public property within the City of
Española, the official shall inform any responsible person(s) for the
gathering at the scene that:
(1) The official has determined that a loud or unruly gathering exists;
and
(2) Hosts will be charged for any response costs required for
subsequent responses to the scene for a loud or unruly gathering
within a twelve-month period. Only one warning will be given to a
host pursuant to this section before the City of Española assesses
response costs. If a host cannot be identified at the scene, the
official may subsequently return to the premises and issue the
warning to a then-present host. Warnings given to a host who does
not reside at the premises in question shall be delivered by certified
mail.
B. A warning given pursuant to this section shall remain in effect for the
premises at a given address until a full twelve-month period has elapsed
during which there have been no responses to a loud or unruly
gathering at that premises.
A. The amount of response costs shall be deemed a debt owed to the City
of Española by the Host responsible for the loud or unruly gathering.
§ 280-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-5
1:315
§ 280-6. Reservation of legal options.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver by the City of
Española of any right to seek reimbursement for actual costs of response
services through other legal remedies or procedures. The procedures
provided for in this chapter are in addition to any other statute, ordinance
or law, civil or criminal. This chapter in no way limits the authority of peace
officers or private citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense arising
out of conduct regulated by this chapter.
§ 280-7. Appeals.
Any person upon whom response costs are imposed shall have the right to
petition the district court for a writ of certiorari pursuant to Rule 1-075
NMRA.
Notice of the costs for which the Host is liable shall be mailed via
certified mail within 14 days of the response giving rise to such costs.
The notice shall contain the following information:
(1) The name of the person(s) being held liable for the payment of such
costs;
(2) The premises address of the loud or unruly gathering;
(3) The date and time of the response;
(4) The law enforcement, fire or emergency service provider who
responded;
(5) The date and time of any previous warning given pursuant to this
chapter and/or previous responses to loud or unruly gatherings at
the residence or other private property in question within the
previous 12 months; and
(6) The recovery cost assessed as set forth in the cost recovery
schedule.
B. The host shall remit payment of the noticed response cost to the City of
Española within 30 days of the date of the notice.
C. The City of Española may place a lien upon property where the loud or
unruly gathering occurred for any costs not paid within three months of
notice in Subsection A above. In the event it occurred on public
property, the lien may be placed on any property owned or being
purchased by the host.
§ 280-5 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 280-7
1:316
Chapter 282
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Carnivals and circuses — See Ch. 163.
Graffiti — See Ch. 213.
Handbills — See Ch. 218.
Housing standards — See Ch. 222.
Littering — See Ch. 235.
Nuisances — See Ch. 254.
§ 280-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-7
1:317

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 282-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ASHES — The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, or other
combustible materials.
COMMERCIAL COLLECTION — Solid waste collected from other than
residential collection.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Public Works.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
HAZARDOUS WASTES — Solid waste that is deemed hazardous under
federal statutes, rules or regulations.
INFECTIOUS WASTE — A limited class of substances that carry a risk of
transmitting disease, including, but not limited to:
LANDFILL — The Santa Fe County Landfill.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any plot of ground upon which three or more
mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located,
regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodation.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, cooperative,
association, or any other entity owning, operating, controlling, or inhabiting
Microbiological laboratory wastes, including clinical and stocks of
infectious agents from clinical research and industrial laboratories, and
disposable culture dishes and devices used to transfer, inoculate and
mix cultures;
A.
Pathological wastes, including human or animal tissues, organs and
body parts, removed during surgery, autopsy, or biopsy;
B.
Disposable equipment, instruments, utensils, and other disposable
materials which require special precautions because of contamination
by highly contagious diseases;
C.
Blood and blood products, including waste blood, blood serum and
plasma;
D.
Used sharps, including used hypodermic needles, syringes, scalpel,
blades, Pasteur pipettes, and broken glass; and
E.
Contaminated animal carcasses, body parts and bedding, especially
those intentionally exposed to pathogens in research, in the production
of biological or the "in vivo" testing of pharmaceuticals.
F.
§ 282-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-1
1:319
any house, residence, shop, establishment, or other premises within the
corporate boundaries of the City.
PREMISES — Any property within the City corporate boundaries adaptable
for human occupancy, and shall also mean, but not be limited to, business
places, apartment houses, offices, theaters, hotels, residences, cafes,
restaurants, eating places, tourist facilities, hospitals, schools, vacant lots,
and any other places or locations within the City boundaries where solid
waste accumulates.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR — The employee of the City who enforces
designated portions of this Code, including this chapter.
RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION — Solid waste collected from premises
occupied as individual residential dwellings, containing no more than four
families per lot, and mobile home parks where the water and/or sewage
service is furnished by the City and billed to the individual occupant of the
mobile home.
RUBBISH — Includes, but is not limited to, all nonputrescible solid wastes
excluding ashes, such as paper, cardboard, cans, wood, yard clippings,
leaves, dirt, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials.
SOLID WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant,
water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility and other
discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural
operations and from community activities, but not including those items
excluded as solid waste by the solid waste management regulations adopted
by the State Environmental Improvement Board.
SPECIAL WASTES — Types of solid wastes that have unique handling,
transportation, or disposal requirements to ensure protection of the
environment and the public health and safety as defined by the state solid
waste management regulations.
TRANSFER STATION — A transferable container designated by the City as
a receptacle for solid waste.
§ 282-2. Penalty.
Any violation of this chapter is punishable by a fine as provided in Chapter
1, General Provisions, Article III, Violations and Penalties, § 1-19.
§ 282-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to preserve the health, safety, comfort, and
convenience of the inhabitants of the City and to preserve, protect, and
improve the environmental quality of the City.
§ 282-4. Administration and enforcement.
A. Enforcing officer. The Public Works Director is responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter.
§ 282-1 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 282-4
1:320
§ 282-5. Responsibility for collection.
B. Duties of enforcing officer, generally. It shall be the duty of the Director
of Public Works to oversee the handling and collection of all solid waste
in the City and disposal or processing of the solid waste. He shall have
the authority to enforce this chapter and to adopt regulations to
implement this chapter.
C. Specific duties of Public Works Director. The Public Works Director
shall:
(1) Monitor compliance with the terms of any applicable contract, and
monitor compliance with the terms of this chapter;
(2) Hear and decide complaints brought by a person concerning
another person's compliance with the terms of this chapter;
(3) Notify persons whose containers are not in conformity with the
requirements set forth in this chapter;
(4) Approve the locations of and need for all containers;
(5) Notify persons if unsanitary conditions exist, according to the
provisions of this chapter;
(6) Resolve disputes regarding placements of solid waste receptacles,
according to the provisions of this chapter; and
(7) Order additional commercial pickups, if unsanitary conditions
exist.
D. Appeals of decisions of Public Works Director. Any person aggrieved by
a decision of the Public Works Director may appeal first to the City
Manager, and if the matter is not resolved, then to the City Council, by
filing a written appeal with the Municipal Clerk within five days of the
Public Works Director's decision. The Municipal Clerk shall notify all
parties by certified mail or registered mail of the date of the hearing no
less than 15 days prior to the date of the hearing.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, solid waste accumulated
in the City shall be collected, conveyed, and disposed of by the City or
its contractors.
B. No person other than the City or an authorized contractor shall collect,
transport, or dispose of any solid waste accumulated in the City; except
that the actual producer of solid waste, or the owner or occupant of
property where solid waste has accumulated, may personally collect
and transport such solid waste, provided it is done in a sanitary manner
which will prevent any waste from spilling, blowing, or in any other
manner being deposited on any public or private property. Such person
shall deposit such solid waste in an authorized landfill site or transfer
station.
§ 282-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-5
1:321
§ 282-6. Accumulations.
C. Notwithstanding the terms of this section, all persons shall arrange for
regular residential or commercial solid waste collection with the City,
per the terms of this chapter, and shall pay for such service, per the
terms of this chapter.
A. No person shall allow any solid waste to accumulate upon premises or
real property owned, leased, or occupied by him during intervals
between collection thereof, except in the manner provided by this
chapter.
B. It shall be unlawful to deposit any solid waste in or upon the streets,
alleys, sidewalks, gutters, or vacant land within the City, except in the
assigned receptacles or containers as specified in Article II of this
chapter.
C. No person shall allow any material to accumulate in or around a
minimum of a twenty-foot clear space around the circumference of a
fire hydrant.
§ 282-5 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 282-6
1:322
ARTICLE II
Municipal Collection and Disposal Service
§ 282-7. Grievance procedure; withholding of payments.
§ 282-8. Collection equipment and personnel; contracts.
The City shall provide for suitable equipment and personnel sufficient to
collect solid waste within the City and shall provide by contract for
adequate areas for the disposal of solid waste. To achieve such purposes,
the City Council may enter into contracts for the transportation and disposal
of solid waste.
§ 282-9. Residential collection.
A. If a person served by the City has a grievance, that person shall file a
written complaint with the City Manager. The City Manager shall
schedule a hearing on the complaint within 15 days and send notice of
the hearing to all parties by registered or certified mail no less than 15
days prior to the scheduled hearing date. The City Manager shall hear
the evidence and grant the appropriate relief, including ordering the
City to change its practices, ordering adjustment of amounts paid to the
City, or any other remedy that is appropriate.
B. Persons shall not withhold payments owed to the City. Failure to pay
appropriate statements or to bring current a delinquent account will
entitle the City to pursue its legal remedies under the applicable laws.
A. Container required; maintenance required. Every person owning,
leasing, or occupying a residence or unit of a residence within the City
shall provide or cause to be provided on his premises one or more of the
following types of solid waste containers in sufficient number to contain
all solid waste accumulated by such person between collections. Such
containers shall meet the following specifications and be maintained as
required:
(1) Containers shall be provided by the City without exception.
(2) The container supplied by the City shall remain the property and
responsibility of the City.
(3) Containers shall be maintained in mechanically sound condition by
the City.
(4) The City shall be entitled to seek restitution from responsible third
parties for all maintenance, repairs or loss occasioned by the
negligent or intentional acts of third parties.
(5) The combined weight of the containers and contents shall not
exceed 100 pounds.
§ 282-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-9
1:323
§ 282-10. Temporary provisions pending delivery of container.
(6) A second container may be purchased directly from the City for
actual cost, plus handling costs of 15%. Maintenance and repair on
purchased receptacles shall be the responsibility of the owner.
B. Collection regulations. Residential collection regulations are as follows:
(1) Containers shall be only loaded with bagged garbage and in such a
manner as they will self-empty when inverted.
(2) Solid waste that is too long or bulky to be placed in the containers
required by this article shall be prepared for collection by
compressing the rubbish as flat as practicable, or breaking or
cutting into shorter lengths, and securely tying in a bundle not
exceeding four feet in length and 50 pounds in weight. No solid
waste such as light packing materials, or other similar and easily
scattered materials, shall be included in the bundle, nor any
garbage or material not defined as rubbish. Such bundles shall be
placed adjacent to containers for collection.
(3) The owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee of each premises shall store
the containers in such a manner as to keep the containers from
being overturned or upset and scattered in any manner.
(4) Upon 10 days' written notice by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested, the Department may advise a customer of a
violation of this section and order corrective action as appropriate.
C. Collection times, locations and frequency; fees. Collection times,
locations and frequency shall be as follows:
(1) Times and location. All residential containers, other than of a
qualified physically disabled resident, shall be placed out for pickup
no later than 7:00 a.m. on the regularly scheduled day, but no
earlier than 7:00 p.m. the evening prior to pickup, unless otherwise
authorized by the Department. Residential containers shall be
placed as close to the back of the front curb as possible without
causing interference with pedestrian or vehicular traffic or fire
hydrants. Containers shall be clearly visible and accessible to
collection employees and free from any obstructions, including, but
not limited to, trees, shrubbery, walls, fences, and vehicles. All
emptied containers shall be removed from the curb area within 12
hours of collection.
(2) Frequency. Solid waste from all residential premises shall be
collected and disposed of once each week.
(3) Fees. The fees for residential containers include the fees for
collections, disposal and plastic bags, as supplied by the City. The
actual fee assessed will be $9.95 per month, plus applicable taxes
and fees.
§ 282-9 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 282-10
1:324
§ 282-11. Commercial collection.
A. Receptacles. Each owner or occupant of a residence shall be provided
with a supply of plastic bags in which to place his garbage. However,
when his supply is exhausted, the owner or occupant shall provide his
own plastic bags for the collection of his garbage.
B. Location of garbage receptacles. Location of garbage receptacles shall
be as follows:
(1) All garbage receptacles shall be kept in an enclosure until 6:00 a.m.
of the day designated as the day for collection, after which time the
owner or occupant shall place such receptacles upon his property
where they are readily accessible for removing but not within the
limits of any street or alley within the City, unless by direction of
the Public Works Department.
(2) Such receptacles shall not be placed anywhere so as to constitute a
nuisance.
(3) In all cases of disputes or complaints arising from or concerning
the types of receptacles or the place where the receptacles shall be
placed while awaiting their removal, the Public Works Department
shall make the final determination.
C. Term. This section shall expire when the containers specified in § 282-9
have been delivered to residential customers.
A. Container required; maintenance required. Commercial collection
containers shall meet the following specifications and be maintained in
the specified manner:
(1) It is the responsibility of the City to arrange for commercial
containers which are compatible with the City's solid waste
collection equipment. It is also the responsibility of the owner of
the premises to contact the City concerning any relocation of a
container, change of service, or change of business.
(2) Commercial or business establishments and multiple-family
dwellings with more than four dwellings on a single site are
required to have a commercial container unless granted an
exemption by the Department. Such container shall be kept in a
clean, neat, and sanitary condition at all times by the customer.
(3) The size and specifications of a commercial container shall be
based on the volume and type of solid waste produced by the
particular commercial or business establishment or multiple-family
dwelling. In cases of disputes or disagreements concerning the
appropriate size of a container, the Department may order a
change in the size of the container or frequency of collections.
§ 282-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-11
1:325
(4) The City shall collect all Type 1, 2 and 3 solid waste which is
contained inside the approved receptacle to be serviced for that
premises. The solid waste shall not exceed the receptacle capacity,
and the container's lid must be closed when not in use. The owner
shall not place any solid waste in any area other than the solid
waste container.
(5) Maintenance. All solid waste receptacles shall be kept in a clean
condition by the user and kept in a good condition by the owner.
The owner will perform or cause to be performed all maintenance
and repairs upon solid waste containers in order to keep them in
proper operating order. The City shall maintain, repair, or repaint a
container upon the order of the Department. The City shall be
entitled to seek restitution from responsible third parties for all
maintenance, repairs or loss occasioned by the negligent or
intentional acts of third parties.
B. Criteria for the placement of containers. Criterion for the placement of
containers shall be as follows:
(1) The container shall at all times be located in such a manner as to be
readily accessible for removing and emptying. Criteria for
placement shall include consideration of accessibility to the
container by the City and safety.
(2) No commercial container shall be placed on any premises zoned
R-1 or R-6, street, or alley without prior approval of the
Department.
(3) A property owner or his agent, whose site will require commercial
collection, shall submit to the Department an accurate site plan of
the whole site for which service is desired. The plan, including a
legal description, shall show lot lines, existing and planned
buildings, proposed collection points and enclosures (including the
design of the enclosure), and the proposed location of each
commercial container.
(4) The specific location for a commercial container shall be approved
by the Department. Commercial containers and enclosure facilities
shall be located according to the criterion of Subsection B of this
section.
(5) The Department may require alternative locations or enclosure
design.
(6) In cases of disputes or complaints arising from or concerning the
placement of a container, the Department shall designate the
location of such containers, taking into consideration, among other
things, convenience to collection crews, convenience to customers,
and hazardous conditions such as electrical wires.
§ 282-11 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 282-11
1:326
§ 282-12. Transfer stations.
§ 282-13. General residential and commercial collection
regulations.
C. Collection times; container size; frequency of collection; fees. Times of
collection, size of containers, frequency of collection and fees shall be
as follows:
(1) Times. Commercial containers shall be serviced between the hours
of 4:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on the regularly scheduled pickup days.
(2) Frequency. It shall be the responsibility of the City and the
commercial user to determine the cubic yard size and number of
pickups per week for commercial containers. The minimum number
of pickups shall be one time per week. If, in the opinion of the
Department, unsanitary premises are being maintained, written
notice of this fact shall be sent by registered or certified mail, or
delivered to the user. The notice shall state if the Department will
require the user to increase the size of the container or to increase
the frequency of collection service to maintain sanitary conditions.
If, within 10 days after the mailing or hand delivery of such notice,
the premises are not being maintained in a sanitary manner, the
user shall be in violation of this article and shall be subject to the
penalties provided in this chapter.
(3) Fees. The fees for commercial containers include the fees for
collection and the container supplied by the City. The actual fee for
a commercial container is $3.75 per cubic yard (average) per
pickup, per week, plus applicable taxes and fees. The minimum
commercial fee is $22 per consumer, per month.
(4) Sharing containers. Commercial businesses that do not warrant
three-yard containers or larger, when determined by the
Department, will be allowed to share a one-and-one-half- or threeyard
container. Fees will be based on a proration of commercial
charge and assessed accordingly. In the event of a conflict, the
proration shall be as determined by the Public Works Director and
the City Manager.
A. The City shall construct, operate and maintain no fewer than two
transfer stations. One transfer station will be located on the east side at
El Llano; the other transfer station will be on the West Side at the
Johnnie A. Roybal Industrial Park. Transfer stations will be open for
public use no more than five days per week, Wednesday through
Sunday, from 9:00 a.m. until 4:00 p.m. These five days, or the time
schedule, may be changed at the discretion of the Department.
B. Fees and disposal types of solid waste for the private use of the transfer
station are listed in § 282-19. Transfer stations shall be closed on the
designated holidays listed in § 282-15.
§ 282-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-13
1:327
§ 282-14. Solid waste categories; separation.
A. Burning. It shall be unlawful to burn solid waste of any nature within
the City. Tumbleweeds may be burned with the permission of the State
Environmental Department, subject to the conditions set forth by that
department.
B. Construction debris. Construction debris shall be subject to the
following regulations:
(1) All construction sites shall have a method of containment for
construction debris to prevent the debris from blowing or
scattering upon the site or adjacent property and streets. The
method of containment shall meet with the approval of the
Department.
(2) The producer of construction debris shall arrange with the City for
its collection and removal, except that the person may personally
collect such debris and transport it to the designated transfer
station. Transportation shall be in a vehicle which will prevent the
debris from spilling, blowing, or in any other manner from being
deposited on any street, roadway, or property.
C. Flammable or explosive materials. It shall be unlawful to place
flammable or explosive materials in residential or commercial
containers. The producers of such materials shall provide a method of
disposal which meets with current state solid waste regulations.
D. Hot ashes and other combustible material. It shall be unlawful to
deposit hot ashes, cinders, smoldering coals, or greasy or oily
substances liable to spontaneous ignition into any combustible
receptacle or place the same within 10 feet of any combustible
materials, except in metal or noncombustible receptacles. For at least
48 hours prior to the scheduled time of collection, ashes or cinders shall
be cooled and shall be placed at the collection point in disposable
containers.
E. Infectious waste. It shall be unlawful to place in any container for
regular collection any infectious waste or an item that has come in
contact with infectious waste.
F. Special and hazardous waste. It shall be unlawful to place or cause to
be placed in any container for collection any special or hazardous waste
of any kind. Any special or hazardous waste will be removed from the
City at the owner's or producer's expense to an approved site.
A. Solid waste shall be divided into the following categories:
(1) Type 1: waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking
and consumption of foods, tin cans, glass and crockery.
(2) Type 2: ashes, paper, dirt, floor sweepings.
§ 282-13 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 282-14
1:328
§ 282-15. Holidays.
The City shall observe the following holidays as noncollection days: New
Year's Day, Memorial Day, July 4th, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, and Christmas.
Collection shall occur on an alternate day approved by the Department.
Commercial collections on such holidays shall be performed on the day
either prior to or after the holiday at the option of the City.
§ 282-16. City removal upon failure to comply.
§ 282-17. Unauthorized use of receptacles.
(3) Type 3: cardboard in lots of sufficient size to be compacted and
bundled.
(4) Type 4: yard waste, including, but not limited to, tree branches and
other parts of trees, leaves, grass clippings and plant material.
(5) Type 5: animal carcasses.
(6) Type 6: construction rubble, consisting of dirt, asphalt, concrete
and automobile and truck tires.
(7) Type 7: automobiles or large parts of automobiles, and white goods,
including large appliances such as stoves, washing machines,
dryers and refrigerators.
B. The east side and west side transfer stations shall only receive Types 1
and 2 garbage in enclosed plastic bags. In addition, the east side
transfer station will also receive Types 3, 4 and 6 solid waste when
placed by the customer in areas designated by the transfer station
attendant.
C. The City will not accept Types 5 and 7 solid waste or infectious or
hazardous waste, which shall be disposed of by the owner of such
wastes in accordance with applicable state and/or federal regulations.
A. The City may remove or order the removal of any solid waste from any
real property or any premises if:
(1) Any person owning, occupying, or controlling real property or
premises allows solid waste to be deposited or accumulated upon
his property other than in the proper receptacle and fails to remove
solid waste or to place the solid waste in the proper receptacle
within 48 hours after notice from the Department.
(2) The person owning, occupying, or controlling real property or
premises refuses to use the solid waste collection service provided
by the City.
B. After such removal of solid waste, the City shall bill the person the
charge allowed under this article for such removal. Failure to pay the
charge is a violation of this article.
§ 282-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-17
1:329
§ 282-18. Supervision of receptacles; notice to Department of
failure to empty receptacles.
Each owner, manager, occupant, tenant or lessee of a house or building used
for residential, business or commercial purposes shall maintain supervision
and surveillance over the garbage or trash receptacles serving such
premises, and if such receptacles are not emptied and the contents removed
by an employee of the City or other duly authorized person for a period of
five days, he shall notify the Department of the fact within five days.
§ 282-19. Additional fees.
A. It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant to remove refuse from an
adjacent right-of-way. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or
permit another to place, any garbage or trash in any receptacle, at any
refuse collection point, or in any refuse container used in the City
container collection service unless the refuse is from the premises
served by the container or from the premises at which the receptacle or
collection point is located.
B. City service containers at several points in City areas are provided for
refuse from apartment house areas, businesses, and institutions within
the City boundaries, and refuse from outside the City boundaries shall
not be placed in the City service containers.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit, or permit another
to place or deposit, prohibited refuse in City service containers or to
place anything on the ground at these locations.
D. The owner or occupant of any building, house, structure or land shall
cause to be removed all refuse items of the nature which are prohibited
to the regular collection service, and which are located, owned or
deposited on the property or on the public right-of-way adjacent to the
property. The existence of refuse or any other item on the property or
the adjacent public right-of-way shall be prima facie evidence that such
owner or occupant failed to remove, as provided by this article, at his
own expense the refuse or other items so stored or located thereon.
Removal within three days of notice by the City is required.
E. It shall be unlawful to deposit any garbage on the public street, alleys or
public ways except in proper receptacles or to deposit it on vacant lots
or out of receptacles with the intent to avoid its collection under the
terms of this article.
A. Deposit for cart replacement. A fee of $0.50 per month will be assessed
to each residential customer and deposited in an equipment
replacement and repair fund.
B. Deposit for dumpster replacement. A fee of $1 per month will be
assessed to each commercial customer and deposited into an
equipment replacement and repair fund.
§ 282-17 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 282-19
1:330
§ 282-20. Delinquency notice; hearing; lien.
C. Equipment replacement and repair fund. The equipment replacement
and repair fund shall be a revolving fund to be used only for the purpose
of equipment replacement and repair, and no balance of such fund shall
revert to the general fund at the end of any fiscal year.
D. Private use of transfer stations.
(1) The following user fee schedule shall apply:
Type/Amount of Waste Fee
1/2 ton and under $5
1/2 to 3/4 ton $10
3/4 to 1 ton $15
1 ton and over $20 per ton
Green waste, per ton $6 minimum
Construction rubble $15 per ton
Tires $5 minimum; $25 per ton
(2) Residential customers of the City may use the transfer stations, at
no cost, for disposal of Types 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6 solid waste a
maximum of four times per month upon presentation of a current
paid solid waste bill, provided that such disposal is made in vehicles
no larger than a three-quarter-ton pickup or equivalent size trailer.
A. On or before August 1 of each year, the City Clerk shall send notice to
every person still owing garbage assessments billed the previous fiscal
year. Each notice shall state the assessment and penalty amounts owed
and shall provide notice that a lien in the amounts owed shall be placed
on the property if payment is not received by September 1. On or before
September 10 of each year, the City Clerk shall prepare an assessment
roll showing all delinquent assessments billed in the previous fiscal
year. The assessment roll shall list, in columns:
(1) The name of the owner, if known, of the parcel of real estate being
assessed;
(2) A description of the parcel of real estate being assessed;
(3) The amount assessed against each parcel of real estate; and
(4) A description, in general terms, of the removal and what was
removed from the real estate being assessed.
B. The City Clerk shall publish notice stating that the assessment roll for
delinquent garbage collection charges due is on file in the office of the
City Clerk and the time and place when the City Council will hear
appeals or protests by any person aggrieved by the assessment. The
notice shall be published once not less than 10 days nor more than 20
§ 282-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-20
1:331
§ 282-21. Notice of lien; charge for release of lien.
days before the day of the protest hearing. If the address of the owner
of the real property is known, a copy of the notice shall be mailed by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the known address of the
owner of the real property being assessed.
C. At the protest hearing required in this section, any interested person
may protest to the City Council:
(1) The regularity of the proceedings;
(2) The amount assessed against the real estate; or
(3) The correctness of the amount of the assessment.
D. The City Council shall (1) determine the regularity of the proceedings;
(2) correct any errors found in the assessment; and (3) by resolution,
confirm the proceedings and the assessments. The proceedings and
assessments so confirmed shall be deemed to be the final determination
as to the regularity, validity and correctness of the assessment.
E. On or before October 1 of each year, the City Clerk shall certify to the
City Council a list containing any delinquent assessment with penalty
added for nonpayment of the assessment at the rate of 1% per month of
any assessment confirmed by resolution as provided in Subsection D of
this section, and describe the parcel of real estate to which the
assessment is applicable. After the certified list is accepted by the City
Council, the assessment shall be a lien, when processed against the
parcel of real estate and shall be processed as provided in NMSA 1978
§§ 3-36-1 through 3-36-5. Any such lien shall be a lien superior to all
other liens except general property taxes upon the property so charged
and a personal liability of the owner of the property so charged and
shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per month.
A. Within 60 days from the date of the filing for record of the claim for lien,
the City Clerk shall mail to each delinquent property owner, as shown
by his records and addressed to such owner at the same address for the
mailing of statement, a notice of delinquency, notifying such owner that
a claim of lien on the property affected has been filed, of the amount
required to secure the release thereof and that the lien may be
foreclosed as provided in NMSA 1978 § 3-36-4 or 3-36-5.
B. There shall be assessed by the City a fee of $15 for the processing of a
release of lien for delinquent service fees. The lien processing fee shall
be added to the delinquent service fees. The lien processing fee shall be
added to the balance due the City and shall be treated as a fee due the
City. This charge shall be collected whether release is sought prior to or
after the commencement of the foreclosure proceedings to enforce the
lien for delinquent garbage assessments.
§ 282-20 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 282-21
1:332
§ 282-22. Compulsory collection; responsible party.
C. If a suit to foreclose the lien has been instituted, such suit shall be
dismissed at any time before foreclosure sale upon receipt of all fees,
penalties and interest provided for in this article, in addition to payment
of all costs of the foreclosure proceeding attributable to the property
sought to be released, including reasonable attorney's fees to be fixed
by the court in which such foreclosure proceeding has been instituted.
A. Every person owning, occupying, or controlling real property or
premises within the City upon which solid waste is generated or
accumulated shall make arrangements with the City for the collection
of solid waste per the terms of this article. Such persons shall pay to the
City the fees established and set forth in this article, whether or not the
solid waste collection service is actually used. Failure to comply is a
violation of this article, in accordance with NMSA 1978, Ch. 3, Art. 48
(NMSA 1978 § 3-48-1 et seq.), as amended. Charges are delinquent if
overdue for 15 days or more.
B. Vacated premises shall continue to receive charges unless the owner or
agent of such premises makes an application in writing to the City
stating the date of vacated premises and expected date of reoccupancy.
Charges may not be stopped until such application is made or the City
documents the vacancy through contact with the tenant or the owner.
No credits shall be given for charges on vacant premises prior to
receipt of such application or documentation. All charges are on a
monthly basis, and credit shall not be prorated. Premises vacated for
less than one month will not receive a credit. Any person making a false
statement upon any application or request pursuant to this article shall
be guilty of a violation of this article.
C. All charges shall be payable to the City and will become delinquent 15
days after the close of the month's service. A delinquent fee of 10% per
mailing shall be imposed for each month a person is delinquent to offset
delinquent billing notification.
§ 282-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-22
1:333
Chapter 286
SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building codes — See Ch. 150.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 192.
Housing standards — See Ch. 222.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 286-1. Scope.
This chapter covers the design and installation of automatic sprinkler
systems for the protection against fire hazards in one- or two-family
dwellings and manufactured homes. Where new dwellings are built with
more than two units, the NFPA 13R standard shall apply.
§ 286-2. Purpose.
§ 286-3. Design and installation.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a sprinkler system that aids in
the detection and control of residential fires and thus provides
improved protection against injury, loss of life, and property damage. A
sprinkler system designed and installed in accordance with this chapter
is expected to prevent flashover (total involvement) in the room of fire
origin, where sprinklered, and to improve the chances for occupants to
escape or be evacuated.
B. Guidelines have been established for the design and installation of
sprinkler systems in one- and two-family dwellings and manufactured
homes. Nothing in this chapter is intended to restrict new technologies
or alternative arrangements, provided that the level of safety
prescribed by the chapter is not reduced.
A. All sprinkler systems designs shall be in accordance with the
requirements of NFPA 13D, as modified by this chapter. A set of plans
must be submitted to the Building Inspector with an application for a
building permit. All required approvals shall be obtained prior to the
installation of any sprinkler piping or components. Approval shall be by
the Española Fire Department or its designee.
B. Any components of the sprinkler system, other than those required for
domestic water supply, shall be installed by personnel licensed for such
work. Inspections during construction will be done by the Building
Inspector, or his designee. Acceptance testing/final test shall be
performed in accordance with NFPA 25, sprinkler system acceptance
test. This test will require a flow test, observed by the Española Fire
Chief or his designee, at the most hydraulically demanding head
location.
§ 282-22 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 286-4
1:334
§ 286-4. Definitions.
All definitions shall conform to NFPA 13D unless otherwise approved. As
used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APPROVED — Acceptance to the Española Fire Department.
SLOPED CEILINGS — Those ceilings having a greater-than-ten-degree
angle (176%) with a ceiling height greater than nine feet.
SYSTEM STORAGE — A reserve of water on site, specific for the sprinkler
system, calculated for the two most hydraulically demanding sprinkler
heads to flow water for 10 minutes.
§ 286-5. Design.
§ 286-6. Maintenance.
(Page 6, Section 1-4, of NFPA 13D) The owner is responsible for the
condition of a sprinkler system and shall keep the system in normal
operating condition.
§ 286-7. Additional requirements.
A. In those areas of Española that are not served by an approved,
pressurized water system, the delivery and reserve capacity aspects of
the sprinkler system are a critical aspects of the design. Based on NFPA
standards, the design specifications of sprinkler systems are based on
either a two- or three-sprinkler-head coverage area design.
B. The sprinkler system for a dwelling containing sloped ceilings shall be
based on a three-head system design, and shall provide a minimum flow
of 25 gallons per minute to the most hydraulically demanding head,
with a system minimum storage capacity of 250 gallons.
C. All other dwellings shall be of a two-head system design, and shall
provide a minimum flow of 16 gallons per minute to the most
hydraulically demanding head, with a system minimum storage
capacity of 160 gallons. Bathrooms, of any size, are required to be
sprinklered.
D. A Fire Department connection shall be installed and shall be
maintained at all times and without obstruction by fences, bushes,
trees, walls or any other object. An exterior audible alarm and visible
light signal shall be installed. The sprinkler shall activate the fire alarm
system or the dwelling's smoke detectors. All attached garages or those
that are located under living spaces shall be protected by the sprinkler
system.
A. This chapter allows for the installation of an approved residential
sprinkler system to be installed in all dwellings in lieu of proper access
or fire protection. However, when the Española Fire Department deems
that, due to specific conditions, there is sufficient threat to life or
§ 286-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-7
1:335
Chapter 290
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building codes — See Ch. 150.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 154.
Excavations — See Ch. 180.
Graffiti — See Ch. 213.
Housing standards — See Ch. 222.
Parades and demonstrations — See Ch. 266.
Solid waste — See Ch. 282.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 294.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 290-1. Obstructions prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, maintain, place or
leave any structure, fence, post or other object upon any public way.
§ 290-2. Height of trees and shrubs above right-of-way. [Amended
11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
All trees, shrubs, etc., shall be trimmed to a minimum height of 10 feet
above any sidewalk, street, etc. The clear sight triangle shall remain free of
any obstacle or structure between three feet and 10 feet above street level.
§ 290-3. Obstructions to movement prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to either:
§ 290-4. Awnings and canopies.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct or maintain any
awning or canopy over or across any sidewalk within the City at any point
lower than eight feet from the surface of the sidewalk.
property, it may recommend additional fire protection measures to be
provided.
B. It is important to understand that during an electrical power outage the
sprinkler system as required by NFPA 13D will not operate. This may be
remedied by the installation of a self-contained system or a backup
power supply.
A. Hinder, annoy, or molest persons passing along any street, sidewalk,
crosswalk, or other public way; or
B. Loiter, sit, or stand around or at the entrance of any church, public hall,
theater, public building, or other place of public assemblage in any
manner so as to unreasonably obstruct such entrance.
§ 286-7 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 290-5
1:336
§ 290-5. Sale of goods. [Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a stand for the sale of any item
within 10 feet of any public way or to do anything to draw a crowd so as to
interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic; provided, however, that upon
written application to the City Council by the vendor, the City Council, in its
discretion, may allow such stand to be operated.
§ 290-6. Duty of occupants of premises; loading or unloading goods.
It shall be the duty of all occupants of premises within the City, under
penalty of law, to keep the sidewalk in front of such premises free and clear
of all obstructions at all times; except that when loading or unloading goods,
such occupant may temporarily occupy such a portion of the sidewalk as is
necessary, provided that a passageway is left open at all times.
§ 290-7. Planting or removal of trees and shrubbery.
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a City employee acting within
the scope of his duties, to plant trees or shrubbery in or upon any public
grounds within the City or to remove, cut down, trim or otherwise alter the
same.
§ 290-8. Irrigation ditches.
§ 290-9. Watering graded streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sprinkle, throw, deposit or allow to
flow any water upon any graded street within the City without permission
from the City Manager.
§ 290-10. Writings on public way.
It shall be unlawful for any person to write, print, letter, draw, place or affix
any advertisement, announcement or design upon any public way within the
City.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, organization, association,
corporation, either private or public, or any entity whatsoever,
including acequia and community ditch associations, or political
subdivisions of the state, to allow irrigation water to drain on or along
the side of any road or highway within the territorial boundaries of the
City, causing damage to the surface of the highway, whether it is paved
or unpaved.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow to stand upon any ditch bank
for a period of more than 24 hours any rubbish removed from any
irrigation ditch.
§ 290-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-11
1:337
§ 290-11. Placing injurious substances on streets, alleys or public
places.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place injurious substances or throw
or deposit or place any glass, bottles, nails, tacks, hoops, wire, cans or any
other material or substances upon any public streets, alleys or other public
places, which cause or which are likely to cause injury to any person, animal
or vehicle traveling upon such public street, alley or public place.
Chapter 294
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building codes — See Ch. 150.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 154.
Development permits and fees — See Ch. 171.
Excavations — See Ch. 180.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 200.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 311.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 294-1. Title, purpose, jurisdiction and applicability.
A. Short title. This chapter may be referred to as the "Subdivision
Ordinance of the City of Española, New Mexico."
B. Purpose. This chapter adopts subdivision regulations which:
(1) Provide for the harmonious development of the municipality and its
environs;
(2) Coordinate streets within subdivisions with other existing or
planned streets or with features of the proposed master plan of the
municipality and of the territory lying within three miles of the
municipality;
(3) Provide for adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, drainage,
light and air;
(4) Provide for a distribution of population and traffic; and
(5) Will tend to create conditions favorable to health, safety,
convenience, prosperity or general welfare.
C. Jurisdiction and applicability. This chapter shall be applicable to all of
the territory within the present and future municipal boundaries of the
City of Española, New Mexico, and all territory within three miles of
such present and future municipal boundaries, and shall be under the
jurisdiction of the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council of
the City.
§ 290-11 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 294-2
1:338
§ 294-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases appearing in this chapter will be defined
and interpreted as set forth below. For this purpose, the singular includes
the plural and the plural includes the singular; the words "shall" and "will"
are mandatory; the word "may" is permissive; and the masculine gender
includes the feminine gender.
ALLEY — A public way used primarily as a service access to the rear or side
of a property which abuts on a street.
BLOCK — The distance measured along a street between intersecting
streets from center line to center line; and, where the context requires, it
also means the enclosed area within the perimeter of the streets or property
lines enclosing it.
BUILDING LINE — A line on a plat between which line and a street no
building may be erected.
CITY MANAGER — The City Manager for the City of Española, New Mexico,
or his duly authorized representative.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street of relatively short length that serves as a
connection between a major or secondary thoroughfare and several minor
streets. The term includes the principal entrance streets of a residential
development and streets for major circulation within such a development.
COVENANT — An express agreement between two or more people to do
or not to do a certain thing. As used in these regulations, it refers to a
written, legally binding agreement between two or more property owners
or between one or more property owners and the City of Española to do or
not to do certain construction on land in any specific or general manner.
The covenant may stipulate certain penalties for contrary actions such
as reversion or transfer of ownership and/or conditions under which the
covenant may be released by either or both parties or all parties involved.
CUL-DE-SAC — A minor street with only one outlet and culminated by a
turnaround at the dead end.
DRAINAGE COURSE — A natural watercourse or indenture for the drainage
of surface waters.
EASEMENT — A grant by the property owner of the use, for a specific
purpose, of a strip of land by the general public, a corporation or a certain
person or persons.
EXPRESSWAY or FREEWAY — A high-capacity and high-speed major
thoroughfare with partially or fully controlled access to abutting properties.
LOT — A part or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land having
fixed boundaries or designated on a plat of survey or other parcel of
land within a subdivision intended for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of human occupation, rental, lease, transfer of ownership or building
development.
§ 294-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-2
1:339
MAJOR THOROUGHFARE — A street of considerable length that carries, or
that planning evidence indicates will carry, a large volume of traffic, and is
usually planned in conjunction with state or federal agencies and is not to
serve immediately abutting properties.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A street parallel to and adjacent to a major
thoroughfare which provides access from the thoroughfare to abutting
properties.
MASTER PLAN — The Comprehensive Plan-Española Planning Area, New
Mexico, revised, including maps and reports, or both, as adopted by the City
Council in February, 1972, and subsequently amended by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and/or the Española City Council.
MINOR INDUSTRIAL OR COMMERCIAL STREET — A street of relatively
short length that provides direct access to an industrial or commercial
district and is designed to discourage its use by through traffic.
MINOR RESIDENTIAL STREET — A street of relatively short length that
provides direct access to a limited number of abutting residential properties
and is designed to discourage its use by through traffic.
PERFORMANCE BOND — A surety bond or cash deposit made out to the
City of Española in an amount equal to the full cost of the improvements
which are required by this chapter, said cost being estimated by the City
Manager and said surety bond or cash deposit being legally sufficient to
secure to the City of Española that the improvements will be constructed in
accordance with this chapter.
PLANNING COMMISSION or COMMISSION — The officially appointed
Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Española, New Mexico.
PLAT — A map, chart, survey, plan or replat certified by a licensed or
registered surveyor which contains a description of the subdivided land
with ties to permanent monuments.
ROADWAY — That portion of the street available for vehicular traffic and,
where curbs are laid, the portion from back-to-back of curbs.
SECONDARY THOROUGHFARE — A street of relatively short length that
carries a considerable volume of traffic of more than neighborhood
character and also serves abutting properties.
STREET — All properties dedicated or intended for public or private use for
access to abutting lands or subject to public easements therefor, whether
designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway,
expressway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, circle or however
otherwise designated.
STREET WIDTH — The distance between lot lines measured at right angles
to the street center line.
SUBDIVIDER — Any persons, individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, estate, trust, or any other group or combination acting as a
unit, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as
defined herein and includes any agent of the subdivider.
§ 294-2 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 294-2
1:340
SUBDIVISION — The division of land into two or more parts by platting
or by metes and bounds description into tracts of less than five acres in
any one calendar year for the purpose of sale, lease or rent, for building
purposes, laying out the municipality or any part thereof, adding to the
municipality, laying out suburban lots or resubdivision. This definition shall
be interpreted as follows: If an individual or subdivider divides a parcel
of land into two parts and retains one part, that shall not be considered
a subdivision. If an individual or subdivider divides a parcel of land into
two parts for the purpose of sale, lease or rent, that shall be considered a
subdivision.
SUBDIVISION CLASS 1 — A subdivision within the three-mile planning and
platting jurisdiction area outside the City of Española in which the smallest
lot has an area of less than 20,000 square feet and a width of less than 100
feet, or any subdivision within the City of Española.
SUBDIVISION CLASS 2 — A subdivision within the three-mile planning and
platting jurisdiction area outside the City of Española in which the smallest
lot has an area of 20,000 square feet or more and a width of 100 feet or
more.
TECHNICAL ADVISOR — The individual or individuals designated to
provide staff assistance for the Planning and Zoning Commission of
Española, New Mexico.
§ 294-3. General procedures.
A. Plat; when required. It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent, or
persons having control of any land within the corporate limits of the
City or within three miles thereof of its corporate limits to subdivide or
lay out such land into lots, blocks, streets, avenues, alleys, public ways
and grounds unless by plat in accordance with the laws of the State of
New Mexico and this chapter.
B. Location map and sketch plan to be submitted. Before preparation of a
preliminary plan, the subdivider shall first submit four prints of a
location map to the technical advisor of the Planning and Zoning
Commission for review and advice concerning the relation of the
comprehensive plan of the Española planning area to the proposed
subdivision. At the option of the subdivider, he may also submit a rough
sketch showing in general his proposed layout of the proposed
subdivision for a general comment from the technical advisor and/or
the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(1) The location map shall consist of data added to an existing base
map such as a United States Coastal and Geodetic Survey, City or
county base map, covering an area of at least a one-mile radius
from the tract proposed for development.
(2) The location map shall show the following information:
§ 294-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-3
1:341
(a) The outline of the area to be subdivided, with approximate
boundary dimensions.
(b) Existing streets and roads and principal utility lines and storm
drainways on adjoining properties to service the area.
(c) North point, scale and date.
(d) Total acreage within proposed subdivision.
(e) Title of proposed subdivisions; names and addresses of
subdivider, engineer and land surveyor.
C. Preliminary plan to be approved. After review of the location map the
subdivider shall file in the office of the technical advisor 10 prints of a
preliminary plan for reference to the Planning and Zoning Commission
and other officials as provided in § 294-7 of this chapter.
D. Approval of final plat. Every person who desires to subdivide land shall
furnish a plat of the proposed subdivision, prepared by a registered,
licensed surveyor of New Mexico; except that the resubdivision of
platted tracts, which are less than one acre and which are contiguous
with each other, for the purpose of increasing or reducing the size of
such contiguous tracts, but not less than the minimum standard size
required by the political subdivision, shall not require that a certificate
of survey setting forth the legal description of tracts resulting from
such resubdivision shall be filed with the municipal planning
commission, the County Clerk and the County Assessor of the county in
which the resubdivision is situated, and such filing shall be considered
as a rededication of said described lots in all respects. The plat shall
refer to permanent monuments and shall accurately describe each lot,
number each lot in progression, give its dimensions and the dimensions
of all land dedicated for public use or for the use of the owners of lots
fronting or adjacent to the land. Description of the lots by number and
plat designation are valid in conveyance and for the purpose of taxation.
After approval of the preliminary plan by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the final plat shall be submitted to the same Commission
for its recommendation of approval, the subdivider shall install the
required public improvements according to the method required under
§ 294-8D, and the plat shall be submitted to the City Council for final
approval, all as provided in § 294-8C and F of this chapter. No plat shall
be recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Rio Arriba or Santa Fe
County, New Mexico, unless and until the approval of the City Council
has been endorsed thereon by the Mayor and City Clerk; and no lot
shall be sold from such plat unless and until the plat is approved by the
City Council and filed for record in the office of the County Clerk. Any
subdivision lying within the platting jurisdiction of both the City of
Española and Rio Arriba or Santa Fe County shall also be approved by
the appropriate county board of commissioners in accord with NMSA
1953 § 14-19-8, as amended.19
§ 294-3 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 294-4
1:342
§ 294-4. Suitability of land.
No location map or preliminary plan shall be approved if, considering the
best interests of the public, the site is not suitable for plat and development
purposes of the kind proposed by reason of flooding or adverse earth or rock
formation. Lots subject to flooding and lots deemed uninhabitable because
of adverse earth or rock formation shall not be platted for residential
occupancy, nor for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life
or property or cause an additional flood hazard, not compensated for by
the drainage plan, to such property or to other properties adjacent thereto,
or which may be affected thereby, but such land within a plat shall be set
aside for such uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional
inundation or shall not produce unsatisfactory living conditions.
§ 294-5. Design standards.
A. Minimum requirements for streets and alleys within a subdivision.
(1) Conformity to the major street plan. The location and width of all
streets shall conform to the latest Comprehensive Plan-Española
Area and to the provisions herein.
(2) Street right-of-way widths. The minimum street right-of-way width
shall be as shown on the major street plan or, if not shown on such
plan, shall be not less than as follows:
(a) Major thoroughfare: 106 feet.
(b) Secondary thoroughfare: 80 feet.
(c) Minor industrial or commercial street: 60 feet.
(d) Marginal access street: 40 feet.
(e) Minor residential street: 50 feet.
(f) Dead-end street (cul-de-sac): 50 feet.
(g) Alley: 20 feet.
B. Additional width of existing or planned streets. Subdivisions that adjoin
existing or planned streets shall dedicate the right-of-way as necessary
to meet the minimum street width requirements set forth in this section
as follows:
(1) The entire additional right-of-way shall be provided where the
subdivision is on both sides of the street.
(2) When the subdivision is located on only one side of an existing or
planned street, 1/2 of the required additional right-of-way shall be
provided, which shall not be less than 30 feet. In no case shall the
resulting eventual right-of-way width be less than 50 feet, except
19.Editor's Note: See now NMSA 1978 § 3-20-9.
§ 294-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-5
1:343
marginal access streets that shall not be less than 40 feet. The City
may require a one-foot deed for center lines of the right-of-way for
the eventual street, upon which a fence may be erected for this
purpose. Such access restriction shall be abandoned and placed
to public use upon the provision of the other 1/2 of the required
right-of-way by the adjacent subdivision upon its proper platting
and acceptance by the City.
C. Restriction of access. When a subdivision or portion thereof adjoins a
major thoroughfare, no lot shall have direct access thereto. Said lots
shall be provided with frontage on a marginal access street or street
other than a thoroughfare with adequate depth for screen planting of
any such lot contiguous with said major thoroughfare.
D. Street grades. Grades on major thoroughfares shall not exceed 5%.
Grades on other streets shall not exceed 8%.
E. Street curves.
(1) Horizontal curves. Where a deflection angle of more than 10° in the
alignment of a street occurs, a curve of reasonably long radius shall
be introduced, as follows: On streets 60 feet or more in width, the
center-line radius of curvature shall be not less than 300 feet; on
other streets not less than 100 feet.
(2) Vertical curves. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical
curves of minimum length in feet equal to 15 times the algebraic
difference in rates of grade for major thoroughfares and 1/2 this
minimum length for other streets. Profiles of all streets showing
natural and finished grades drawn to a scale of not less than one
inch equals 100 feet horizontal, and one inch equals 20 feet
vertical, may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission,
if topographic conditions warrant.
F. Intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as
is possible, and no intersections shall be at an angle of less than 60°.
Four-way intersections shall be discouraged in residential areas.
G. Street jogs. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet
shall not be allowed.
H. Dead-end streets.
(1) Minor residential streets that are also dead-end streets shall be no
more than 500 feet long unless necessitated by topography. They
shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an
outside roadway diameter of at least 80 feet and a street right-ofway
diameter of 100 feet.
(2) Where it is necessary to provide for street access to adjoining
property not yet subdivided, proposed streets shall be extended by
dedication to the boundary of such unsubdivided property. Such
§ 294-5 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 294-5
1:344
temporary dead-end streets shall be provided with a temporary
turnaround having a roadway diameter of at least 80 feet.
I. Private streets and reserve strips. Every subdivided lot shall be served
from a publicly dedicated street. There shall be no reserve strip
controlling access to streets, except where the control of such strip is
definitely placed with the City under conditions approved by the City
Council.
J. Street names. A proposed street which is in alignment with and joins on
an existing and named street shall bear the name of the existing street.
In no case shall the proposed name of a street duplicate the name of an
existing street within the area covered by this chapter. The use of a
suffix "street," "avenue," "boulevard," "drive," "place," "court" or similar
description shall not be a distinction sufficient to constitute compliance
with this chapter. In general, east-west trending rights-of-way shall be
called "streets," while north-south trending ones shall be called
"avenues." Dead-end rights-of-way shall be called "courts," and short
streets shall be called "place" or "drive."
K. Alleys. Alleys 20 feet wide shall be provided to the rear or side of all lots
to be used for commercial or industrial uses. Alleys may be required by
the Planning Commission in apartment or multifamily subdivisions.
Dead-end alleys shall not be allowed; "L" shaped alleys shall be bevelled
25 feet at the inside of the "L."
L. Size of blocks. Block length shall not be less than 400 feet nor more
than 1,200 feet measured along the greatest dimension of the enclosed
block. In blocks over 800 feet in length, the Planning and Zoning
Commission may require one or more public crosswalks or rights-ofway
not less than 10 feet in width to extend entirely across the block
and at locations deemed necessary at intervals not closer than 400 feet.
Block width shall be sufficient to allow two tiers of lots of a minimum
depth of 100 feet for each tier.
M. Arrangement of lots. Side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
street lines or radial to curved street lines. Each lot must front upon a
public street not less than 40 feet in width. Lot dimensions shall
conform to the requirements of Chapter 350, Zoning and Development,
provided that the depth of a lot shall not exceed three times the width.
Corner lots for residential use shall have the extra width to permit
appropriate building setback from both streets. Lots with double
frontage shall be avoided.
N. Public use and service areas. In reviewing subdivision plats, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the adequacy of
existing or proposed community facilities to serve the additional
dwellings proposed by the subdivision. Subdividers shall provide areas
for community facilities normally considered desirable for serving
residential areas such as parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, schools,
churches, libraries, shopping centers and local business centers, tot
§ 294-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-5
1:345
parks and school loading areas. Areas provided or reserved for such
community facilities shall be adequate to provide for building sites,
play areas, landscaping, and off-street parking as may be necessary
for the use proposed. Subdividers should confer with the Planning and
Zoning Commission prior to the preparation of final plats in order to
develop suitable plans for providing community facilities. Areas for
community facilities may be provided through dedication or sale to a
public agency, including a property owners' association. In all cases,
suitable arrangements shall be made, fixing responsibility for
sponsorship and continued maintenance of community facilities.
Subdivisions shall conform to the City of Española's plan for parks and
recreational areas and facilities.
O. Public open spaces. Where a proposed school, neighborhood park or
recreation area shown on the Comprehensive Plan-Española Planning
Area is located in whole or in part in the applicant's subdivision, the
Planning and Zoning Commission may require as a condition of final
approval that such space within the subdivision be reserved and not
developed for a period not to exceed one year from the date of such
final approval so that within said period the appropriate public agency
may acquire said land in the manner provided by law and before it is
developed for some other purpose. If it is not so acquired and no legal
action is filed by such public agency within such period, said
reservation shall be of no further effect.
P. Easements for utilities. Except where alleys are provided for the
purpose, utility easements not less than 10 feet in width shall be
provided along rear or side lot lines where necessary for use in
erecting, constructing and maintaining poles, wires, conduits, storm
sewers, sanitary sewers, surface drainage, gas mains, water mains,
electrical lines and other public utilities reasonably required for an
urban structure. At the request of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, utility companies are to be contacted by the City to
determine easement width needed. Whenever practical, all utilities
shall be placed underground. No building shall be erected on said
easement. All final plats should be accompanied with evidence that all
utilities concur, and easements indicated on the plat are suitable for
their servicing the area.
Q. Drainage courses. Where stormwater from adjacent areas naturally
passes through a subdivision, adequate provision shall be included in
the facilities to route the stormwater through the subdivision to its
natural outlet, including necessary easements and provisions for lining
and checking the rainways, if open, for the installation, or provision for
the installation, of storm sewer conduit. A report by a civil engineer,
registered in New Mexico, must accompany the preliminary plat of a
subdivision, giving the quantity, velocity and depth of flow in all
drainage courses at points of entering and leaving the subdivision and
at key points within the subdivision for flows anticipated, after
development of the area, from floods with an average recurrence
§ 294-5 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 294-5
1:346
§ 294-6. Maintenance of improvements outside corporate limits.
Where a subdivision outside the corporate limits of the City contains sewer,
sewage treatment plants, water supply systems, park areas, or other
physical facilities necessary or desirable for the welfare of the area and
which are of common use or benefit, and which the City does not desire
to or cannot maintain, provision shall be made by trust agreements made
a part of the deed restrictions acceptable to the City for the proper and
continuous maintenance and supervision of such facilities by the lot owners
in the subdivision or until incorporated within the City limits of the City of
Española and other provisions made therefor.
§ 294-7. Preliminary plat.
interval of 10 years and 25 years. The effect of such flows at these
points on hydraulic structures, streets, street intersections, and private
structures should be presented in the report. Any open channel must be
structurally lined with adequate checks to prevent excessive velocities.
The design requirements for storm sewer, flood control easements
and channels, and for hydraulic structures will be provided by the
technical advisor, who must approve plans and specifications for these
structures. Right-of-way easements for all open channels shall be
dedicated to the City.
A. Submission for review. Following review of a location map and sketch
plan (optional), any subdivider proposing to subdivide the land
described in said location map or portion thereof shall file in the office
of the technical advisor 10 prints of a preliminary plat for said
subdivision. Said preliminary plat shall be filed with the technical
advisor at least 15 days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of the
Planning and Zoning Commission. The technical advisor shall deliver
one print to the City Manager, one for engineering review, one to each
utility affected and shall retain the remaining prints on file for
transmittal to the Planning and Zoning Commission. In the case of
subdivision outside the corporate limits of the City, the subdivider shall
transmit the required number of copies of the preliminary plat to the
appropriate county manager as is required by the subdivision
regulations of the county in which the subdivision is located. In the case
of a subdivision outside the corporate limits of the City planning the use
of a private utility system, the technical advisor shall notify the Public
Service Commission and the State Environmental Improvement Agency
of the plans and request that a representative review the plat.
B. Preliminary plat requirements.
(1) The preliminary plat shall show at least the following:
(a) The location of all present property lines, municipal
boundaries, section lines, streets, buildings, watercourses and
other existing features within the area to be subdivided and
§ 294-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-7
1:347
similar information (except buildings and property lines)
regarding land immediately adjacent thereto.
(b) The proposed location and width of all proposed streets, alleys,
front setback lines, utility easements, and areas to be reserved
for public use.
(c) Existing utilities, drainage courses and culverts, within the
tract or on streets immediately abutting thereto; the location
and size of the nearest water mains and sewer lines.
(d) The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be
recorded and the name of the engineer, the registered land
surveyor and the subdivider and owner of the tract, with the
address to which any notice is to be sent.
(e) The layout, numbers and approximate dimensions and areas of
proposed lots.
(f) The zoning classification and proposed use for the area being
platted.
(g) Proposed names for all streets in the area being platted.
(h) Written and signed statements explaining how and when the
subdivider proposes to provide and install all required sewer or
other disposal of sanitary wastes, pavement, sidewalks,
drainage structures and water supply system.
(i) The legal description of the areas being platted.
(j) Contours referred to the United States Coastal and Geodetic
Survey datum with intervals of five feet or less in all areas,
except in the floors of the river valleys where two-foot intervals
shall be required.
(k) The North point, scale (one inch equals 100 feet) and date.
(l) The acreage of the land to be subdivided.
(m) Any restrictions proposed to be included in the owner's
declaration of plat.
(n) Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the Planning
and Zoning Commission, including such information as the
location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil,
rock and groundwater conditions; depth to groundwater; soil
percolation and any other subsurface conditions.
(o) Such other information and material as may be applicable or
required by ordinance or rules and regulations pertaining to
utilities.
§ 294-7 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 294-7
1:348
§ 294-8. Final plat.
(2) All preliminary plat requirements shall be submitted on one or
more sheets of dimensions 24 inches by 36 inches.
C. Hearing on preliminary plat. A public hearing upon such proposal for
subdivision as stated in the preliminary plat shall be had before the
Planning Commission not later than its third regular meeting following
filing. Notice thereof shall be given by the technical advisor on behalf of
the Commission by mailing a notice to the person or persons who filed
the preliminary plat at the address set forth in the filed papers. The cost
of publication for public notice will be paid by the subdivider.
D. Approval and form of preliminary plat.
(1) If, upon the conclusion of such hearing, the Commission shall find
that such preliminary plat satisfies the requirements of this
chapter, the Chairman of the Commission shall endorse approval
thereof in substantially the following language:
"The proposed plan of subdivision as shown in the preliminary plat
herein is approved and the Commission now is ready to receive the
final plat of said subdivision for consideration."
Dated: ______________________
Española Planning and Zoning Commission
by:
by:
(2) One print of said preliminary plat so endorsed shall be returned to
the subdivider by personal delivery or mail, and one print so
endorsed shall be retained by the Commission, and one print with
said findings and other shall be delivered to the subdivider in
person or by mail.
(3) A subdivider may submit to the Commission an amended
preliminary plat for the purpose of complying with any order of the
Commission. In such event, 10 prints thereof shall be so filed with
the technical advisor.
A. Preparation of final plat by registered licensed surveyor and minimum
public improvements. Receipt by the subdivider of the print of the
preliminary plat approved by the Commission as aforesaid shall
constitute authority for the subdivider to proceed with further plans
and specifications for installation of public improvements in accordance
with the minimum standards established by this chapter and the
preparation of a final plat. The final plat must be prepared by a
registered, licensed surveyor of New Mexico as is required in NMSA
1978 § 3-20-2, as amended.
§ 294-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-8
1:349
B. Submission of final plat to Planning Commission. The final plat may, in
the discretion of the subdivider, constitute only such portions of the
tract covered in the preliminary plat as the subdivider proposes to
presently record and develop. If a final plat of the entire subdivision, or
of such portion as the subdivider proposes to presently record and
develop, is not submitted for approval within six months after approval
of the preliminary plat, such approval of the unfinalized portions of the
preliminary plat shall become null and void unless an extension of time
is applied for by the subdivider and granted in writing by the Planning
and Zoning Commission. Where a portion of a plat has been approved
as a final plat and has been developed, and within six months after
completion of such development an additional final plat has not been
submitted for additional approval, the provisions of this subsection
providing that it shall become null and void will apply. Four prints of the
final plat shall be filed with the technical advisor at least 15 days before
the next regular meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
C. Contents of final plat.
(1) The final plat shall be in conformity with the requirements of the
County Clerk and shall be an accurate drawing designating
specifically the land so laid out, and particularly describing the
portions thereof intended to be dedicated for public use. Said final
plat shall be drawn in black ink to a scale of not more than 100 feet
to the inch from an accurate survey. It shall contain one or more
sheets of dimensions 24 inches by 26 inches. If more than two
sheets are submitted, an index sheet of the same dimensions shall
be attached showing the entire subdivision on one sheet and the
component areas on the remaining sheets.
(2) Said final plat of the subdivision and accompanying documents
shall show:
(a) Boundary lines with accurate distances and angles.
(b) Correct legal description, which shall refer to permanent
monuments, number of each lot in progression, and
dimensions of same.
(c) Lines of all proposed streets and alleys with their width and
names.
(d) Accurate outline of any portions of the property intended to be
dedicated for public use or for the use of the owners of lots
fronting or adjacent to the land, together with dimensions of
same.
(e) Line of departure of one street from another.
(f) Names and widths of adjoining streets and alleys abutting the
subdivision.
§ 294-8 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 294-8
1:350
(g) All lots designated by numbers of letters and streets, avenues
and other grounds designated by names, letters or numbers,
and designate building numbers (street addresses).
(h) Building setback lines shown by narrow dashed lines.
(i) Location of all easements provided for public use, services or
utilities.
(j) All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating
the boundaries of the subdivision, lots, streets, alleys,
easements, and other areas for public or private use.
(k) Radii, arcs or chords, points of tangency and central angles for
all curvilinear streets and radii for rounded corners.
(l) Location of all survey monuments and their descriptions.
(m) Name of the subdivision and the scale of the plat, North point,
the name of the owner or owners, or subdividers and date.
(n) Certificate of registered land surveyor, attesting to the
accuracy of the survey and the correct location of all
monuments shown.
(o) Certificate of licensed engineer, attesting to the adequacy of
and in compliance with engineering provisions and
requirements.
(p) Acknowledgement. Every plat shall contain a statement that
the land being surveyed, and the streets, alleys, easements,
drainways and other public ways appearing on the plat, are
with the free consent and in accordance with the desire of the
undersigned owner and proprietor of the land and are
dedicated to the public use and shall be acknowledged.
(q) Certification. A certification by the owner or owners and
spouse, if any, or a duly authorized attorney that there are no
delinquent taxes, suits, actions at law, easements, restrictive
covenants or rights-of-way affecting the property except those
stated on the plat.
(r) Affidavit. The plat shall also contain an affidavit by the City that
the proposed subdivision does lie within the planning and
platting jurisdiction of the municipality.
(s) Separately signed approval blocks with the names of each
utility company involved typed under the signatures along with
the date of each signature. Signatures shall be obtained from
the telephone company, electric company, gas company, cable
TV, the City Utilities Superintendent, and the local health
officer representing the State Environmental Improvement
Agency.
§ 294-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-8
1:351
D. Recommendation of approval of final plat by Commission.
(1) When the subdivider has filed with the Planning and Zoning
Commission a final plat (and four prints thereof) for approval, the
Commission shall inform him that he is entitled to a public hearing
on the plat within five days' notice. Such hearing may be waived by
the person seeking approval of the plat (the subdivider).
(2) Subsequently, when the Commission has determined that the plat
conforms to the previously approved preliminary plat, including
any condition which may have been required by the Commission in
approving said preliminary plat, and that said final plat meets all
requirements of this chapter, the following shall be printed or
stamped upon the original plat and plats thereof and signed by the
Chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission:
"This final plat of subdivision is recommended to the City Council
for approval, subject to certifications by the City Manager that all
arrangements for public improvements required by the Española
Land Subdivision Regulations have been made in accordance with
the requirements of Section 38."
Dated: ________________________
Española Planning and Zoning Commission
by:
Chairman
by:
Secretary
(3) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall then transmit the
endorsed final plat and three prints thereof to the office of the City
Manager for immediate reference to the City Council, with a letter
of transmittal in duplicate calling attention to any variations or
modifications of the requirements recommended by the
Commission under § 294-10 of these regulations and setting forth
its reasons for recommending the same. One print of said final plat
so endorsed shall remain on file in the office of the technical
advisor.
E. Submission of final plat to City Council; certificate of City Manager.
Upon receipt of a final plat and prints thereof so endorsed by the
Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Manager shall refer the final
plat with said letter of transmittal to the City Council at its next regular
session. Thereupon, said plat shall remain pending on the agenda of the
City Council until the City Manager has certified thereon that:
(1) The public improvements required by this chapter have been
constructed in a satisfactory manner in accordance with the
minimum standards established by the City of Española; or
§ 294-8 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 294-8
1:352
(2) In lieu of such prior construction, the subdivider has filed with the
City Clerk a duly executed performance bond with a financially
qualified surety in an amount equal to 100% of the cost of the total
improvements and on all of the property abutting each such street;
or
(3) The developer has presented copies of signed contracts containing
adequate financial assurance to the City providing for installation
of public improvements in a satisfactory manner in accordance
with the minimum standards established by the City of Española
and such contracts shall be cancellable only upon disapproval of
the plat by the City Council; or
(4) The developer has entered into an agreement or contract with the
City providing for the installation of such improvements and
pledging the properties of the subdivision as guarantee that such
improvements will be installed, which contract and agreements, or
such utilities and public improvements, shall constitute a lien upon
such property as is provided in paving districts, water and sewer
districts, etc. Such contract may provide that the subdivider pay for
such public improvements made pursuant to the contract with the
City on a block-to-block basis as the subdivision is developed,
providing for payment for such improvements, as constructed, and
the release of lien placed upon such properties by the instrument of
the City. Payment to the City for these purposes shall be made at
the time of development even though the entire improvements, or a
portion thereof, may be required to be deferred, and such money
shall be held in escrow by the City as a trust fund for such
purposes.
F. Approval or disapproval of final plat by the City Council.
(1) The City Council shall approve or disapprove a final plat within 35
days of the day that the provisions of Subsection E above have been
complied with by the developer. If the City Council does not act
within 35 days, the plat is deemed to be approved, and, upon
demand, the City Council shall issue a certificate approving the
plat. The person seeking approval of the plat may waive this
requirement and agree to an extension of this time period. The
reason for disapproval of a plat shall be entered upon the
recordings of the City Council.
(2) No plat of territory within the planning and platting jurisdiction of
the municipality shall be filed and recorded unless it has been
approved by the City Council, and endorsed by the Mayor and Clerk
of the City of Española.
G. Approved plat filed with County Clerk; action upon disapproval. When
such final plat has been approved by the City Council and signed by the
Mayor and City Clerk and the filing fee, as required by the County
Clerk, has been received from the developer, it must be recorded in the
§ 294-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-8
1:353
§ 294-9. Improvements.
office of the County Clerk of Rio Arriba or Santa Fe County, New
Mexico, by the City. If the plat is not approved, the filing fee, together
with the final plat, is to be returned to the person submitting the plat.
A. Authorization for subdivider to construct public improvements. Receipt
of the signed copy of the preliminary plat is authorization for the
subdivider to proceed with the preparation of plans and specifications
for the minimum improvements that will be required. Prior to the
construction of any improvements, the subdivider shall furnish the City
Manager with all plans, information and data necessary for the
construction of said improvements. These plans shall be examined by
the City Manager and will be approved if in accordance with the
following requirements. Following the approval, construction can be
started. The subdivider may prepare and secure approval of the
preliminary plat and then install improvements only in a portion of the
area covered by the preliminary plat.
B. Completion of improvements. Plans for improvements shall be prepared
by a qualified engineer registered in accordance with the laws of New
Mexico. The improvements listed below shall be installed pursuant to
the method decided upon under § 294-8E, and with the provision that
no residence or other building shall be constructed until the street,
water and sewer improvements, underground utilities, or storm drain
provisions, as may be required, have been installed for the entire block
in which the residence or other building shall be located. Sidewalks
may be installed after the construction of each residence or other
building.
C. Improvements standards. Standards for design, construction,
specifications and inspection of street improvements, curbs and
gutters, sewers, sidewalks and drainage facilities shall be prepared by
the City Manager, plus similar standards for gas and water distribution
facilities, fire hydrants, sewage disposal, garbage disposal and
sanitation facilities shall be prepared by the City Manager in
conformance with applicable departmental requirements. Such
standards, rules and regulations shall be approved by the City Council
and be on file in the City Manager's office.
D. Improvement requirements. The improvements to be installed shall
include the following:
(1) Permanent markers. All subdivision boundary corners and the
intersections of street center lines shall be marked with a
permanent monument. A permanent monument shall be deemed to
be concrete with a minimum dimension of four inches, extending
three feet below the surface of the ground, or steel pipe firmly
imbedded in concrete which extends at least three feet below the
surface of the ground. Should conditions prohibit the placing of
monuments on line, offset marking will be permitted; provided,
§ 294-8 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 294-9
1:354
however, the offset courses and distances are shown on the plat.
A permanent benchmark shall be accessibly placed within the
subdivision, the elevation of which shall be referred to the
U.S.C.&G.S. data and accurately noted on the subdivision plat.
(2) Street improvements. All streets shall be graded and the roadway
improved by surfacing under the supervision of the City Manager
and subject to his approval.
(3) Class 1 subdivisions. Roadway surfacing for Class 1 subdivisions
shall include standard eight-inch-high curb and twenty-two-inch
gutter on both sides of the street no closer than 34 feet from the
back of one curb to the other, with the area between the curbs
surfaced with concrete or asphalt meeting the standard
specifications of the City of Española.
(4) Class 2 subdivisions. Roadway surfacing for Class 2 subdivisions
shall consist of concrete or asphalt paving, at least 24 feet wide,
constructed in accordance with standard specifications of the City
of Española, with drainage ditches where appropriate with slopes
no steeper than two feet horizontal for each one foot vertical and at
least two feet deep.
(5) Major streets. For streets designated as major streets on the
official Comprehensive Plan-Española Planning Area, the surfacing
shall be at a width determined by study of the technical advisor,
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, and
approval of the City Council.
(6) Sidewalks for Class 1 subdivisions. Sidewalks for Class 1
subdivisions shall be required on both sides of all streets.
(7) Sidewalks for Class 2 subdivisions. Sidewalks for Class 2
subdivisions are not required.
(8) Sidewalk standards. Whenever sidewalks are required or provided,
they shall have a minimum width of four feet where the right-of-way
permits and shall be constructed under the supervision of, and
subject to the approval of, the City Manager in accordance with
standard specifications of the City of Española. Sidewalks shall be
located with backs abutting the street right-of-way line.
(9) Water lines for Class 1 subdivisions. The subdivider shall make
necessary arrangements to serve each lot from a water main of the
Española water system. Water lines for Class 1 subdivisions shall
be installed to at least the back side of proposed sidewalks before
any paving is installed.
(10)Water lines for Class 2 subdivisions. The subdivider shall provide
an adequate supply of potable water to each lot in Class 2
subdivisions by a water system approved by the State
Environmental Improvement Agency, with proper provisions for the
§ 294-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-9
1:355
maintenance thereof as required, or shall serve each lot with a
water main of the Española water system, or where it is feasible
and practical for an adequate water supply to be made available
for every lot by the individual lot owner, to present evidence to
this effect and include deed restrictions on the final plat requiring
any such individual water supply systems to comply with the
requirements of the State Environmental Improvement Agency.
(11) Sanitary sewers for Class 1 subdivisions. For Class 1 subdivisions,
the subdivider shall connect with the sanitary sewer system of the
City of Española and provide adequate sewer lines accessible to
each lot. Said sewers shall be constructed in accordance with the
standard specifications of the City of Española under the
supervision of the City Manager and subject to his approval. All
lines which will lie under paving shall be installed prior to paving.
(12) Sanitary sewers for Class 2 subdivisions. Where a public sanitary
sewer is within 600 feet of a Class 2 subdivision, the subdivider
shall connect with the public sanitary sewer system and provide
adequate sewer lines accessible to each lot. Said sewers shall be
constructed in accordance with the standard specifications of the
City of Española under the supervision of the City Manager and
subject to his approval. Where lots cannot be connected with a
public sewer system, provisions must be made for sanitary
sewerage facilities, consisting of a central treatment plant or
individual disposal devices for each lot, but the subdivision plat
shall include deed restrictions requiring that all such disposal
systems shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications
of the State Environmental Improvement Agency and under the
supervision of and subject to the approval of the City Manager.
(13) Drainage. Adequate provision shall be made for drainage of
stormwater subject to the approval of the City Manager. Drainage
improvements shall maintain any natural watercourse and shall
prevent the collection of water in any low spot. In Class 2
subdivisions, drainage may be by open channels located along the
streets or along rear lot lines. No lot shall be platted to obstruct
natural water flow. Stormwater drainage shall not be permitted to
combine with sanitary sewers. In Class 1 subdivisions, drainage
channels must be lined and provided with required checks or be
installed in concrete storm sewer conduit in accordance with the
requirements shown on the Comprehensive Plan-Española
Planning Area, and as required by the City Manager for storm
sewers.
(14) Alleys. Alleys shall be graded to their maximum usable width to a
grade approved by the City Manager and shall be paved in the
same manner as streets.
(15) Street signs. A four-way metal street sign shall be installed at each
street intersection by the City and billed to the developer. The
§ 294-9 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 294-9
1:356
§ 294-10. Modification of requirements.
§ 294-11. Changes and amendments.
These land subdivision regulations may be changed and amended from time
to time by the City Council, provided that such changes or amendments
shall not become effective until after a public hearing has been held. Before
such hearing, notice of same must be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in Española at least 15 days prior thereto.
§ 294-12. Penalty; enforcement.
letters shall be at least four inches high. The signs shall be green
with white letters except for signs on state highways. Signs on
state highways shall meet the standards of the State Highway
Commission.
A. Where in the case of a particular proposed subdivision it can be shown
that strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter would
result in extraordinary hardship to the subdivider because of unusual
topography or other non-self-inflicted condition, or that these
conditions would result in inhibiting the achievement of the objectives
of this chapter, the Planning and Zoning Commission may vary, modify,
or waive the requirements so that substantial justice may be done and
the public interest secured, provided that such variance, modification,
or waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of
this chapter or any utility regulations or other requirement of the City
or interfering with carrying out the Comprehensive Plan-Española
Planning Area.
B. Application for any variance shall be submitted in writing by the
subdivider at the time the preliminary plat is filed and shall state in full
the grounds for the application and the facts relied upon by the
subdivider. The Commission shall give its written recommendation
thereon, at the time of its approval or disapproval of said preliminary
plat. Approval of any variation must be by a two-thirds vote of the entire
Commission.
C. In no case shall any variation or modification be contrary to the
mandatory requirements of state law, nor be more than a minimum
easing of the requirements. In no case shall it have the effect of
reducing the traffic capacity of any street below that shown on the
Comprehensive Plan-Española Planning Area or be in conflict with any
zoning ordinance and map.
D. In granting variances and modifications, the Planning and Zoning
Commission may require such conditions as will in its judgment secure
substantially the objective of the requirements so varied or modified.
A. Whoever, being the owner, or agent of the owner, having control of any
land within the corporate limits of the City of Española or within three
§ 294-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-12
1:357
§ 294-13. Approval necessary for utility protection.
Until a final plat has been approved by the planning authority, any official
of a municipality or public utility company who shall serve or connect the
land within the subdivision and within the planning and platting jurisdiction
of a municipality with any public utility such as water, sewer, electric or
gas is guilty of a misdemeanor. A municipality may require any utility
connected in violation of this section to be disconnected. This chapter shall
not prohibit the extending of the utilities through an area irrespective of
its platting and planning status after review and approval by the Planning
and Zoning Commission, which area may be subject to assessments for
such improvements in accordance with the rules and regulations of the City
utilities or public improvements requirements.
§ 294-14. Alternate summary procedure.
miles of its corporate limits, subdivides or lays out land into lots, blocks,
streets, avenues, alleys, public ways and grounds or whoever sells,
transfers, leases or rents or agrees to sell or negotiate to sell lots or
parts of a subdivision by reference to any exhibit of or by any other
use of a plat or subdivision of such land, before such plat has been
approved as provided for in this chapter and recorded in the office of
the appropriate County Clerk, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
may, upon conviction, be fined not more than $300 or imprisoned for
not more than 90 days for each lot transferred or sold, subdivided or
laid out, or agreed or negotiated to be sold, or may suffer imposition of
both such fine and penalty for each lot transferred or sold, subdivided
or laid out or agreed or negotiated to be sold. Any municipality, through
its attorney or other official designated by its governing body, may
enjoin the transfer or sale or agreement by action for injunction or may
recover the penalty by civil action.
B. The designated official for the enforcement of this chapter shall be the
City Manager.
A. The technical advisor to the Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby
authorized to approve and sign certain subdivision plats as follows:
(1) Subdivisions of not more than two parcels of land; or
(2) Resubdivisions, where the combination or recombination of
portions of previously platted lots does not increase the total
number of lots; or
(3) Subdivisions of two or more parcels of land in areas zoned for
industrial use.
B. Any subdivision approved as authorized in this section shall be in
substantial conformity with § 294-5 of these subdivision regulations.
Approval by this summary procedure shall be enclosed on the plat or on
the instrument of conveyance in lieu of a plat, and such approval shall
§ 294-12 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 294-14
1:358
§ 294-15. Acceptance of unapproved streets.
The City Council of the City of Española may not locate, construct or
accept any street dedication until the street dedication is first submitted
to the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval or disapproval. If
disapproved by the Commission, the street dedication may be approved by
a two-thirds vote of all the members of the City Council of the municipality
having jurisdiction or of the Board of County Commissioners having
jurisdiction. A street dedication accepted by the Planning and Zoning
Commission or by a two-thirds vote of all the members of the City Council
or for the Board of County Commissioners having jurisdiction shall have the
same status as any other public street.
§ 294-16. Appeals from decision of Planning and Zoning
Commission.
be conclusive evidence of the approval of the City Planning and Zoning
Commission.
A. Any person or persons or any officer of the City of Española jointly or
severally aggrieved by any order or determination of the Planning and
Zoning Commission, its agents or employees may submit to the City
Council a petition duly verified, such petition constituting an appeal,
setting forth his dissatisfaction with the order or determination, in
whole or in part, specifying the grounds for appeal. Appeal shall be
taken within 10 days of the date on which the action appealed from was
taken.
B. The Planning and Zoning Commission, upon notification of the
submission, shall forthwith transmit to the City Council all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken,
or certified copies of the same.
C. The Planning and Zoning Commission, upon notification of said
submission, shall forthwith transmit to the City Council all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken,
or certified copies of the same. The City Council shall hear and decide
such appeal. When an appeal alleges that there is error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination by an administrative official,
commission or committee or in any order, resolution, or rule relating to
subdivision regulation, the City Council, by a two-thirds vote of all its
members, may:
(1) Authorize, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards, special exceptions to the terms of the
subdivision ordinance, resolution or regulation:
(a) Which are not contrary to the public interest;
(b) Where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
subdivision ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship; and
§ 294-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-16
1:359
Chapter 298
TAXATION
(c) So that the spirit of the subdivision ordinance is observed and
substantial justice done; or
(2) In conformity with NMSA 1978 §§ 3-19-1 through 3-19-12 and
§§ 3-21-1 through 3-21-6:
(a) Reverse any order, requirements, decision or determination of
an administrative official, commissioner or committee;
(b) Decide in favor of the appellant; or
(c) Make any change in any order, requirement, decision or
determination of an administrative official, commission or
committee.
D. Appeal to the City Council shall be deemed to constitute a stay of legal
proceedings until said appeal is heard and decided by the City Council.
E. The aggrieved party may commence an action in the District Court to
vacate and set aside the order or determination of the City Council on
the ground that it is unlawful or unreasonable. The court shall
determine the issue from the evidence introduced, but the plaintiff has
the burden of establishing a prima facie case. The court may grant
relief by injunction, mandamus or any other extraordinary remedy. In
any action, the complaint shall be served with the summons. Appeal
may be taken from the judgment as in other civil cases. The trial shall
be de novo and shall be governed by the rules of civil procedure of the
District Court. Except as provided in this section, all processes shall be
served and the practice and rules of evidence shall be the same as in
civil actions.
F. Appeal to the District Court shall be filed within 30 days after final
action by the City Council. Appeals which are not timely filed shall be
dismissed by the District Court.
§ 294-16 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 294-16
1:360
ARTICLE I
Occupancy Tax
[Adopted 12-17-1996 by Ord. No. 558 (Ch. 90, Art. II, of the Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 298-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BOARD — The advisory board established in this article to make
recommendations to the City Council, keep minutes of its proceedings
and submit its recommendations, correspondence and other pertinent
documents to the City Council.
GROSS TAXABLE RENT — The total amount of rent paid for lodging, not
including the state gross receipts tax or local sales taxes.
LODGING — The transaction of furnishing rooms or other accommodations
by a vendor to a vendee who for rent uses, possesses or has the right to
use or possess any room or other units of accommodations in or at a taxable
premises.
LODGINGS — The rooms or other accommodations furnished by a vendor
to a vendee by a taxable service of lodging.
OCCUPANCY TAX — The tax on lodging authorized by the Lodgers' Tax Act,
NMSA 1978 § 3-38-13 et seq.
PERSON — A corporation, firm, other body corporate, partnership,
association or individual. The term "person" includes an executor,
administrator, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed according
to law and acting in a representative capacity, but does not include the
United States of America, the state, any corporation, department,
instrumentality or agency of the federal government or the state
government, or any political subdivision of the state.
RENT — The consideration received by a vendor in money, credits, property
or other consideration valued in money for lodgings subject to an occupancy
tax authorized in the Lodgers' Tax Act.
TAXABLE PREMISES — A hotel, apartment, apartment hotel, apartment
house, lodge, lodginghouse, rooming house, motor hotel, guesthouse, guest
ranch, ranch resort, guest resort, mobile home, motor court, auto camp,
trailer court, trailer camp, trailer park, tourist camp, cabin or other
premises for lodging.
TOURIST — A person who travels for the purpose of business, pleasure or
culture to a municipality or county imposing an occupancy tax.
TOURIST-RELATED EVENTS — Events that are planned for, promoted to
and attended by tourists.
§ 298-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-1
1:361
TOURIST-RELATED FACILITIES AND ATTRACTIONS — Facilities and
attractions that are intended to be used by or visited by tourists.
TOURIST-RELATED TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS — Transportation
systems that provide transportation for tourists to and from tourist-related
facilities, attractions and events.
VENDEE — A natural person to whom lodgings are furnished in the exercise
of the taxable service of lodging.
VENDOR — A person furnished lodgings in the exercise of the taxable
service of lodging.
§ 298-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to impose a tax which will be borne by
persons using commercial lodging accommodations, which tax will provide
revenues for the purpose of advertising, publicizing and promoting touristrelated
attractions, facilities and events, and acquiring, establishing and
operating tourist-related facilities, attractions or transportation systems, as
authorized in § 298-16.
§ 298-3. Penalty.
Any person who violates the provisions of this article for a failure to pay
the tax, to remit proceeds thereof to the City, to properly account for
any lodging and tax proceeds pertaining thereto or for violating the
confidentiality provisions of § 298-14 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article III, Violations and Penalties, § 1-19.
§ 298-4. Imposition and amount.
There is hereby imposed an occupancy tax of 5% of gross taxable rent for
lodging within the City paid to vendors.
§ 298-5. Licensing.
A. Required. No vendor shall engage in the business of providing lodging
in the City who has not first obtained a license as provided in this
section.
B. Application; contents. Applicants for a vendor's license shall submit an
application to the City Clerk stating:
(1) The name of the vendor, including identification of any person, as
defined in this article, who owns or operates, or both owns and
operates, a place of lodging and the name or trade names under
which the vendor proposes to do business and the post office
address thereof.
(2) A description of the facilities, including the number of rooms and
the usual schedule of rates therefor.
§ 298-1 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 298-5
1:362
§ 298-6. Exemptions.
The occupancy tax shall not apply:
(3) A description of other facilities provided by the vendor or others to
users of the lodgings, such as a restaurant, bar, cleaning, laundry,
courtesy car or others, and a statement identifying the license
issued, to whom issued, the authority issuing and the period for
which issued. If applicable, the applicant also shall provide the
identification number provided by the Bureau of Revenue of the
state.
(4) The nature of the business of the vendor and to what extent, if any,
his business is exempt from the tax levied by the provisions of this
article.
(5) Other information reasonably necessary to effect a determination
of eligibility for such license.
C. Review and granting of application. The City Clerk shall review
applications for licenses within 10 days of receipt thereof and grant the
license in due course if the applicant is doing business subject to the
lodgers' tax.
D. Appeals. An applicant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the City
Clerk may appeal the decision to the City Council by written notice to
the City Clerk of such appeal, to be made within 15 days of the date of
the decision of the City Clerk on the application. The matter shall be
referred to the City Council for a hearing at a regular or special
meeting in the usual course of business. The decision of the City
Council made thereof shall be expressed in writing and be
communicated in the same manner as the decision of the City Clerk is
transmitted. The action of the City Council shall be deemed final.
E. Issuance upon favorable ruling. If the City Council finds for the
applicant, the City Clerk shall issue the appropriate license or other
notice conforming to the decision made by the City Council.
A. If a vendee:
(1) Has been a permanent resident of the taxable premises for a period
of at least 30 consecutive days; or
(2) Enters into or has entered into a written agreement for lodgings at
the taxable premises for a period of at least 30 consecutive days;
B. If the rent paid by the vendee is less than $2 a day;
C. To lodging accommodations at institutions of the federal government,
the state or any political subdivision thereof;
§ 298-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-6
1:363
§ 298-7. Collection and reporting procedures.
§ 298-8. Records to be maintained by vendor.
The vendor shall maintain adequate records of facilities subject to the
tax and of proceeds received for the use thereof. Such records shall be
maintained in City, shall be open to the inspection of the City during
reasonable hours and shall be retained for three years.
§ 298-9. Enforcement.
D. To lodging accommodations at religious, charitable, educational or
philanthropic institutions, including, without limitation, such
accommodations at summer camps operated by such institutions;
E. To clinics, hospitals or other medical facilities;
F. To privately owned and operated convalescent homes, or homes for the
aged, infirm, indigent or chronically ill; or
G. If the taxable premises do not have at least three rooms or three other
units of accommodation for lodging.
A. Every vendor providing lodging shall collect the tax thereon on behalf
of the City and shall act as a trustee therefor.
B. The tax shall be collected from vendees and shall be charged separately
from the rent fixed by the vendor for the lodgings.
C. Each vendor licensed under this article shall be liable to the City for the
tax provided in this article on the rent paid for lodging at his respective
place of business.
D. Each vendor shall make a report by the 25th day of each month, on
forms provided by the City Clerk, of the receipts for lodging in the
preceding calendar month, and shall submit the proceeds of the
lodgers' tax to the City and include sufficient information to enable the
City to audit the reports, which shall be verified on oath by the vendor.
A. An action to enforce this article may be brought by:
(1) The Attorney General or the District Attorney in the county of
jurisdiction; or
(2) A vendor who is collecting the proceeds of an occupancy tax in the
county of jurisdiction.
B. A district court may issue a writ of mandamus or order an injunction or
other appropriate remedy to enforce the provisions of this article.
C. The court shall award costs and reasonable attorneys' fees to the
prevailing party in a court action to enforce the provisions of this
article.
§ 298-6 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 298-10
1:364
§ 298-10. Liability for payment; failure to make return; collection of
delinquencies; occupancy tax as lien.
§ 298-11. Refunds.
If any person believes he has made payment of any lodgers' tax in excess of
that for which he was liable, he may claim a refund thereof by directing to
the City Clerk, no later than 90 days from the date the payment was made,
a written claim for refund. Every claim for refund shall state the nature of
the person's complaint and the affirmative relief requested. The City Clerk
shall allow the claim in whole or in part or may deny it. Refunds of tax and
interest erroneously paid and amounting to $100 or more may be made only
with the approval of the City Council.
§ 298-12. Vendor audits.
A. Every vendor is liable for the payment of the proceeds of any occupancy
tax that the vendor failed to remit to the City, whether due to his failure
to collect the tax or otherwise. He shall be liable for the tax plus a civil
penalty equal to the greater of 10% of the amount not remitted or $100.
The City Clerk shall give the delinquent vendor written notice of the
delinquency, which notice shall be mailed to the vendor's local address.
B. If payments are not received within 15 days of the mailing of the notice,
the City may bring an action in law or equity in the District Court for the
collection of any amounts due, including, without limitation, penalties
thereon and interest on the unpaid principal at a rate not exceeding 1%
a month. If the City attempts collection through an attorney or the City
Attorney for any purpose with regard to this article, the vendor shall be
liable to the City for all costs and fees paid to the attorney or City
Attorney, and all other expenses incurred in connection therewith.
C. The occupancy tax imposed by the City constitutes a lien in favor of the
City upon the personal and real property of the vendor providing
lodgings. The lien may be enforced as provided in NMSA 1978 §§ 3-36-1
through 3-36-7. Priority of the lien shall be determined from the date of
filing.
D. Under process or order of court, no person shall sell the property of a
vendor without first ascertaining from the City Clerk or Treasurer the
amount of any occupancy tax due the City. Any occupancy tax due the
City shall be paid from the proceeds of the sale before payment is made
to the judgment creditor or any other person with a claim on the
proceeds of the sale.
A. The City Council shall conduct random audits to verify full payment of
occupancy tax receipts.
B. The City Council shall determine each year the number of vendors
within the City to audit.
§ 298-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-12
1:365
§ 298-13. Financial reporting.
§ 298-14. Confidentiality of return and audit.
It is unlawful for any employee of the City to reveal to any individual other
than another employee of the City any information contained in the return
or audit of any taxpayer, including vendors subject to this article, except
to a court of competent jurisdiction in response to an order thereof in an
action relating to taxes to which the City is a party, and in which information
sought is material to the inquiry; to the taxpayer himself or to his authorized
representative; and in such manner, for statistical purposes, the information
revealed is not identified as applicable to any individual taxpayer.
§ 298-15. Administration of monies collected.
The City Council shall administer the lodgers' tax monies collected. The
Mayor shall appoint a five-member advisory board that consists of two
members who are owners or operators of lodgings subject to the occupancy
tax within the City, two members who are owners or operators of industries
located within the City that primarily provide services or products to
tourists and one member who is a resident of the City and represents the
general public. The board shall advise the City Council on expenditure of
funds authorized under § 298-16 for advertising, publicizing and promoting
tourist attractions and facilities in the City and surrounding area.
§ 298-16. Eligible uses of proceeds.
The City may use the proceeds from the lodgers' tax to defray the costs of:
C. The audits may be performed by the City Clerk or by any other designee
of the City Council. A copy of the audits shall be filed annually with the
Local Government Division of the Department of Finance and
Administration.
A. The City Council shall furnish to the advisory board that portion of any
proposed budget report or audit filed or received by the City Council
pursuant to either NMSA 1978, Ch. 6, Art. 6 (NMSA 1978 § 6-6-1 et
seq.), or the Audit Act (NMSA 1978 § 12-6-1 et seq.) that relates to
expenditure of occupancy tax funds within 10 days of the filing or
receipt of such proposed budget, report or audit by the City Council.
B. The City Council shall report to the Local Government Division of the
Department of Finance and Administration on a quarterly basis any
expenditure of occupancy tax funds pursuant to NMSA 1978 §§ 3-38-15
and 3-38-21, and shall furnish a copy of this report to the advisory board
when it is filed with the Division.
A. Collecting and otherwise administering the tax, including the
performance of audits required by the Lodgers' Tax Act (NMSA 1978
§ 3-38-13 et seq.) pursuant to guidelines issued by the Department of
Finance and Administration;
§ 298-12 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 298-16
1:366
B. Establishing, operating, purchasing, constructing, otherwise acquiring,
reconstructing, extending, improving, equipping, furnishing or
acquiring real property or any interest in real property for the site or
grounds for tourist-related facilities, attractions or transportation
systems of the City or the county;
C. The principal of and interest on any prior redemption premiums due in
connection with and any other charges pertaining to revenue bonds
authorized by NMSA 1978 § 3-38-23 or 3-38-24;
D. Advertising, publicizing and promoting tourist-related attractions,
facilities and events of the City or county and tourist facilities or
attractions within the area;
E. Providing police and fire protection and sanitation service for touristrelated
events, facilities and attractions located in the City; or
F. Any combination of the foregoing purposes or transactions stated in
this section, but for no other City purpose.
§ 298-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-16
1:367
Chapter 300
UTILITIES
§ 298-16 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 298-16
1:368
Part 1
General Provisions
§ 300-1. Short title.
This chapter, as amended from time to time may be cited as the "Utility
Ordinance of the City of Española" or simply as the "Utility Ordinance."
§ 300-2. Statutory authority; enactment.
The City Council of the City of Española, New Mexico, pursuant to the
laws of the State of New Mexico (NMSA 1978 §§ 3-18-25, 3-26-3, 3-18-22),
hereby ordains and enacts into law the following regulations.
§ 300-3. Jurisdiction.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply within the corporate limits of the
City of Española, as well as any extraterritorial zone or jurisdiction that is
or may be put in place.
State law references: NMSA 1978 §§ 3-27-3, 3-26-1.
§ 300-4. General purposes.
The regulations contained herein are provided to promote the proper
management of land, structures, land and structures in combination, as well
as water lying within, above, below and around the jurisdiction of the City
of Española, and to ensure the protection of the health, safety and welfare
of the general public
§ 300-5. Applicability to public lands.
This chapter shall apply to all lands, and their associated rights, including
surface and subsurface water rights, lying within, above, below and around
the City of Española, including lands belonging to other public agencies,
organizations and groups, including those belonging or falling under the
control of federal, state or other local governments.
§ 300-6. Interpretations.
A. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare.
Questions or conflicts regarding the actual and/or intended meanings of
terms, sections or articles of this chapter shall be reviewed utilizing the
standards set forth by the New Mexico Standards and Specifications for
Public Works, American Public Works Association, American Water
Works Association, Uniform Plumbing Code, Uniform Building Code
and the Uniform Zoning Code as published by the International
Conference of Building Officials.
§ 300-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-6
1:369
§ 300-7. Conflicts with other regulations.
It is not intended that this chapter interfere with, abrogate, annul or repeal
any ordinance, rules or regulations previously adopted and not in conflict
with any of the provisions of this chapter or which shall be adopted,
pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises, nor is it
intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any
easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties, except that
where such use is in direct violation of this chapter, except as provided
for in § 300-8. Should a conflict arise with another ordinance, law, rule or
regulation, the stricter of the two shall apply.
§ 300-8. Repeal.
This chapter does hereby repeal Ordinance No. 2001-01 and all
amendments thereto.
§ 300-9. through § 300-25. (Reserved)
B. Additional interpretive assistance can and may be garnered from the
Española Municipal Code Appendix C.20
C. Zoning, the Zoning Encyclopedia, the Zoning Dictionary and the Zoning
Compendium, all published by Lehman & Associates and known and
referenced more commonly as the "Zoning Trilogy," as well as those
terms utilized and listed in the Española Municipal Zoning Ordinance.
Each of these documents and publications shall be maintained and kept
on file for public review in the Planning and Zoning office.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 350, Zoning and Development.
§ 300-6 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 300-9
1:370
Part 2
Municipal Infrastructure
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 300-26. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Part 2, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
A.S.T.M. — The American Society for Testing Materials.
BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter by Standard Methods
procedure in five days at 20°C. expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
BRANCH WASTEWATER LINE — A wastewater line that receives
wastewater from a relatively small area and discharges into a main
wastewater lines serving more than one branch wastewater line.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
wastewater lines, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building
wall.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The building official or other authorized person
charged with permitting the construction and development of buildings and/
or other structures within the City of Española.
BUILDING SERVICE — A saddle or Y connection to lateral or branch
wastewater lines for the connection of a building lateral.
BUILDING WATER LINES — Asystem of pipelines connecting a building's
water service system. The building water lines begin at the water meter and
extend on throughout the building itself.
BUILDING WASTEWATER LINE — A gravity-flow pipeline connecting a
building wastewater collection system to a lateral or branch wastewater
line. The building wastewater line may begin at the outside of the building's
foundation wall or some distance (such as two to 10 feet) from the wall,
upon approval from the Wastewater Resources Manager and the Planning
and Zoning Department.
BUILDING WASTEWATER COLLECTION SYSTEM — All of the wastewater
drainage pipes and their hardware that connect plumbing fixtures inside or
adjacent to a building to the sanitary wastewater lines. This includes traps,
vents and cleanouts.
CLASS I COMMERCIAL — Small offices and businesses with 15 or fewer
employees, such as law firms, realtors, architects, doctor/dentist offices,
surveyors, insurance agencies, abstract offices, gift shops, curio shops,
§ 300-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-26
1:371
clothing shops, galleries, bookstores, gas stations, variety stores, grocery
stores, and liquor stores.
CLASS II COMMERCIAL — Food and/or beverage establishments, theaters,
businesses with more than 15 employees, bed-and-breakfasts,
condominiums, and townhomes.
CLASS III COMMERCIAL — Apartments, laundromats, car washes, hotels,
motels, schools, and government buildings/offices.
COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the chemical oxidation of organic and inorganic matter under standard
laboratory procedure by the dichromate reflux method expressed in
milligrams per liter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The person charged with the official
duties of enforcing all noncriminal codes within the City of Española,
including but not limited to this chapter, Utilities, and its amendments.
COMBINED WASTEWATER LINE — A wastewater line receiving both
surface runoff and sewage.
ENFORCEMENT — There shall be three modes of enforcement: payment
of administrative fees; discontinuance of water service; and prosecution of
petty misdemeanors through the Municipal Court.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of
produce.
GREASE — A substance that is considered to be the residues of fats,
detergents, waxes, free fatty acids, calcium and magnesium soaps, mineral
oils and certain other nonfatty materials which tend to separate from water
and coagulate as floatable scum.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR — A receptacle designed to collect and retain
grease and fatty substances usually found in kitchens or from similar
wastes. It is installed in the drainage system between the kitchen or other
point of production of the waste and the building wastewater collection line.
HEALTH OFFICER — Any person or his authorized representative so
appointed by the City or any state environmental improvement agency
representative charged with approval or inspection of public or private
wastewater facilities.
INDUSTRIAL LIQUID WASTE — All waterborne solids, liquids or gaseous
wastes resulting from any industrial, manufacturing or food processing
operation or process, or from the development of any natural resource or
any mixture of these with water or domestic sewage as distinct from normal
domestic sewage.
INGRESS/EGRESS — Right of entry and exit by the City onto private
property for the purpose of installation and City-owned infrastructure.
§ 300-26 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 300-26
1:372
INTERFERENCE WITH ANY WASTEWATER FACILITY — Any condition or
combination of conditions which causes degradation of the operational
efficiency of a wastewater facility.
IRRIGATION METER — An additional meter installed primarily for
irrigation or other outdoor uses such as, but not limited to, pool or spa filling
or vehicle washing.
MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE — Any utility under the direct control of
the City of Española for the use by the citizens of the City of Española.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface water or groundwater.
NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER — Waterborne wastes normally
discharging from the sanitary conveniences of buildings, including
apartment houses and hotels, office buildings, factories and institutions,
free from storm surface water and industrial wastes. Normal domestic
wastewater shall mean "normal" for the City.
PERSON — Any individual, firm company, political or governmental
subdivision, association, society, corporation or group.
pH — The logarithm, to the base 10, of the reciprocal of the weight of
hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Paved or unpaved streets, alleys, drainage or
other private easements and lined or unlined drainage channels which
comprise or impact the local or municipal storm drainage system.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public wastewater lines, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch
in any dimension.
PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE — Water and/or wastewater lines in which
all owners of abutting properties shall have equal rights or access and is
controlled by public authority.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Paved or unpaved streets, alleys, drainage, or
other public easements and lined and unlined drainage channels which
comprise the municipal storm drainage system.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — The owner, manager, supervisor, or person in
charge of the property, facility or operation during the period of time the
violations are observed.
SANITARY WASTEWATER LINES — Wastewater lines that carry water and
water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial
plants and institutions to treatment or disposal facilities.
SETTLEABLE SOLIDS — Those solids, which settle during a preselected
period time, expressed as milliliters per liter of sample.
SLUDGE — Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity or flow exceeds for any
§ 300-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-26
1:373
periods of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
STANDARD METHODS — The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest
edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater," as prepared, approved and published jointly by
the American Public Health Association and the American Water Works
Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation, American Water
Wastewater Association and the New Mexico Public Works Council.
STORM WASTEWATER LINE — A wastewater line that carries storm water
and surface water, street wash and other wash waters or drainage, but
excludes domestic wastewater and industrial wastes. Also called "storm
drain."
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
UNPOLLUTED PROCESS WATER — Any water or waste containing none
of the following: emulsified grease or oil; acid or alkali, phenols or other
substances imparting taste and odor to receiving water; toxic substances in
suspension, colloidal state or solution; and noxious or odorous gases.
WASTEWATER — The used water and water-carried solids from homes that
flow in wastewater lines to a treatment plant.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — The structures, equipment and processes
required to collect, transport and treat wastewater and dispose of the
effluent.
WASTEWATER LINES — Pipes or conduits to carry wastewater or sludge.
WASTEWATER RESOURCES MANAGER — The director of the Wastewater
Department of the City or his authorized representative.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITIES — An arrangement of devices and
structures for treating wastewater and sludge; sometimes synonymous with
"waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant."
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
W.P.C.F. — The Water Pollution Control Federation.
§ 300-27. Circumstances requiring connection with municipal
infrastructure.
The owner, agent in charge or occupant of any building or lot adjoining
a street or alley where municipal infrastructure is laid or whose legal
property line is within 300 feet of existing municipal infrastructure and
within the jurisdiction of the City of Española shall install proper plumbing
as required, inspected and approved by the Public Works Director of the
City and shall connect with such plumbing to the municipal infrastructure.
§ 300-26 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 300-27
1:374
State law reference: municipal authority to require wastewater lines
connection, NMSA 1978 § 3-26-3.
§ 300-28. Notice of requirement to connect to municipal
infrastructure.
After determination that a property is within the three-hundred-foot limit
stated in § 300-27, the owner, agent, person in charge or the occupant
shall be sent a notice by the City Code Enforcement advising them of such
requirement to connect to municipal infrastructure. Such notice shall be
sent via certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known mailing
address of each of the parties concerned.
State law reference: similar provisions, NMSA 1978 § 3-18-22.
§ 300-29. Procedure upon non-compliance with notice.
If, after 60 days upon receipt of the notice referred to in § 300-28, the
owner, agent, or person in charge shall fail or refuse to make the
connection, installation or construction, the City shall have the right to
impose a fine of $500 per § 300-101. This right shall include the right of
ingress and egress to inspect if such work is being performed by the owner
or responsible party.
State law reference: similar provisions, NMSA 1978 § 3-18-22.
§ 300-30. Connections; charges and permit required; issuance of
permits.
§ 300-31. (Reserved)
§ 300-32. Application for municipal infrastructure.
All applications for the use of municipal infrastructure service connections
shall be submitted to the Utility Billing Division of the City of Española. The
owner, or his designated agent, of the property to be benefited shall submit
such application.
A. No person shall tie into, make installation with or in any way connect to
municipal infrastructure lines of the City without first paying the
connection charges as required in this Part 2 and obtaining the
required connection permit from the City Planning and Zoning
Department.
B. Permits shall be issued in the name of the owner of the property which
is to be connected, but no person shall tie into, make installation with or
in any way connect to any municipal infrastructure line of the City.
§ 300-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-33
1:375
§ 300-33. Notice of decision on application.
The City shall decide to approve or deny the application for municipal
water/wastewater services within 30 days of submission of such application.
§ 300-34. Appeal from denial.
§ 300-35. City Council's right to refuse or suspend.
The City Council may refuse or suspend the furnishing of municipal water
and wastewater connections. Notice of the time and place of such hearing
shall be published at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing.
A. Generally. Any applicant whose application for municipal infrastructure
service connections has been denied shall be entitled to a hearing
before the City Manager as specified in this section.
B. Procedure. Any applicant who wishes to have a hearing following denial
of municipal infrastructure services shall submit a request for a
hearing, in writing, to the City Manager within 10 working days of
receipt of the decision denying such application. The request shall state
the reasons it is believed the denial is unwarranted.
C. The City Manager shall hold a hearing within 10 working days after
receipt of the request. The City Manager shall provide the applicant
notice of the time and place of the hearing at least five working days
before such hearing. Notices shall be in writing and shall be delivered
via registered or certified mail and addressed to the applicant at the
address indicated in the application. A separate letter also delivered via
registered or certified mail shall be sent to the legal property owner, if
different from the applicant. The City Manager shall render his
decision, in writing, within five working days of the hearing to the
applicant and property owner, if necessary.
D. Further appeal to the City Council. The decision of the City Manager to
deny municipal infrastructure to the applicant may be appealed to the
City Council. To initiate an appeal before the City Council, the applicant
must submit a written appeal delivered to the City Clerk within 15
working days from the date of the City Manager's notice of denial.
E. City Council public hearing. The City Council shall hold a public hearing
on the appeal within 30 days from receipt of the request for further
appeal. Notice of public hearing shall be given to the applicant and
legal owner at least 15 days prior to such hearing. The City Council
shall review the City Manager's written justification for denying the
approval and render its decision at the conclusion of the public hearing.
A written decision of such action shall be prepared and mailed to the
applicant and legal property owner via certified or registered mail. In
the event the property owner or his legal designee is not present, the
hearing will be tabled and the City Manager's decision will be upheld.
§ 300-33 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 300-36
1:376
§ 300-36. through § 300-45. (Reserved)
§ 300-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-36
1:377

ARTICLE II
Water Service
§ 300-46. Public water lines.
A. Permits required. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public water
lines or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a proper City
permit from the Planning and Zoning Department and Water
Department.
B. Permit applications; fees. The owner or his agent shall submit a permit
application for connection to municipal water lines. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Planning and
Zoning Department. A permit and inspection fee based on classification
for connection of residential, commercial and industrial lines shall be
paid to the City at the time the application is filed.
C. Costs; indemnification. All costs and expenses incidental to the
installation and connection of the new infrastructure lines shall be
borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City against any loss
or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building infrastructure.
D. Separate water lines required. Separate and independent water lines
shall be provided for every building.
E. Use of old building water lines. Upon failure of building distribution
lines, the owner(s) shall replace such lines with lines of modem design,
as appropriate and approved by the Planning and Zoning Department
and the Water Service's Foreman, at the owner's expense.
F. Easements. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the lot or lots to
be connected to provide adequate easement(s) to the City in order to
provide for the proper installation of water lines.
G. Design requirements. The size, slope, alignment, and materials of
construction of building water lines and the methods to be used in
excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, backfilling and
compacting the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of
the City and state.
H. General connection procedures. The connection of the building water
lines into the municipal water lines shall conform to the requirements of
the current Uniform Building Code and Uniform Plumbing Code or
other applicable rules and regulations of the City, and the New Mexico
Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction. The Public
Works Director or his designee must approve any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials prior to installation.
§ 300-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-46
1:379
§ 300-47. through § 300-49. (Reserved)
§ 300-50. Water rights fees.
§ 300-51. (Reserved)
I. Final inspection. The applicant for the municipal water connection shall
notify the Utility Department when the constructed building water
line(s) are ready for inspection and connection to the municipal water
line(s). The connection shall be made under the supervision of the City.
A. No new municipal water services application shall be approved by the
City until the required subsurface water rights have been paid for. The
applicant for water services shall be required to provide payment of a
fee as part of the application fee for municipal utility services.
B. All future municipal water services which use larger amounts of water,
such as apartment complexes/condominiums, motels, mobile home
parks, subdivisions and others within the City's corporate limits, will be
provided only after payment is collected in full. The developer shall be
responsible for full payment.
C. All owners of water rights within the City corporate limits will be
encouraged to continue using their irrigation rights beneficially. In
those cases where such rights are not being or will not be used in the
future, owners are encouraged to sell them to the City. Compensation
shall be based on the prevailing fair market value on water.
D. The City Council shall establish a Water Rights Trust Fund in an
interest-bearing account, which shall be utilized solely for the purchase
of water rights for the beneficial use of the City of Española.
§ 300-46 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 300-51
1:380
ARTICLE III
Wastewater Service
§ 300-52. Notice to connect to wastewater lines.
§ 300-53. Circumstances that require septic tank use.
The owner, agent in charge or occupant of any building on a lot or land
adjoining a street or alley where no wastewater lines are laid but where
water pipes are laid shall construct and install and connect to an approved
septic tank as reviewed, inspected and approved in this chapter. This
requirement does not eliminate the need for water line service connection
if such infrastructure is available as delineated in § 300-27.
§ 300-54. Private wastewater collection and storage.
A. When service connections to municipal infrastructure are required
utilizing wastewater lines as required in § 300-27, a notice advising the
owner or agent in charge of any buildings of such requirement shall be
mailed via certified, registered mail. Such notice shall state the address
in question, the location of the nearest infrastructure line and the
estimated cost if municipal crews are utilized. The notice shall further
state that the owner shall have 30 days within which to initiate the
service connections or be considered to be in violation with this
chapter.
B. It is unlawful to fail or refuse to make the wastewater lines connection,
installation or construction required pursuant to NMSA 1978 § 3-18-22.
A. Permit required. Before commencement of construction of a private
sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit
signed by the New Mexico Environment Department, Wastewater
Resources Manager and the Planning and Zoning Department. The
application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the
City which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications,
and other information as are deemed necessary by the Building
Inspector, Wastewater Resources Manager and the Planning and
Zoning Department. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the
City at the time the application is filed. The fee shall include an
inspection fee of $30. Reinspection shall be subject to the inspection fee
of $50 for each inspection conducted to any system.
B. Inspection. A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not
become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of
the Wastewater Collection Foreman or his designee. He shall be
allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction. The applicant
for the permit shall give a one-day notice to the Wastewater Collection
Foreman when the work is ready for final inspection and before any
underground portions are covered. The Wastewater Collection Foreman
or his designee shall be on site for inspection.
§ 300-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-54
1:381
§ 300-55. Public wastewater lines.
C. Design requirements. The type, capacities, location and layout of a
private sewage disposal system shall comply with all requirements and
recommendations of the New Mexico Environment Department. No
permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system
employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot
is less than 32,670 square feet (3/4 acre). No septic tank or cesspool
shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
D. Conversion to public wastewater lines. As provided in § 300-27,
property served by a private sewage disposal system shall directly
connect to the public wastewater lines. Such connections shall be in
compliance with this Part 2, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar
private sewage disposal facilities shall be completely drained, filled
with clean soil, sand or gravel and abandoned. The Wastewater
Collection Foreman, his legal designee and the Wastewater Resources
Manager, prior to service within the municipal collection system, shall
inspect all connections and abandoned facilities. All maintenance costs
shall be maintained by the owner.
E. Operation; maintenance. The owner shall operate and maintain private
sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no
expense to the City, from the wastewater main collection line to the
residence and/or structures.
F. Chapter not to limit other reasonable requirements. No statement
contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with any
additional reasonable requirements that may be imposed by the
Wastewater Collection Foreman, Planning and Zoning Official,
Wastewater Resources Manager or official from any State of New
Mexico agency or department having jurisdiction over such systems.
A. Permits required. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public
wastewater lines or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a
written permit from the Planning and Zoning Department and Utility
Departments.
B. Permit categories; applications; fees. There shall be two permit
categories for residential service and three categories for commercial
service and for service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
In all cases, the owner or his agent shall make application on a form
furnished by the City. The permit application shall be supplemented by
any plans, specifications or other information which may be necessary
in reviewing the plans for permit by the Planning and Zoning
Department. A permit and inspection fee for a residential, other or
industrial wastewater lines permit shall be paid to the City at the time
the application is filed, as provided in § 300-54.
§ 300-54 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 300-55
1:382
C. Costs; indemnification. All costs incidental to the installation and
connection of the new infrastructure lines shall be borne by the owner.
The owner shall indemnify the City against any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the municipal
infrastructure.
D. Separate wastewater lines required. Separate and independent
wastewater lines shall be required for every building.
E. Use of old building wastewater lines. Upon failure of old building
wastewater lines, the owner(s) shall replace such lines with lines of
modem design, minimum of four-inches in diameter, as appropriate and
approved by the Planning and Zoning Department and the Wastewater
Manager, at the owner's expense.
F. Existing or insufficient easements. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner of the lot or lots to be connected to provide adequate
easement(s) to the City in order to provide for the proper installation of
utility lines. A minimum of a fifteen-foot easement will be required.
G. Design requirements; compliance with Codes. The size, slope,
alignment, and materials of construction of building wastewater lines
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, backfilling and compacting the trench shall all conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable
rules and regulations of the City and state. A minimum of a four-inchsize
service connection must be made to a minimum of an eight-inch
wastewater collection line.
H. Safety and protective measures for excavations. All excavations for
municipal wastewater line installation shall be adequately guarded with
barricades and lights to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City. A
traffic control plan shall be presented with all applications for sanitary
wastewater lines construction to be conducted within a public right-ofway.
I. Connection of surface runoff or groundwater to public wastewater
lines. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, areaway
drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to building
wastewater lines or building drains, which in tum are connected
directly or indirectly to municipal wastewater lines.
J. Gravity flow or lift. Whenever possible, the building wastewater lines
shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement
floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public wastewater lines, sanitary sewage carried by
such building drain shall be lifted by an approved mechanical pump and
discharged to the sanitary wastewater lines.
§ 300-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-55
1:383
§ 300-56. (Reserved)
§ 300-57. Use of public wastewater lines.
K. Connection procedures generally. The connection of the building
wastewater lines into the municipal wastewater lines shall conform to
the requirements of the current Uniform Building Code and Uniform
Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the City or
the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M.
and the New Mexico Standard Specifications for Public Works
Construction. All such connections shall be made gastight and
watertight. The Wastewater Resources Manager, before installation,
must approve any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials.
L. Final inspection. The applicants for the municipal wastewater
connection permit shall notify the Wastewater Resources Manager
when the building wastewater lines are ready for inspection and
connection to the municipal wastewater lines. The connection shall be
made under the supervision of the Wastewater Collection Foreman,
Wastewater Manager or his representative.
A. Prohibited discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted
industrial process waters into any sanitary wastewater lines.
B. Prohibited substances. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described liquids or wastes to any and
all sanitary wastewater lines:
(1) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas, volatile or nonvolatile substance.
(2) Any waters or wastes, containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, that may injure or interfere with any wastewater
facility, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the
wastewater treatment works, including but not limited to cyanide
in excess of two mg/l such as cadmium, in the waste as discharged
to the public wastewater lines.
(3) Any herbicides and pesticides.
(4) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or higher than
9.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the
wastewater facility.
(5) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in wastewater lines or other
§ 300-55 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 300-57
1:384
interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facility
such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
ungrounded garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshing, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc.,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(6) Any amount of the following heavy metals:
Antimony
Arsenic
Barium
Beryllium
Bismuth
Boron
Cadmium
Chromium (Hexa)
Chromium (Tri)
Cobalt
Copper
Iron
Lead
Manganese
Mercury
Molybdenum
Mercury
Nickel
Rhenium
Selenium
Silver
Strontium
Tellurium
Tin
Uranium
Zinc
(7) Dilution of toxic materials and heavy metals in lieu of removal is not
acceptable.
C. Discharges subject to regulation. No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or
wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the Wastewater Resources
§ 300-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-57
1:385
Manager, that such wastes can harm the wastewater facility or
equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can
otherwise endanger life, limb, or public property or constitute a
nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes,
the Wastewater Resources Manager will consider such factors as the
materials of construction of the wastewater lines, nature and capaCity
of the wastewater treatment works and other pertinent factors. The
substances which must be considered include, but are not limited to,
the following:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F. (65°
C.).
(2) Any water or waste containing fats, grease, wax or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/liter or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between 32° F. and 150° F. (0° C. and 56° C.).
(3) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The Wastewater
Collection Foreman will not allow installation and operation of any
garbage grinder larger than those normally manufactured and sold
for residential and noncommercial use without specific review and
approval.
(4) Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron, pickling wastes
or concentrated plating solutions cannot be discharged into the
wastewater facility unless completely neutralized and approved by
the Wastewater Resources Manager for discharge.
(5) Any waters or wastes containing reducing substances of an organic
or inorganic nature, toxic and nontoxic, which exert an immediate
chlorine demand cannot be discharged into the wastewater facility
if discharge of agents will prevent the achievement of an adequate
chlorine residual in the effluent of the wastewater treatment works.
(6) Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odorproducing
substances in concentrations exceeding limits
established by the Wastewater Resources Manager after treatment
of the composite sewage to meet the requirements of the state,
federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge
to the receiving waters.
(7) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentrations as may exceed limits established by the Wastewater
Resources Manager in compliance with applicable state and
federal regulations.
(8) Materials which exert or cause:
(a) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or
§ 300-57 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 300-57
1:386
of dissolved solids such as, but not limited to, sodium chlorine
and sodium sulfate.
(b) Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions.
(c) Unusual chemical oxygen demand, or biochemical oxygen, or
chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a
significant load on the wastewater treatment works.
(d) Slugs or shocks constituting an unusual volume of flow or
concentration of wastes, which will disturb the normal
functioning of the wastewater facility.
(9) Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment works
employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that
the effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
D. Wastewater Resources Manager discretion.
(1) If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged, to the public wastewater lines and such waters contain
the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in this
section, and which in the judgment of the Wastewater Resources
Manager may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater
facilities or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to
life or constitute a public nuisance, the Wastewater Resources
Manager may:
(a) Reject the wastes;
(b) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge
to the public wastewater lines; or
(c) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
(2) If the Wastewater Resources Manager permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants
and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Wastewater Resources Manager and the State of New Mexico
Environment Department and subject to the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
E. Tasting industrial waste. Testing of industrial waste will be performed
at least twice a year or whenever found necessary by the Wastewater
Resources Manager. The person discharging the waste shall be liable
for payment of all costs arising from the testing of the industrial waste.
F. Grease, oil and sand interceptors. Grease, oil and sand traps shall be
provided when they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable
§ 300-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-57
1:387
wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such traps shall
not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. Grease
and oil traps shall be installed in all new filling stations, garages,
restaurants, and other new facilities, as determined by the Wastewater
Resources Manager, wherein heavy discharge of grease and oil is to
be expected. When, in the judgment of the Wastewater Resources
Manager, discharge pretreatment into the wastewater lines system is
required, an approved-type grease interceptor or sand interceptor, or
both, complying with the provisions of this section or the adopted
Uniform Plumbing Code shall be installed in the wastewater lines line
leading from sinks, drains and other fixtures or equipment where
grease or sand may be introduced into the drainage or sewage system
in quantities that can cause line stoppage or hinder sewage treatment
or private sewage disposal. Every private or public wash rack and/or
floor or slab used for cleaning vehicles, equipment or machine parts
shall be adequately protected against stormwater or surface water and
shall drain or discharge into a sand trap of an approved design for
the specific use. The Wastewater Resources Manager, in accordance
with the Uniform Building Code or the Uniform Plumbing Code, shall
approve the size, type and location of each grease trap or sand trap or
separator. These interceptors for grease or sand and similar solid heavy
wastes shall be so designed and located as to be readily accessible
for servicing maintenance, and inspection and shall at all times be in
working and operating condition. Grease traps and sand traps shall
be properly serviced and maintained by authorized personnel and
documentation filed for inspection at any time by the City Enforcement
Officer. Property owners of the establishment will be held liable in a
court of competent jurisdiction for their negligence or the negligence
of their lessees in maintaining and servicing the grease trap or sand
trap, or both, creating sewage problems in a public wastewater line or
to other City customer services.
G. Maintenance of preliminary treatment and flow-equalizing facilities.
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
for any industrial liquid wastes, the owner, at his expense, shall
maintain them continuously in satisfactory and effective operation.
H. Waste meters; manholes. When required by the Wastewater Resources
Manager, the owner of any property serviced by sanitary lines carrying
industrial liquid wastes shall install a suitable control manhole,
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
sanitary wastewater lines to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessibly and safely located, constructed in such a manner as to
prevent infiltration of groundwater and surface water and constructed
in accordance with plans approved by the Wastewater Resources
Manager and the Planning and Zoning Department. The manhole shall
be installed by the owner, at his expense, and shall be maintained by
him to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 300-57 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 300-57
1:388
§ 300-58. Unpolluted discharges to wastewater lines.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to
any sanitary wastewater lines.
§ 300-59. Untreated discharges.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet, including irrigation
ditches or storm drains within the City, or in any that are under the
jurisdiction of the City, any sewage or wastewater or other polluted waters,
except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this chapter.
§ 300-60. Foreign materials in wastewater lines system prohibited;
sand and grease traps.
I. Methods of testing; location of test site. All measurements, tests and
analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods"
and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon
suitable samples taken at such manhole. The control manhole shall be
located so that sampling of the industrial waste will be performed
before discharge into the public wastewater lines system.
J. Sampling and analysis methods. Sampling shall be carried out by
customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon
the wastewater treatment works and to determine the existence of
hazards to life, limb, and property. The particular analyses involved will
determine whether a twenty-four-hour composite of all outfalls of
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be
taken. Normally, but not always, COD, BOD, and settleable solids
analyses are obtained from twenty-four-hour composites of all outfalls,
whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples.
K. Access for sampling. The Wastewater Resources Manager shall be
allowed access to the properties of all wastewater lines users as
necessary to sample, test and measure all wastewater discharges.
Failure to allow such access may, at the City's discretion, be the basis
for discontinuance of wastewater lines and/or water service to the
property to which access is denied.
A. All persons are prohibited from introducing any foreign material,
including, but not necessarily limited to, crankcase oil, wastepaper and
sand into the wastewater lines system, as well as any item or material
which could be considered volatile or toxic.
B. All owners of service stations, restaurants, schools, cafeterias, bars and
clubs, hospitals, or any commercial establishment wherein grease, oil,
or other like substances may be introduced into the drainage system in
§ 300-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-60
1:389
§ 300-61. Unauthorized sewage disposal prohibited.
Except as provided by NMED, and after approval by the Planning and
Zoning Department and the Wastewater Resources Manager, it shall be
unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
§ 300-62. Extraterritorial hookups.
Residential, commercial and industrial properties situated outside the City
limits, but within any extraterritorial zone, may be connected via building
wastewater lines to available wastewater lines or future wastewater lines
upon application and agreement to abide by the provisions of this chapter.
quantities that could affect sewage flow and sewage treatment shall,
as prerequisite to commencing business, provide a grease interceptor.
This grease interceptor shall be sized and designed for the appropriate
business. The Wastewater Collection Foreman, prior to installation, will
review the specifications and design of the interceptor.
C. All car washes, laundries, excluding dry cleaners, or any commercial
establishment wherein any solid material may be introduced into the
drainage system in quantities that could affect sewage flow and sewage
treatment shall, as a prerequisite to commencing business, provide a
sand interceptor. This sand interceptor shall be sized and designed for
the appropriate business. The Wastewater Collection Foreman, prior to
installation, will review the specifications and design of the sand
interceptor.
D. Sand and grease interceptors shall be cleaned out as often as necessary
to provide maximum efficiency. A schedule for such cleaning shall be
presented to the Code Enforcement Officer each year prior to approval
or renewal of a business registration or other license.
E. The effective date of this section shall be six months from the date of
adoption of this chapter, after which time all applicable businesses will
have to be in compliance.
§ 300-60 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 300-62
1:390
ARTICLE IV
Rates and Charges
§ 300-63. Rates and charges levied.
For the purpose of defraying the expense of maintaining, extending,
operating and keeping in repair the water and wastewater lines system of
the City, including suitable disposal plants thereof, there are hereby levied
the rates and charges set out in this Part 2 for services rendered by the joint
water and wastewater lines system.
§ 300-64. Connection charges.
Upon the receipt of an application for a new tap and service connection
from any owner or agent of property to be benefited, the applicant shall pay
to the City the charges set forth in this section.
A. Residential water and wastewater connection charges shall be as
follows:
(1) Connection fee for water and wastewater connection: $2,400.
(2) Water-only connection: $1,900.
(3) Wastewater-only connection: $500.
(4) Water connections requiring a water meter will be paid for by the
owner/developer to the City and said meter will be installed by the
City. Commercial water and wastewater service connection
charges shall be as follows:
Water Connection Charges
Connection (inches) Charge
3/4 $427
1 $721
2 with a compound meter $3,108
2 with a positive displacement
meter
$2,208
4 $1,050
6 $1,330
(5) Water rights assessment fee shall be calculated based on the
following:
Category of
EstablishmentAcre Foot/Year
Base Cost Per Acre Foot at
$6,000
Single family $0.38 $1,330
Multifamily $0.25 $1,050
§ 300-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-64
1:391
Category of
EstablishmentAcre Foot/Year
Base Cost Per Acre Foot at
$6,000
Motels,
hotels, bedandbreakfasts
$0.20 $1,200
Schools
Without
cafeteria
$0.10/fixture $600/fixture
With
cafeteria/
gym
Plus $0.50/fixture $350/fixture
Showers $0.10/shower $1,750
Boarding
schools
$0.16/Resident $6,000/shower, plus $600/
resident
Hospitals $0.20/room $1,200/room
Rest home,
nursing
homes and
other private
care
$0.16/resident $960/resident
Assembly/
meeting halls
With fixed
seating
Without
fixed
seating
$0.01/seat $60/seat
Recreation/
health club
$0.10/shower or $6,000
Retail stores $0.25 $1,500
Hair salon/
barber shop
$0.10/stall or chair $600 stall or chair
Theater $0.01/seat $60/seat
Restaurant/
bar
$1.75 $10,500
Nonseating
food or
beverage
service
$1.25 plus $0.01/
stall
$7,500 plus
Service
stations
$1.25 plus
$0.10/pump
$7,500
§ 300-64 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 300-64
1:392
§ 300-65. Additional connections fees.
Category of
EstablishmentAcre Foot/Year
Base Cost Per Acre Foot at
$6,000
Laundry (selfservice)
$0.10 washing $600/washing machine
B. Commercial wastewater line connection charges shall be as follows:
(1) Six-inch, sewer connection:
(a) Medium commercial: $7,500.
(b) Additional unit: $1,000.
(2) Eight-inch, sewer connection:
(a) Large commercial: $10,000.
[1] Additional units: $1,000.
(b) Residential subdivision main tie-in: $10,000.
[1] Additional units: $500.
(3) Ten-inch, sewer connection: $12,000.
(a) Additional units: $1,000.
(4) Plus $25 for each fixture to include drainage.
(5) For wastewater lines over 10 inches, the connection charges shall
be an additional $500 for each additional two inches of pipe size.
A. In addition to the connections, fees established in § 300-64 above the
cost of providing materials for such connections shall be borne by the
applicant and paid to the City of Española. The fees outlined in this
chapter are only to the first legal property line. If water service is
needed beyond the first legal property line, it shall be the responsibility
of the person requesting service to get all utility easements needed.
(Note: Meter will be placed at first property line off the public right-ofway.)
B. Backflow preventers, such as approved double check valves, (RP)
reduced pressure principle assembly, (PVB) pressurized vacuum
breakers, and atmospheric vacuum breakers will be installed at the
developer's expense. (Note: The type of backflow preventer to be
installed will depend on the degree of hazard.) All approved backflow
preventers will be tested on an annual basis by a certified backflow
preventer tester at the owner's expense, and a copy of the results will
be provided to the City of Española Water Department.
C. Enclosures will have to meet City standards and receive approval prior
to installation.
§ 300-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-65
1:393
§ 300-66. Disconnection or reconnection charge.
§ 300-67. (Reserved)
§ 300-68. Credit deposits for utility services.
D. Pressure-reducing valves (PRV) are required to reduce water pressure,
and will be installed downstream from the water meter at the owner's
expense. The owner will maintain the PRV.
A. The following service disconnection or reconnection charges shall be
charged separately for disconnection or reconnection of water service
after service has been disconnected for failure to pay the assessed rates
or charges for water service:
(1) For each disconnection or reconnection during regular City
business hours:
(a) First disconnect/reconnect: $50.
(b) Second disconnect/reconnect: $100.
(c) Third disconnect/reconnect: $150.
(2) For each disconnection or reconnection after regular City business
hours or on weekends, an additional $30 to the amount in
Subsection A(1) of this section will be applied.
(3) For each disconnection due to failure to pay the assessed rates, the
applicant shall be subject to an additional deposit equal to those
established in § 300-66, of this chapter.
(4) Voluntary disconnect/reconnect charge of $25 during business
hours, and $30 for after hours.
(5) A customer may request voluntary suspension of their service,
which must be for a period of more than 45 days, not to exceed six
months. There will be a fee of $25 to suspend the service. The
customer will continue to incur the monthly service charge during
the suspension of services, but no usage charges.
B. The City Council shall annually review water rates to ensure that rates
are consistent with ongoing operating and maintenance requirements
of the water system, including, but not limited to, additional water
distribution and storage facilities, water rights and other related
appurtenances. Based on these reviews, the Public Works Director shall
make a recommendation on the rate structure increases to the City
Manager for presentation to the City Council. The City Council shall
then review the recommendations and approve or forgo the rate
increases.
§ 300-65 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 300-68
1:394
§ 300-69. Utility service rates.
§ 300-70. Poverty Exemption
A. Credit deposits for utility service shall be determined based on the
credit application, hereto attached as Addendum A.21 Such deposits
shall be paid in advance for each account before services are rendered.
B. Deposits not refunded will be applied to delinquent or outstanding
balances owed to the City.
C. Deposits shall be forfeited if the City is forced to disconnect an active
account for failure to pay the assessed charges.
A. Utility rates shall be as outlined in the rate structure attached hereto as
Exhibit B.22 Rates shall be evaluated, annually and it will be determined
if the proposed next year's rate is required as outlined. In the event the
governing body decides that the rates need to be adjusted, it shall be
done as an amendment to this chapter.
B. Rates for out-of-City-limits customers shall be the same as in-City-limits
customers. Out-of-City-limits customers shall be charged a per-bill
surcharge of $20. This shall apply to residential and commercial
customers.
C. Bulk water rates shall be charged at a rate equal to the per-onethousand-
gallon rate for residential customers. There shall be no
service fee charged to bulk water users.
A. Qualified customers shall be exempt from the following:
(1) Monthly residential service charge for water if individually
metered.
B. In order to qualify for an exemption, the following shall apply:
(1) The customer shall file an affidavit setting out the following facts:
(a) The customer is the head of the household residing in the
residence being assessed; and
(b) The household's gross annual income does not exceed 120% of
the most recent federal poverty guidelines issued by the
United States Department of Health and Human Services.
(2) The customer shall submit documents as required by City policy in
order to verify income.
(3) The customer shall consent to any reasonable investigation and
substantiation by the City of facts stated in the affidavit.
21.Editor's Note: Addendum A is on file in the City offices.
22.Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the City offices.
§ 300-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-70
1:395
§ 300-71. Monthly statements.
Statements for water and wastewater services shall be rendered on or about
the fifth day of each month following the month in which services were
furnished and are due on receipt. Monthly statements shall be mailed to
the person in possession of the property served, addressed to such person
at the address of the premises served. If the owner of the property served
shall have requested of the Utility Billing Manager, in writing, to mail
the statement to the owner or his agent and shall have furnished to the
Utility Billing Manager a mailing address other than the address of the
premises served, such statement shall be so mailed to the mailing address
so furnished.
§ 300-72. Penalty for delinquency.
§ 300-73. Special assessment for cutting pavement.
C. The filing of a false statement or otherwise fraudulently obtaining the
benefits of this section is a violation of the Española Code of Ordinances
and is punishable pursuant to all applicable Code provisions and shall
entitle the City to recover any fraudulently exempted amount and
applicable interest penalties.
A. A utility account shall become delinquent on the 21st day of the month
after the billing month. There is hereby imposed a penalty of 10% of all
charges due in all delinquent accounts which, together with penalty,
shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per month. If statements are not
paid within 10 days from date of delinquency, the deposit shall be
applied to defray the outstanding account balance. If the balance
remains outstanding after applying the deposit credit, service will be
disconnected and discontinued from the property and shall not be again
supplied to the person liable for the payment until the arrears, with
interest and penalties, have been fully paid. A new connection charge
must be paid in accordance with the schedule set out in this chapter.
B. Payment arrangements may be made with the City through the City
Manager or his designee. All agreements must be in writing. The City
Manager or his designee may make reasonable accommodations to
accept payment over a period of time, but may not make any
accommodations or waive any fees set forth in by this chapter.
C. Failure to comply with a payment plan shall result in the immediate
disconnection of services. Only one payment plan per twelve-month
period shall be allowed.
A. Permit required. Should the applicant for utility service require the
cutting of pavement to gain access or install such utilities, a permit for
cutting such pavement shall be required.
B. Submittals. Applicants for utility connections requiring pavement cuts
shall submit to the Planning and Zoning Department two sets of plans
§ 300-70 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 300-73
1:396
§ 300-74. Lien and enforcement.
All of the rates and charges imposed by this Part 2, if not promptly paid,
shall become a lien on the lot or parcel of land served by the water or
wastewater lines system, as provided in NMSA 1978 § 3-23-1 and 3-36-5
and all laws thereunto enabling. Within 60 days after January 1 of each
year, the City Clerk shall prepare a list of all property owners subject to the
charges imposed under this Part 2 who are delinquent in the payments of
such charges, either in whole or in part, and from this list prepare a notice
of lien against each of the properties shown to be delinquent, which notice
of lien shall immediately be filed for record in the office of the clerk of the
county in which the property is located.
for review and approval prior to commencing any work associated with
the utility connection.
C. Fee. A fee of $100 shall be imposed against the applicant for each
pavement cut approved. Additionally, a fee not to exceed the current
market value of the cost to replace the removed asphalt shall be
charged should municipal crews be required or requested to replace or
repair the pavement cut patch.
D. Approval of pavement patch. The pavement patch shall not be
considered approved until reviewed and accepted by the Streets
Foreman, Planning and Zoning staff or their designee. Any patch not
accepted shall be required to be replaced; failure to replace the patch
within 30 days shall constitute approval for municipal crews to replace
or repair the patch and charge the prevailing market-rate fee.
E. Restrictions on cutting new pavement. Prior to the paving of any public
streets or alleyways, the City shall advise the owners of all lands
adjoining such streets to be paved of the time that paving is to begin
and give them notice that if they intend at any time in the future to hook
up to the City water or wastewater lines system, they must at this time
arrange for the wastewater lines or water line to be extended to their
property line, prior to the paving of the area.
F. City Council approval. If the property owner desires to hook up to water
or wastewater lines within five years of the paving of the street or
alleyway, and it is necessary to cut the pavement in order to hook them
up, the property owner shall be required to present such request to the
City Council for approval. No permits shall be approved for pavement
cuts on these streets without this approval. There shall be a special
assessment of $500 against the property owner for each cut in such
pavement, and such assessment shall be beyond the assessment listed
in § 300-73C above. All such cuts shall be subject to the inspection and
acceptance standards as set forth in § 300-73C above.
§ 300-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-75
1:397
§ 300-75. Notice of lien; foreclosure.
Within 60 days from the date of the filing for record of the notice of
lien provided for in § 300-74, the City Clerk shall mail to each delinquent
property owner a notice of delinquency, notifying such owner that a claim
of lien upon the property affected has been filed, of the amount required to
secure the release thereof and that unless payment is received prior to a
certain date to be so specified in the notice, the lien will be foreclosed.
§ 300-76. Liability of property owner.
The charges imposed under this Part 2, together with all penalties, interest
and other charges prescribed, shall become and be a personal liability of the
owner of the property served. In addition to collection through foreclosure
of the lien, as provided in this Part 2, collection of the lien may be enforced
on such personal liability by resorting to any other legal procedure available
for the enforcement of personal liabilities.
§ 300-77. Revision of schedules.
Nothing contained in this Part 2 shall be so construed as to prevent the
revision, modification, increase or decrease by the City Council by
ordinance, from time to time, of the charges fixed, prescribed, established
and levied in this Part 2, subject to any limitation in any covenant of the City
for the protection of any holder of any bond, security or other obligation
payable from any revenues of all or any part of the water or wastewater
lines systems.
§ 300-78. City enforcement.
The City Manager, Finance Department Director and Code Enforcement
Officer of the City are hereby authorized and directed to take all action
necessary or appropriate to collect the charges prescribed in this Part 2 and
otherwise to effectuate the provisions of this Part 2.
§ 300-79. through § 300-100. (Reserved)
§ 300-101. Violations and penalties; remedies.
A. Penalties; continuing violations. Every person convicted of a violation of
this chapter shall be punished as provided in § 1-10 of the Española
Municipal Code. The conviction and punishment of any person for a
violation shall not excuse or exempt such person from the payment of
any fee due or unpaid at the time of such conviction, and nothing herein
shall prevent a criminal prosecution of any violation of the provisions of
this chapter.
B. Remedies cumulative; liens. All remedies prescribed or liens created
under this chapter or under the provisions of the law for collection and
enforcement of the fees shall be cumulative, and the use of one or more
remedies by the City shall not bar the use of any other remedy for
§ 300-75 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 300-101
1:398
enforcing the provisions of this Part 2 created by the law. The fees
authorized by this Part 2 shall be a lien in favor of the City upon the
real property served and the personal property of the person used in
connection with the wastewater lines use which gave rise to the fee,
and such lien shall be imposed, collected, enforced, and paid category
of acre foot/year, Base cost per acre foot as provided by the law. No
property of any persons shall be exempt from levy and sale on execution
issued for the collection of a judgment for any fee imposed by this
chapter.
§ 300-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-101
1:399
Chapter 302
VACANT STRUCTURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building codes — See Ch. 150.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 192.
Nuisances — See Ch. 154.
Zoning and development — See Ch. 350.
§ 302-1. Findings.
The City Council determines that the presence of vacant and abandoned
structures within commercial zones creates blight. It is recognized that
blight lowers property values, leads to deteriorating conditions, undermines
the quality of life, affects the public health, safety and general welfare and
also results in human injury and criminal activities. It is also determined
that vacant and unoccupied structures within commercial zones demand
an inordinate amount of City administrative and ordinance enforcement
resources. As such, the City Council finds the prolonged presence of vacant
and abandoned structures within commercial zones to be unacceptable to
the citizens of Española.
§ 302-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED STRUCTURE — Includes an abandoned commercial, office,
or industrial structure within the B-1, B-2, HI, LI, R-O-I, or historical zones
as defined herein.
ABANDONED COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURE —
ABANDONED COMMERCIAL STRUCTURE —
Any single-tenant building located in a B-1, B-2, B-3, HI, LI, R-O-I
or historic zoned district which has been unoccupied by a tenant
for a period of 90 consecutive days or which satisfies one of the
supplementary conditions in Subsection C below; or
(1)
Any multitenant building located in a B-1, B-2, B-3, HI, LI, R-OI
or historic zoned district which is more than 50% unoccupied
for a period of 90 consecutive days or which satisfies one of the
supplementary conditions in Subsection C below.
(2)
A.
ABANDONED INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURE —
Any single-tenant building located in an HI or LI zoned district
which has been unoccupied by a tenant for a period of 90
(1)
B.
§ 300-101 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 302-2
1:400
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A subordinate structure on the same premises
as the main structure, the use of which would be naturally and normally
incidental to that of the main structure, whether the main structure is an
abandoned structure or not, such as, but not limited to, a garage, barn or
storage shed.
OWNER — Any person with a legal or equitable ownership interest in the
structure.
SECURED — A building which has all points of entry into the structure
either:
§ 302-3. Registration; fees.
consecutive days or which satisfies one of the supplementary
conditions in Subsection C below; or
Any multitenant building located in an HI or LI zoned district which
is more than 50% unoccupied for a period of 90 consecutive days or
which satisfies one of the supplementary conditions in Subsection
C below.
(2)
Supplementary conditions:
(1) Is open to casual entry or trespass;
Is damaged by fire, flood, weather, or vandalism to an extent which
prohibits safe human occupancy;
(2)
(3) Is the site of loitering or vagrancy;
Demonstrates a lack of property maintenance and upkeep as
evidenced by one or more violations of Chapter 254, Nuisances, of
the City of Española Code;
(4)
(5) Is under notice for being in violation of City ordinances;
(6) Has been secured or boarded up for at least 60 days;
Has property taxes in arrears to the City or county for a period of
time exceeding 365 days;
(7)
(8) Has utilities disconnected or not in use;
(9) Is under a condemnation notice or legal order to vacate;
(10) Is structurally unsound; or
(11) Is a potential hazard or danger to persons.
C.
Closed by use of windows and doors which are in proper working order,
intact, without holes, broken elements, and are locked; or
A.
B. Secured by exterior grade plywood in compliance with this chapter.
§ 302-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 302-3
1:401
§ 302-4. Registration information.
A. Owners of abandoned structures shall register such properties with the
City and pay a monthly administration fee of not less than $35 per
month. The duty to register an abandoned structure shall not require
prior notice to the owner by the City. Registration of an abandoned
structure does not preclude the City from taking appropriate actions to
secure the property or to issue orders to repair or abate dangerous,
hazardous or unlawful conditions or from acting to eliminate an
imminent hazard to public health and safety. The monthly
administrative fee shall be in effect for the time during which such
structure remains an abandoned structure.
B. Fees under this section shall be established to support the services
rendered by the City in the course of its duties related to abandoned
structures. Failure to register an abandoned structure or pay the
monthly registration fee shall be cause for penalties to be assessed and
are criminal violations of this chapter.
C. The monthly registration fee shall be paid so that it is received by the
City on or before the seventh day of each month, following each month
during which the structure was an abandoned structure for 15 days or
more.
D. A late fee, in an amount equal to 50% of the registration fee shall also
be payable by an owner of an abandoned structure when the monthly
administrative fee is not paid by the due date.
A. For each abandoned structure, each owner shall register with the City
and provide the following information on an abandoned structure
registration form available from the City:
(1) The address of the abandoned structure;
(2) The legal names of all owners of the property and each owner's
date of birth, if applicable;
(3) The complete mailing address of all owners;
(4) Telephone numbers of each owner, including cell phone and mobile
phone numbers;
(5) Proof of identification of each owner;
(6) The name, address and telephone number of any local agent or
representative authorized by the owner to handle the affairs of the
property;
(7) The reason for vacancy of the property;
(8) The estimated length of time the property is expected to remain
vacant; and
§ 302-3 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 302-4
1:402
§ 302-5. Recovery of fees.
If all or part of the fees required by this chapter are not paid or are overdue,
the City may recover such sums by filing suit against the owner for entry
of civil money judgment or any other means available by law. The City shall
be entitled to all attorney fees and costs incurred in obtaining a warrant
or to obtain a judgment against an owner for any overdue or unpaid fee
associated with any abandoned structure.
§ 302-6. Securing structures.
§ 302-7. Right of entry and inspection.
If the owner has failed to secure a property the City may, after obtaining a
warrant, enter to secure the structure or reenter the structure to conduct
necessary inspections to ensure compliance with the requirements of this
(9) Any plans for restoration, reuse or removal, with an accompanying
timeline and work schedule.
B. An owner shall notify the City and file an amended form within seven
days of any change in the registration information required by this
section.
A. Unless otherwise specified by the Planning Department/Code
Enforcement Officer, a City order to secure an abandoned structure
shall be complied with by the owner within 15 days. If the securing has
not been completed or does not comply with the requirements for
securing the structure under this chapter, the City may secure the
structure and bill the owner of record for all costs incurred, including
service fee and administrative costs. The amount so billed shall
constitute a personal debt of the owner and may be recovered in the
same manner as permitted by law for the recovery of fees.
B. All points of entry on an abandoned structure that are suitable for
animal or human entry shall be secured as follows:
(1) Unless otherwise specified by the Planning Department/Code
Enforcement Officer, on all first-story and ground-accessible points
of entry, such shall be secured by use of exterior-grade plywood or
its equivalent, of at least one-half-inch thickness, cut to the size of
the opening and secured by the use of Phillips-headed two-inchlong
screws; and
(2) Unless otherwise specified by the Planning Department/Code
Enforcement Officer, on entry points being secured above the first
story or which are not accessible from ground level, such shall be
secured by use of exterior-grade plywood or its equivalent of at
least one-half-inch thickness, cut to the size of the opening and
secured by the use of sixteen-penny common nails or equivalent.
§ 302-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 302-7
1:403
chapter and to determine if there are any emergency or hazardous
conditions.
§ 302-8. Reoccupancy.
No abandoned structure shall be reoccupied until it has been inspected and
found to be in full compliance with all applicable City and state codes and a
final certificate of occupancy is issued by the City; all fees are paid in full;
and all other conditions set forth in this chapter are satisfied.
§ 302-9. Responsibility for violations.
All nuisance, housing, building and related code violations will be cited and
noticed to the owner of record and shall become the owner's responsibility.
The owner of any abandoned structure shall be obligated to provide written
notice to any prospective purchaser of an abandoned structure of any
violations, fees, or obligations imposed by the City regarding that
abandoned structure. Failure by an owner to comply with this section shall
constitute a violation of this chapter. If the owner sells or otherwise disposes
of the property to another party, the new owner shall not be entitled to any
extension of time to correct or address such violations as existed at the time
of sale, transfer or conveyance of the property.
§ 302-10. Penalty.
§ 302-11. Alternative in lieu of monthly registration fee.
A property owner may have the ability to waive the monthly registration fee
provided that a facade be created either through paints and/or construction
materials to reflect a common theme within the City of Española to be
approved by the Planning Department.
Chapter 305
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
A. A person who violates or fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than
$500 or imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both, for each offense.
B. Each day that an owner of an abandoned or vacant structure fails to
comply with the requirements of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense.
C. In addition to any other penalty provided for in this section, this chapter
may be enforced by suit for injunction, action for damages, or any
equitable relief appropriate to the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 302-7 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 302-11
1:404
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 305-1. Uniform Traffic Code saved from repeal. [Amended
11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code repeals Ord. No.
455 or any ordinance amendatory thereof. The 2013 compilation of the New
Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance and all changes through July 1, 2013,
compiled by the New Mexico Municipal League, is adopted by reference and
incorporated as fully as if set out herein, with the exception that Sections
12-8-13 through 12-8-23, to do with bicycle license plates and inspections,
are not adopted within the City. A copy of the New Mexico Uniform Traffic
Code is on file at the office of the City Clerk and is available at all reasonable
times for inspection.23
§ 305-2. Zones of quiet.
Whenever authorized signs are placed, erected or installed, indicating a
zone of quiet, no person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone
shall sound the horn or other warning device of the vehicle except in an
emergency.
§ 305-3. School zones.
Whenever authorized signs are placed, erected, or installed indicating any
street or parts of streets as school zones, all drivers of motor vehicles using
such streets or parts of streets shall exercise the greatest care in driving
upon such streets or parts of streets for the protection of children.
§ 305-4. Designation of through streets and stop streets.
The City Council may designate through streets and stop streets within the
City.
§ 305-5. Two-way left-turn lanes.
§ 305-6. Written notice of revocation of license and right to hearing
regarding administration of chemical tests.
A. A two-way left-turn lane is a lane near the center of the highway and
designated by parallel double yellow lines on each side of the lane. Such
lanes, whether with or without indicating arrows, shall be used only for
making lefthand turns, the completion of lefthand turns, or the crossing
of such lane incident to crossing the roadway on which the lane is
located. Through travel and passing in such lanes is unlawful.
B. A vehicle using the two-way left-turn lane shall be positioned so as not
to obstruct the free flow of traffic.
23.Editor's Note: See now § 305-10 for current provisions.
§ 305-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-6
1:405
A. On behalf of the director, a law enforcement officer requesting a
chemical test or directing the administration of a chemical test
pursuant to NMSA 1978 § 66-8-107 shall serve immediate written
notice of revocation and of a right to a hearing on a person who refuses
to permit chemical testing or on a person who submits to a chemical
test the results of which indicate 0.08 or more if the person is 21 years
of age or older, 0.04 or more if the person is driving a commercial motor
vehicle or 0.03 or more if the person is less than 21 years of age.
[Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
B. Upon serving written notice of revocation, the law enforcement officer
shall take the license or permit of the driver, if any, and issue a
temporary license valid for 30 days, provided that no temporary license
shall be issued to a driver without a valid license or permit.
C. The law enforcement officer shall send that person's driver's license to
the director, along with the affidavit required pursuant to NMSA 1978
§ 66-8-111.
§ 305-6 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 305-6
1:406
ARTICLE II
Stopping, Standing and Parking
§ 305-7. Obedience to no-parking zone areas.
Whenever authorized signs or markers are placed, erected or installed,
indicating no-parking zones, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
provisions of such signs.
§ 305-8. Overparking and parking in restricted areas.
Parking longer than the time limit allowed and parking in any restricted
area shall not be enforced against any driver or registered owner of a
vehicle unless the time for parking is clearly marked by signs, by tags upon
parking meters or by painted curbs. The City Council may establish timed
parking areas.
§ 305-9. Towing away illegally parked vehicles.
Where any vehicle has been parked illegally in such a manner as to
endanger public safety or convenience, or where it appears that a vehicle
has been abandoned, the Police Department shall have the right to have
such vehicle towed away and impounded until the owner thereof or his
agent proves his right to possession thereto and satisfactorily answers to
the violation of this article. If such impounded vehicle is owned by any
county, state or the United States government, such vehicle may be released
upon payment of the towing charges.
§ 305-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-9
1:407

ARTICLE III
Uniform Traffic Ordinance
§ 305-10. Adoption by reference. [Last amended 12-8-2015 by Ord.
No. 2014-04]
§ 305-11. Penalty assessment program. [Added 2-24-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-01]
A. The New Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance, 2010 Compilation with all
revisions through July 2015, is herewith adopted by reference, pursuant
to NMSA 1978 § 3-17-6.
B. The New Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance hereby adopted by
reference is on file at the City Clerk's Office, City of Española, 405
North Paseo de Oñate, Española, NM 87532.
A. This section may be cited as the "City of Española Penalty Assessment
Program."
B. Penalty assessment misdemeanors.
(1) As used in the New Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by
the City of Española, New Mexico, "penalty assessment
misdemeanor" includes violation of any the following listed sections
of the New Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance and other City traffic
ordinances, for which the listed penalty assessment is established,
as follows, but does not include offenses described in Subsection
B(2) of this section:
Village/
UTO
Ordinance
Designated
Court
Fine
(Including
Fees)
Violation
Description Bond
State
Statute
12-4-4 $100 Duty upon Striking
Unattended Vehicle
$100 § 66-7-204
12-4-5 $100 Duty upon Striking
Fixtures or Other
Property upon a
Street
$100 § 66-7-205
12-4-6 (up to
$529)
Immediate Notice of
Accidents
Mandatory Court
Appearance
$500 § 66-7-206
§ 305-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-11
1:409
Village/
UTO
Ordinance
Designated
Court
Fine
(Including
Fees)
Violation
Description Bond
State
Statute
12-5-3 $100 Obedience to
Required Traffic
Control Devices
Other Property upon
a Street
$100 § 66-7-104
12-5-4 $100 When Official Traffic
Control Devices
Required for
Enforcement
Purposes
$100 § 66-7-104
12-5-6 $100 Lights and Their
Application to a
Vehicle
$100 § 66-7-105
12-5-8 $100 Flashing Light
Violation
Flashing Signals
$100 § 66-7-107
12-5-14 $74 Failure to Maintain
Lane
Traffic Lane
$74 *
12-6-1.5 $100 Impeding the flow of
Traffic
Minimum Speed
Regulation
$100 § 66-7-305
12-6-2.1 $100 Driving Left of
Center
Drive on Right Side
of Street-Exceptions
$100 P.A.M.
12-6-2.4 $100 Limitations of
Overtaking on Left
$100 § 66-7-312
12-6-2.6B $100 Improper Passing on
Right
When Overtaking on
Right is Permitted
$100 § 66-7-311
§ 305-11 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 305-11
1:410
Village/
UTO
Ordinance
Designated
Court
Fine
(Including
Fees)
Violation
Description Bond
State
Statute
12-6-2.7B $100 Improper Passing
(No-Pass Zone)
No-Passing Zones
and Restrictions on
Passing
$100 § 66-7-315
12-6-2.7C $74
$100
Improper Passing
(Double Yellow)
No-Passing Zones
and Restrictions on
Passing
$74
$100
§ 66-7-315
12-6-2.7D $74
$100
Improper Passing
(School Zone)
No-Passing Zones
and Restrictions on
Passing
$74
$100
§ 66-7-315
12-6-2.7E $74
$100
Improper Passing
(Stopped Vehicle at a
Marked Crosswalk)
No-Passing Zones
and Restrictions on
Passing
$74
$100
*
12-6-2.12(1)
12-6-2.12
$74
$100
Unsafe Lane Change
Driving on Streets
Laned for Traffic
$74
$100
§ 66-7-317
12-6-2.13 $100 Following Too Closely $100 § 66-7-318
12-6-2.14 $100 Driving on Divided
Streets
$100 § 66-7-319
12-6-4.1 $100 Vehicles Approaching
or Entering
Intersections
$100 § 66-7-328
12-6-4.2 $100 Vehicles Turning Left
at Intersection
$100 § 66-7-329
§ 305-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-11
1:411
Village/
UTO
Ordinance
Designated
Court
Fine
(Including
Fees)
Violation
Description Bond
State
Statute
12-6-4.3B
12-6-4.3
$79
$100
Stop Sign Violation -
Failure to Yield
Vehicles Entering
Stop or Yield
Intersection
$79
$100
§ 66-7-330
12-6-4.3D
12-6-4.3
$100 Stop Sign Violation -
Failure to Stop
Vehicles Entering
Stop or Yield
Intersection
$100 § 66-7-330
12-6-4.3E
12-6-4.3
$100 Yield Sign Violation -
Failure to Stop When
Required
(Vehicles Entering
Stop or Yield
Intersection)
$100 § 66-7-330
12-6-5.1A $100 Improper Right Turn
Required Position
and Method of
Turning at
Intersection
$100 § 66-7-322
12-6-5.1B $100 Improper Left Turn
Required Position
and Method of
Turning at
Intersection
$100 § 66-7-322
12-6-5.1C $100 Improper Position for
Turning
Required Position
and Method of
Turning at
Intersection
$100 § 66-7-322
§ 305-11 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 305-11
1:412
Village/
UTO
Ordinance
Designated
Court
Fine
(Including
Fees)
Violation
Description Bond
State
Statute
12-6-5.1D $100 Improper Method of
Turning (1-way
street)
Required Position
and Method of
Turning at
Intersection
$100 § 66-7-322
12-6-5.1E $100 Improper Position
(Avoidance of Traffic
Control Device)
Required Position
and Method of
Turning at
Intersection
$100 *
12-6-5.4 $100 Obedience to No-
Turn Signs
$100 P.A.M.
12-6-5.5 $100 Limitations on
Turning Around
$100 P.A.M.
12-6-5.6 $100 Limitations on
Turning Around
(Curve or Crest of
Grade)
(Turning on Curve or
Crest of Grade
Prohibited)
$100 § 66-7-323
12-6-5.7 $100 Starting Parked
Vehicles
$100 § 66-7-324
12-6-5.8 $100 Turning and Stopping
Movements Required
Signals (No Turn
Signals)
$100 § 66-7-325
12-6-5.9A $74
$100
Failure to Signal for
Turn
Signals by Hand and
Arm or Signal Device
$74
$100
§ 66-7-326
§ 305-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-11
1:413
Village/
UTO
Ordinance
Designated
Court
Fine
(Including
Fees)
Violation
Description Bond
State
Statute
12-6-5.9B $61
$100
No Signal Lamp or
Device When
Required
Signals by Hand and
Arm or Signal Device
$61
$100
§ 66-7-326
12-6-6.3 $61
$100
Stopping Vehicle Not
to Interfere with
Other Traffic
(Stopped or Parked
Vehicles Not to
Interfere with Other
Traffic)
$61
$100
§ 66-3-852
12-6-7.1 $100 Emerging from
Alleys/Driveways
Emerging from Alley,
Building, Driveway or
Private Road
$100 § 66-7-346
12-6-7.3A $100 Failure to Stop for a
School Bus
Stopping for School
Bus
$100 § 66-7-347
12-6-7.4A $100 Failure to Yield to
Emergency Vehicles
Operation of Vehicle
on Approach of
Authorized
Emergency Vehicle;
of Oncoming Vehicle
Yield Right-of-Way
$100 § 66-7-332
§ 305-11 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 305-11
1:414
Village/
UTO
Ordinance
Designated
Court
Fine
(Including
Fees)
Violation
Description Bond
State
Statute
12-6-7.4B $74
$100
Failure to Yield to
Oncoming Traffic
Operation of Vehicle
on Approach of
Authorized
Emergency Vehicle;
of Oncoming Vehicle
Yield Right-of-Way
$74
$100
§ 66-7-332.1
12-6-11.1AD
Mandatory
Court (up
to $329)
No Permit for Moving
Excessive Size and
Weight Vehicles
$300 § 66-7-401:416
12-6-11.2 $100 Slow-Moving Vehicle
Identification
$100 § 66-3-887
12-6-12.3 Mandatory
Court (up
to $279)
Reckless Driving
1st Offense - $279
$300 § 66-8-113
12-6-12.3 Mandatory
Court (up
to $529)
Reckless Driving
2nd or Subsequent
Offense - $529
$300 § 66-8-113
12-6-12.4 $129 Careless Driving $129 § 66-8-114
12-6-12.5 $79
$100
No Motorcycle
Endorsement
Operators and
Chauffeurs Must be
Licensed
$79
$100
§ 66-5-2
12-6-12.5A$79 Driving without a
Valid License
$79 § 66-5-2
12-6-12.5D$61 No Driver's License
in Possession
$61 § 66-5-16
Code
§ 34-29
and
12-6-12.6A(5)
$79 Provisional License
(Minor)
$79 § 66-5-8
12-6-12.8 $100 Unattended Motor
Vehicle
$100 § 66-7-353
12-6-12.9 $100 Limitations on
Backing
$100 § 66-7-354
§ 305-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-11
1:415
Village/
UTO
Ordinance
Designated
Court
Fine
(Including
Fees)
Violation
Description Bond
State
Statute
12-6-12.10$100 Obstruction to
Driver's View
Obstruction to
Driver's View or
Driving Mechanism
$100 § 66-7-357
12-6-12.11$100 Television Screen in
Driver's View
Restriction on use of
Television in Motor
Vehicles
$100 § 66-7-358
12-6-12.12$100 Coasting
Coasting Prohibited
$100 § 66-7-360
12-6-12.13Mandatory
Court (up
to $529)
Following Fire
Apparatus Prohibited
$529 § 66-7-361
12-6-12.16$100 Vehicles Shall be
Driven Only on
Streets, Private
Roads, and
Driveways
$100 *
12-6-12.18(A)
Ord.
11-003
$100 Prohibited Activities
While Driving
(Including Cell
Phone, Text
Messaging Devices)
1st offense - ($100)
$100 § 66-7-374
12-6-12.18(B)
Ord.
11-003
$220 Prohibited Activities
While Driving
(Including Cell
Phone, Text
Messaging Devices)
2nd or Subsequent
Offense - ($200)
$220 § 66-7-374
§ 305-11 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 305-11
1:416
Village/
UTO
Ordinance
Designated
Court
Fine
(Including
Fees)
Violation
Description Bond
State
Statute
12-6-12.19$74
Court
Appearance
up to
$529
Racing on Streets $74
$300
§ 66-8-115
12-6-12.23A$100 Permitting
Unlicensed Minor to
Drive
$100 § 66-5-40
12-6-12.23B$100 Permitting
Unauthorized Person
to Drive
$100 § 66-5-41
12-6-13.2 $100 Unlawful Riding $100 *
12-6-13.4AMandatory
Court (up
to $529)
Moving/Molesting
Unattended Vehicle
$529 § 30-16D-5
12-6-13.5AE
$329 Destructive or
Injurious Material on
Roadway
$329 § 66-7-364
12-6-13.12$100 Child Passenger
Restraints
$100 § 66-7-369
12-6-13.13$100 Mandatory Use of
Seatbelts
$100 § 66-7-372
12-6-13.14$104
Mandatory
Court up
to $529
Unlawful Drinking of
Liquor in Motor
Vehicle; Open
Container (1st
offense)
(Consumption or
Possession of
Alcoholic Beverages
in Open Container,
1st Offense)
$104
$300
§ 66-8-139
§ 305-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-11
1:417
Village/
UTO
Ordinance
Designated
Court
Fine
(Including
Fees)
Violation
Description Bond
State
Statute
12-6-13.14EMandatory
Court (up
to $529)
Unlawful Drinking of
Liquor in Motor
Vehicle; Open
Container (Second or
Subsequent Offense)
(Consumption or
Possession of
Alcoholic Beverages
in Open Container
2nd Offense/
Subsequent)
$529 § 66-8-139
12-6-14.2 $100 Pedestrian/
Equestrian Right-of-
Way Crosswalks
(Pedestrians' Rightof-
Way in Crosswalks)
$100 § 66-7-334
12-6-14.8 $100 Drivers to Exercise
Due Care
$100 § 66-7-337
12-6-18 $100 Texting While Driving
(First Offense)
$100 § 66-7-374
12-6-18 $229 Texting While Driving
(Second or
Subsequent Offense)
$229 § 66-7-374
12-7-5 $100 Driving Motorcycle
w/No Eye Protection
Eye Protective
Devices or
Windshields
$100 § 66-7-355
12-7-6A $179 Driving Motorcycle
w/No Helmet (Under
18)
Safety Helmets
$179 § 66-7-356
12-7-9.1A $100 No Registration: Off-
Road Vehicle
Off-Highway Motor
Vehicles
$100 § 66-3-1003
§ 305-11 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 305-11
1:418
Village/
UTO
Ordinance
Designated
Court
Fine
(Including
Fees)
Violation
Description Bond
State
Statute
12-7-9.2 $100 Driving Off-Road
Vehicle on Streets
Operation of Off-
Highway Motor
Vehicles on Streets or
Highways-Prohibited
Areas
$100 § 66-3-1011
12-10-1.2A$100 Defective Equipment
Vehicles to Be in Safe
Condition
$100 § 66-3-901
12-10-1.3 $100 When Lighted Lamps
Required
$100 § 66-3-802
12-10-1.5 $100 Headlamps on Motor
Vehicles
$100 § 66-3-804
12-10-1.6A$100 Failure to Dim
Headlights
Dimming of Lights
$100 *
12-10-1.7 $100 No Tail Lamps
Tail Lamps
$100 § 66-3-805
12-10-1.9 $79
$100
No Brake Lights
Stop Lamps, Signal
Lamps and Signal
Devices
$79
$100
§ 66-3-807
12-10-1.10A$79
$100
No Muffler or Load
Muffler
Muffler-Prevention of
Noise-Emission
Control Devices
$79
$100
§ 66-3-844
12-10-1.10B$100 Excessive Fumes or
Smoke
Muffler-Prevention of
Noise-Emission
Control Devices
$100 § 66-3-844
12-10-1.11$100 Lamp or Red Flag on
Projecting Loads
$100 § 66-3-824
§ 305-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-11
1:419
Village/
UTO
Ordinance
Designated
Court
Fine
(Including
Fees)
Violation
Description Bond
State
Statute
12-10-1.12$100 Windshields Must be
Unobstructed and
Equipped with
Wipers
$100 § 66-3-846
12-10-1.12A$100 Sun Screening;
Tinted Windows
Sun Screening
Material on
Windshields and
Windows;
Requirements;
Violation; Penalty
$100 § 66-3-846.1
12-10-1.16$179 Defective Brakes $179 § 66-3-840
12-10-4 $100 Display of Current
Valid Registration
Plate
$100 § 66-3-18
12-10-5 $100 Evidence of
Registration to be
Signed and Exhibited
on Demand
$100 § 66-3-13
12-10-6 $165 Mandatory Proof of
Financial
Responsibility
$165 § 66-5-205
Code
§ 11-4(11)
Mandatory
Court (up
to $529)
Motorized Vehicles
Prohibited in
Corrales Bosque
Preserve
$529
Ord.
11-001
$529 Prohibiting ATV on
Village Right-of-Way
$529
Code
§ 34-26
$79 Mufflers Required:
Prevention of Noise
$79
Code
§ 34-27
$51 Use of Safety Belts by
Passenger/Trucks
$51
Code
§ 34-28
$179 Motorcycle Safety
Helmets Required for
Persons Under 18
Years of Age
$179
12-6-1.1 $61 Speeding - Basic Rule $61 *
§ 305-11 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 305-11
1:420
Village/
UTO
Ordinance
Designated
Court
Fine
(Including
Fees)
Violation
Description Bond
State
Statute
12-6-1.2A(3) SPEEDING
VIOLATIONS
§ 66-7-301
(a) $100 1-10 Miles Over $100
(b) $130 11-15 Miles Over $130
(c) $165 16-20 Miles Over $165
(n) $200 21 Miles Over $200
(o) $214 22 Miles Over $214
(p) $219 23 Miles Over $219
(q) $224 24 Miles Over $224
(r) $229 25 Miles Over $229
(s) $239 26 Miles Over $239
(t) $249 27 Miles Over $249
(u) $259 28 Miles Over $259
(v) $269 29 Miles Over $269
(w) $279 30 Miles Over $279
(x) Mandatory
Court
Over 30 Miles $300
12-6-1.2A(1) SPEEDING IN A
SCHOOL ZONE
§ 66-7-301
(a) $104
$20
10 Miles or Less over
Limit
$104
$20
(b) $104 +
$10 per
additional
mile
$20 per
additional
mile
11 Miles or More
over Limit
Same
as fine
12-6-6.1A PARKING
VIOLATIONS
§ 66-7-351
(1) $30 On a Sidewalk
(2) $30 In Front of a Public
or Private Driveway
(3) $30 Within an
Intersection
§ 305-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-11
1:421
Village/
UTO
Ordinance
Designated
Court
Fine
(Including
Fees)
Violation
Description Bond
State
Statute
(4) $30 Within 15 Feet of Fire
Hydrant
(5) $30 On a Crosswalk
(6) $30 Within 20 Feet of
Crosswalk at an
Intersection
(7) $30 Within 30 Feet of
Traffic Control
Device
(8) $30 Safety Zone
(9) $30 Within 50 Feet of
Railroad Crossing
(10) $30 Within 20 Feet of Fire
Station Entrance
(11) $30 Obstructing Traffic
(12) $30 Stopped or Parked at
the Edge or Curb of a
Street
(13) $30 Upon any Bridge or
Elevated Structure
(14) $30 Prohibited by Official
Signs
(15) $30 On any Railroad
Track
(16) $30 Between Curb and
Sidewalk
12-6-6.6(1)$30 Illegal Parking -
Displaying Vehicle for
Sale
*
12-9-9 $250 Parking in
Designated Disabled
Parking Spaces
$250 § 66-7-352.5
Code
§ 34-30
Mandatory
Court up
to $529
Excess Gross Weight
of 10,000 Pounds
Prohibited
$529
(2) The term "penalty assessment misdemeanor" does not include any
violation which has caused or contributed to the cause of an
accident resulting in injury or death to any person or any violation
§ 305-11 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 305-11
1:422
for which a court appearance is required as set forth in Subsection
B(1) of this section.
(3) When an alleged violator of a penalty assessment misdemeanor
elects to accept a notice to appear in lieu of a notice of penalty
assessment, no fine imposed upon later conviction shall exceed the
penalty assessment established for the particular penalty
assessment misdemeanor and no probation imposed upon a
suspended or deferred sentence shall exceed 90 days.
(4) The penalty assessment for speeding in violation of Section
12-6-1.2 (4) of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance is twice the penalty
assessment otherwise established by ordinance for the equivalent
miles per hour over the speed limit.
(5) The penalty assessment established for each penalty assessment
misdemeanor pursuant to this section, as set forth in Subsection
B(1), includes the following mandatory fees for each penalty
assessment misdemeanor: a corrections fee of $20; a court
automation fee of $6; and a judicial education fee of $3.
C. Penalty assessment misdemeanors; effect.
(1) Unless a warning notice is given, at the time of making an arrest for
any penalty assessment misdemeanor, the arresting officer shall
offer the alleged violator the option of accepting a penalty
assessment. The violator's signature on the penalty assessment
notice constitutes an acknowledgment of guilt of the offense stated
in the notice, and payment of the prescribed penalty assessment is
a complete satisfaction of the violation.
(2) Payment of any penalty assessment must be made by mail or in
person to the Municipal Court, City of Española, New Mexico,
within 30 days from the date of arrest. Payments of penalty
assessments are timely if postmarked three days prior to the 30th
day from the date of the arrest.
(3) No record of any penalty assessment payment is admissible as
evidence in any court in any civil action.
D. Failure to pay penalty assessment.
(1) If a penalty assessment is not paid within 30 days from date of
arrest, the violator shall be prosecuted for the violation charged on
the penalty assessment notice in a manner as if a penalty
assessment had not been issued. Upon conviction in such
prosecution, the court shall impose penalties as provided by the
New Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance (Section 12-12-1.1) or
other law relating to motor vehicles for the particular offense
charged, and the schedule of penalty assessments shall not apply.
§ 305-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-11
1:423
(2) In addition to the prosecution provided for in Subsection D(1), it is
a misdemeanor for any person who has elected to pay a penalty
assessment to fail to do so within 30 days from the date of arrest.
(3) The Office of the Municipal Court shall notify the Division of Motor
Vehicles of the State of New Mexico when a person fails to pay a
penalty assessment within the required period of time. The
Department of Motor Vehicles shall report the notice upon the
driver's record and shall not renew the person's license to drive
until the Office of the Municipal Court notifies the Department of
Motor Vehicles that the penalty assessment, or its equivalent, as
well as any additional penalties imposed are properly disposed of.
§ 305-11 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 305-11
1:424
ARTICLE IV
Moving of Oversize Loads
[Added 1-24-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-03]
§ 305-12. Title; definitions; scope and applicability.
§ 305-13. Permit requirements.
A. This article shall be known as the "City of Española Escort Moving
Permit Ordinance."
B. The provisions of this article shall include the following:
OVERSIZE LOAD, HOUSE OR BUILDING — All oversize loads, houses
and buildings or any part thereof, to include, but not necessarily limited
to, the following: a house, building or structure, or part thereof as a unit
and not dismantled; a double-wide mobile home or any other building,
structure, vehicle, load, etc., in excess of the following criteria, of which
each would require a separate City of Española escort moving permit:
(1) Wider than 10 feet.
(2) Higher than 14 feet.
(3) Weighing more than 80,000 pounds; or
(4) Any hazardous material as defined by NMDOT.
C. All movers and transporters are subject to the City of Española Noise
Ordinance regarding exemptions and prohibiting the use of retarders/
engine brake devices within the City of Española.24
D. The provisions of this article shall apply to any oversize load, house,
building or part thereof which is:
(1) Outside the City intended to be relocated within the City.
(2) Within the City being relocated outside the City limits.
(3) Within the City and being relocated within the City.
(4) Outside the City with a final destination outside the City but being
moved through the corporate limits of the City of Española.
A. Permit required. No person, partnership, corporation, firm or
association shall move an oversize load, house or building or part
thereof into, out of, within, or through the City without first obtaining
an oversize load/housemover's permit pursuant to this article. A moving
permit is required for each separate oversize load, house or building or
any part thereof that is moved separately and the size of which comes
within the provisions listed above.
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. 249, Noise.
§ 305-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-13
1:425
§ 305-14. Permitted hours.
Permitted hours shall be as follows:
09:00 to 11:00
13:00 to 16:00
17:30 to dusk
§ 305-15. Permit fees.
Permit fees for the issuance of a permit to move any oversize load, house or
building shall be as set forth below:
(1) The movement and relocation of any oversize load, house or
building or part thereof into or within City limits must comply with
all other City ordinances and provisions, including but not limited
to compliance with all City zoning, building and fire regulations.
(2) Further, the mover shall comply with all provisions of state laws
and administrative rules of the State of New Mexico pertaining to
notifying and working with all utilities in order to accomplish the
movement of any oversize load, house or building or part thereof in
a safe manner.
B. Application. The application for an escort moving permit shall be filled
out with the information required as follows:
(1) Information with respect to mover's name, address, state, mover's
license number.
(2) Proposed moving date(s) and time(s).
(3) If destination is within the City, the applicant/mover shall provide:
(a) Name of owner, address of site, legal description, approved
zoning permit.
(b) Zoning review. The City Planning Department must review the
site plan and other materials submitted and determine that the
building as relocated will meet all requirements of the Official
Zoning Code of the City of Española.25
C. Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from obtaining wide load
permits from the City of Española: NMDOT and New Mexico county
vehicles.
A. If the transporter or mover requires escort services of the City of
Española, a fee of $30 will be charged for each escort required based on
the provisions set forth above for height, width and weight, payable
prior to the move.
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 350, Zoning and Development.
§ 305-13 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 305-15
1:426
§ 305-16. Grounds for issuance of permits; insurance requirements.
The following shall be grounds for issuance of permits:
§ 305-17. Compliance with state regulations.
Each application for an oversize load, housemover's escort moving permit
shall furnish proof of compliance with all state regulations for such moving.
§ 305-18. Penalty.
Any moves through the corporate limits of the City of Española via City
or state roadways are susceptible to all criteria listed within this article.
Failure to comply may result in a penalty of not more than $500 or 90 days
in jail, or both, as determined by the Española Municipal Court.
B. An annual-fee permit may be obtained by a licensed mover or institution
for a fee of $1,200 per calendar year beginning January 1 of each year,
expiring December 31 of the same year.
A. That the oversize load or building is not too large or heavy to move
without endangering persons or private or public property, including
trees, buried utilities and other public improvements as determined by
the Police Department, Building Official or Public Works Director.
B. That the oversize load or building is not in a state of deterioration or
disrepair or is otherwise so structurally unsafe that it can be moved
without endangering persons and property in the City as determined by
the City prior or during the move.
C. That City zoning, building, fire and other codes or ordinances would not
be violated by the building in its new location if the relocation site is in
the City.
D. Insurance coverage required of each applicant for an oversize load,
housemover:
(1) Bodily injury to or death of one person: $50,000.
(2) Bodily injury to or death of two or more persons: $300,000.
(3) Damage to property: $100,000.
E. Submittal of application and all pertinent documentation must be
submitted at least 48 hours prior to a scheduled move.
§ 305-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-18
1:427
Chapter 315
WATER EMERGENCIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building codes — See Ch. 150.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 192.
Housing standards — See Ch. 222.
Sprinkler systems — See Ch. 286.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 311.
§ 315-1. Title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Emergency Water Regulations
Ordinance."
§ 315-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide the City with the means to
implement measures for controlling water use in response to water-systemrelated
emergencies or catastrophic events that may disrupt systems
operations.
§ 315-3. Water emergency management plan.
There is established a City of Española water emergency management plan
that will apply to all customers of the City's water system.
§ 315-4. Factors determining water emergency; priority of uses.
A. The governing body, by and through its Public Utilities Department,
finds and determines that a water service emergency exists based upon
the occurrence of one of more of the following conditions
(1) A general water supply shortage due to increased demand or
limited supply.
(2) Distribution or storage facilities of the City water utility are
inadequate to meet demand or minimum quality standards.
(3) A disruption of the supply, storage, and distribution facilities of the
City water utility occurs.
B. It is hereby declared that, because of the conditions prevailing in the
City of Española, the general welfare requires that the City maximize
the beneficial use of its available water resources to the extent to which
it is capable, and that the waste or unreasonable use, and the
conservation of such water is to be practiced with a view to the
reasonable and beneficial use thereof in the interest of the citizens of
the City of Española and for the public health, safety and welfare. It is
§ 305-18 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 315-4
1:428
§ 315-5. Manager's authority to declare emergency and implement
emergency procedures.
further declared that in times of a water supply shortage emergency,
uses of water shall be prioritized as follows:
(1) Human consumption, food preparation, maintaining sufficient
pressures to fight fires, bathing, and all uses directly related to
assuring public health and sanitation.
(2) Indoor commercial and industrial water use.
(3) Outdoor commercial water use by businesses directly dependent
on water to produce the product or service provided, such as but
not limited to plant nurseries, construction activities, and car wash
facilities.
(4) Residential and commercial outdoor water use.
A. The City Manager is authorized to determine and declare that a water
emergency exists in any and/or all parts of the City of Española and the
Counties of Santa Fe and Rio Arriba that are served by the municipal
water system and, upon a formal declaration of a water emergency
management stage, to utilize such regulations, rules, and conditions
relative to the time of using water, the purposes for which it may be
used and such other necessary limitations as will, in the City Manager's
opinion, relieve the water shortage in any such section or sections of
the water service area.
B. The City Manager, or the City Manager's designee, following public
notice, is hereby authorized and directed to implement the water
emergency management plan through the applicable provisions of this
chapter, upon the City Manager's determination that such
implementation is necessary to protect the public health, safety and
welfare, under the following conditions:
(1) In the event of a disaster or water emergency such as an
earthquake, or other catastrophic event affecting the Española
watershed, groundwater supply, or other major disruption in the
water supply, the governing body shall formally declare Water
Emergency Management Stages 3 and 4, thereby authorizing the
implementation plans for Stages 3 and 4 of the emergency
provisions of this chapter. Public notice will follow enactment of
said provision.
(2) In the event of a foreseeable water emergency, such as extended
drought conditions, the governing body shall formally declare
Water Emergency Management Stage 2 and the City Manager, or
the City Manager's designee, shall be authorized to implement the
applicable provisions of this chapter, upon public notice. In the
event of a foreseeable yet limited water supply shortage, the City
Manager, or the City Manager's designee, shall formally declare
§ 315-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-5
1:429
§ 315-6. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons, customers and
property served by the City water utility wherever situated and to all
citizens, businesses, and governmental entities within the corporate limits
of the City.
§ 315-7. Water emergency management stages.
No customer of the City of Española water utility shall make, cause, use, or
permit the use of water from the City for residential, commercial, industrial,
agricultural, governmental or any other purpose in a manner contrary
to any provisions of this chapter, or in an amount in excess of that use
permitted by the following water emergency management stages which
are in effect pursuant to action taken by the City Manager, or the City
Manager's designee, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Unless specifically noted otherwise, all requirements included in a
particular water emergency management stage and its corresponding
implementation plan shall apply to each and every higher level water
emergency management stage or stages. A more stringent requirement in a
higher stage shall replace a less stringent requirement in a lower stage.
Water Emergency Management Stage 1 and shall be authorized to
implement the applicable provisions of this chapter
(3) The City Manager, or the City Manager's designee, shall be
authorized to rescind or downgrade the water emergency
management stage in effect to a lower water emergency
management stage.
A. Stage 1: Voluntary Compliance—Water Watch. Stage 1 applies during
periods when the possibility exists that the City of Española water
utility will not be able to meet all of the water demands of its customers
by up to 15% of the annual demand projection. All elements of Stage 2
shall, during Stage 1, apply on a voluntary basis only. Furthermore, the
City of Española water utility shall provide its customers with a mock
calculation of Stage 2 surcharge impacts indicating what their water
bill would be if the Stage 2 surcharges were in effect.
B. Stage 2: Mandatory Compliance—Water Alert. Stage 2 applies during
periods when the probability exists that the City of Española water
utility will not be able to meet from 16% to 35% of the water demands of
its customers. The Stage 2 implementation plan is incorporated hereto
as Exhibit A.26 Upon declaration by the governing body and publication
of notice, the following water conservation measures shall apply:
(1) Lawn watering and landscape irrigation, including irrigation of golf
courses, parks, school grounds, and recreation fields, are permitted
26.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 315-5 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 315-7
1:430
only during designated hours on designated days as determined by
the water utility in the Stage 2 implementation plan.
(2) Commercial nurseries, commercial sod farms and equivalent
establishments approved by the City are exempt from Stage 2
irrigation restrictions but are encouraged to curtail all nonessential
water use and to use the recognized conservation practices of the
industry.
(3) The washing of automobiles, trucks and trailers, boats, airplanes
and other types of mobile equipment is permitted at any time. The
City will encourage the use of recycling systems and other
conservation techniques available to the commercial car wash
industry.
(4) One initial filling shall be allowed for recirculating pools and spas
which were empty prior to the declaration of emergency or which
are new installations. No draining and refilling shall be allowed for
the duration of the emergency except as may be permitted by the
City for reasons of health and safety. The filling or refilling of
noncirculating swimming pools and spas is prohibited for the
duration of the emergency.
(5) Use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to fire fighting,
related activities or other activities necessary to maintain the
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens served by the municipal
water system. Metered sales from hydrants for construction and
landscape irrigation purposes will be allowed.
(6) Water shall not be used to wash down sidewalks, parking areas,
tennis courts, patios or other paved areas, except to alleviate
immediate fire or sanitation hazards.
(7) Ornamental fountains may operate if they recirculate water but not
during windy periods. Ornamental fountains that do not recirculate
water are prohibited.
(8) Construction operations receiving water from a construction meter
or water truck shall not use water unnecessarily for any purpose
other than those required by regulatory agencies. Construction
projects requiring water for new landscaping materials are
encouraged to adhere to the designated irrigation hours associated
with Subsection B(1) of Stage 2. Contractors will be required to use
reclaimed water for construction and irrigation purposes if the
construction project is located outside the incorporated limits of
the City of Española.
(9) All public, semi-public and governmental rest room and shower
facilities shall replace the conservation signage required in Section
98-54.5 with a more urgent conservation message, the text of
which shall be provided by the City. Entities may use a Cityprovided
sign or develop their own sign.
§ 315-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-7
1:431
(10) All hotels, motels, and other lodging facilities shall provide their
guests with a water supply shortage/conservation information card
at the time of guest registration. Lodging facilities may use a Citygenerated
card or develop their own card using City-provided text,
the size of which shall not be smaller than the City-generated card.
Furthermore, all lodging facilities shall offer their guests the
voluntary option of not having their sheets and towels changed
daily for multiple-night stays.
C. Stage 3: Mandatory Compliance—Water Warning. Stage 3 applies
during periods when the City of Española water utility will not be able
to meet from 36% to 50% of the water demands of its customers. The
Stage 3 implementation plan is incorporated hereto as Exhibit B.27
Upon declaration by the governing body and publication of notice, the
following water conservation measures shall apply:
(1) Lawn watering and landscape irrigation, including irrigation of golf
courses, parks, school grounds, and recreation fields, are permitted
only during designated hours on designated days as determined by
the water utility in the Stage 3 implementation plan.
(2) The filling or refilling of private swimming pools and spas is
prohibited, except when this use is for water supply storage.
(3) The operation of any ornamental fountain or similar structure is
prohibited except for short periods of time to prevent damage.
(4) The number of new construction meters shall not exceed the
number authorized through approval of the Stage 3
implementation plan by the governing body. Construction projects
requiring water from a construction meter or a water truck shall
not use water unnecessarily for any purposes other than those
required by regulatory agencies. Construction projects requiring
water for new landscapes shall adhere to the designated days and
times as set forth in the Stage 3 implementation plan. An additional
meter(s) beyond that determined in the Stage 3 implementation
plan may be allowed under the following conditions:
(a) For projects necessary to protect the public's health, safety,
and welfare;
(b) When using exclusively reclaimed water for the project;
(c) When the potential recipient of the meter can demonstrate that
no net increase in water use will occur; or
(d) Where the potential recipient of the meter provides a
conservation offset. For purposes of this chapter, "conservation
offset" means the implementation of proven conservation
techniques which, when installed, will result in a reduction
27.Editor's Note: Exhibit B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 315-7 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 315-7
1:432
equal to demand of the proposed use. A conservation offset
may be effected by paying a fee established by the governing
body in an amount necessary to cover the cost of implementing
such conservation techniques. The fee will be based on the
conservation offset required for an equivalent dwelling unit.
Such fee shall apply to residential as well as commercial and
industrial buildings, and may be adjusted from time to time as
determined by the governing body.
D. Stage 4: Mandatory Compliance—Water Emergency. Stage 4 applies
when a major failure of any supply or distribution facility, whether
temporary or permanent, occurs in the water distribution system of the
City water utility, upon which supply of water the municipal water
system relies. In addition, if these or other factors lead to a probable
shortage in excess of 50% of anticipated demand, the Stage 4
implementation plan will be activated. Upon declaration by the
governing body and publication of notice, the following measures shall
apply except when reclaimed water is used:
(1) All outdoor irrigation of all landscaping and turfed areas is
prohibited with the exception of plant materials classified to be
rare, exceptionally valuable or essential to the well being of the
public at large or rare animals. Grey water may be used to irrigate
fruit trees, ground covers and ornamental trees and shrubs. "Grey
water" is defined as household wastewater other than toilet and
kitchen sink waste.
(2) The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes and
other types of mobile equipment is prohibited in residential
settings. The use of water by all types of commercial car washes,
self-service car washes, or commercial vehicle service stations and
not in the immediate interest of the public health, safety and
welfare shall be reduced in volume by an amount determined by
the Stage 4 implementation plan. Further, such washings are
exempt from these regulations where the health, safety and welfare
of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleanings, such as
refuse collection trucks and vehicles used to transport food and
perishables.
(3) The filling, refilling or adding of water to swimming pools, spas,
ponds and artificial lakes is prohibited except where this use is
storage for a water supply.
(4) All sales of nonreclaimed water outside of the water service area
shall be discontinued, with the exception of sales previously
approved by the governing body.
(5) No new construction meters will be issued. Construction water
shall not be used for earth work or road construction purposes.
Construction projects necessary to maintaining the health, safety
and welfare of the public are exempt from these regulations.
§ 315-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-7
1:433
§ 315-8. Mandatory conservation phase implementation.
The City water utility shall monitor the projected supply and demand for
water by its customers on a daily basis during periods of emergency or
drought and shall recommend to the City Manager the extent of the
conservation required through the implementation and/or termination of
particular conservation stages, to prudently plan and supply water to its
customers. Thereafter, the City Manager may order the implementation or
termination of the appropriate phase of water conservation in accordance
with the applicable provisions of this chapter. The declaration of any stage
shall be made by public announcement and shall be published a minimum
of one time for three consecutive days in a daily newspaper of general
circulation. The stage designated shall become effective immediately upon
announcement.
§ 315-9. Penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or association to violate
the provisions of this chapter. Violations of these provisions shall be a
misdemeanor subject to penalties provided in NMSA 1978 § 3-17-1C. The
Public Utilities Department may alternatively seek injunctive relief in the
District Court. In addition to any other remedies which the Public Utilities
Department may have for the enforcement of this chapter, service of water
may be discontinued or appropriately limited to any customer who willfully
uses water in violation of any provisions hereof.
§ 315-10. Notice of restrictions.
Upon such emergency declaration by the governing body, it shall be the
duty of the administration to give notice by publishing a notice giving the
extent, terms and conditions respecting the use and consumption of water,
at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in Española. Upon such
declaration and publication of such notice, due and proper notice shall be
deemed to have been given to each and every consumer supplied with water
by the municipal water system.
(6) Except for property for which a building permit has been issued, no
new building permit(s) shall be provided, except in the following
circumstances:
(a) For projects necessary to protect the public's health, safety,
and welfare; or
(b) When using reclaimed water; or
(c) When the recipient of the building permit can demonstrate that
no net increase in water use will occur; or
(d) Where the recipient of the building permit provides a
conservation offset.
§ 315-7 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 315-10
1:434
Chapter 319
WEAPONS AND FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fireworks — See Ch. 196.
Minors — See Ch. 241.
Offenses — See Ch. 260.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 270.
§ 319-1. Furnishing weapons to minors.
It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish, sell or offer for sale to any
person under 16 years of age any firearm, air gun or slingshot within the
City.
§ 319-2. Possession of weapons by minors.
It shall be unlawful for any person under 16 years of age to have in his
possession any firearm, air gun or slingshot within the City; except that
when such person is under the immediate supervision of an adult instructor
or teacher, such possession shall not be considered a violation of this
section.
§ 319-3. Carrying of deadly weapon on school premises.
A. Unlawful carrying of a deadly weapon on school premises consists of
carrying a deadly weapon on school premises except by:
(1) A peace officer;
(2) School security personnel;
(3) A student, instructor or other school-authorized personnel engaged
in Army, Navy, Marine Corps or Air Force Reserve officer training
corps programs or state-authorized hunter safety training
instruction;
(4) A person conducting or participating in a school-approved
program, class or other activity involving the carrying of a deadly
weapon; or
(5) A person older than 19 years of age on school premises in a private
automobile or other private means of conveyance, for lawful
protection of the person's or another's person or property.
B. As used in this section, the term "school premises" means:
(1) The buildings and grounds, including playgrounds, playing fields
and parking areas and any school bus of any public elementary,
secondary, junior high or high school in or on which school or
§ 315-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 319-3
1:435
§ 319-4. Handguns.
school-related activities are being operated under the supervision
of a local school board; or
(2) Any other public buildings or grounds, including playing fields and
parking areas that are not public school property, in or on which
public school-related and -sanctioned activities are being
performed.
C. Whoever commits unlawful carrying of a deadly weapon on school
premises is guilty of a misdemeanor.
A. Possession of a handgun; exceptions; penalty.
(1) Unlawful possession of a handgun by a person consists of a person
knowingly having a handgun in his possession or knowingly
transporting a handgun, except when the person is:
(a) In attendance at a hunter's safety course or a handgun safety
course;
(b) Engaging in the use of a handgun for target shooting at an
established range authorized by the governing body of the
jurisdiction in which the range is located or in an area where
the discharge of a handgun without legal justification is not
prohibited by law;
(c) Engaging in an organized competition involving the use of a
handgun;
(d) Participating in or practicing for a performance by an
organization that has been granted exemption from federal
income tax by the United States Commissioner of Internal
Revenue as an organization described in Section 501(c)(3) of
the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended
or renumbered;
(e) Engaging in legal hunting or trapping activities;
(f) Traveling, with an unloaded handgun in his possession, to or
from an activity described in Subsection A(1)(a), (b), (c), (d) or
(e) of this section; or
(g) On real property under the control of the person's parent,
grandparent or legal guardian and the person is being
supervised by his parent, grandparent or legal guardian.
(2) A person who commits unlawful possession of a handgun by a
person is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(3) As used in this section:
§ 319-3 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 319-4
1:436
§ 319-5. Firing or discharging firearms or cannons.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the City to discharge, set off or fire
any firearm or cannon; provided, however, that a permit may be issued
by the City Council to any civic body, club or organization sponsoring a
supervised public celebration to discharge, set off or fire, at a designated
time and place, under the immediate supervision of a competent expert,
such firearms or cannons as may be deemed proper by the City Council.
§ 319-6. Negligent use of deadly weapons.
(a) The word "person" means an individual who is less than 19
years old; and
(b) The word "handgun" means a loaded or unloaded pistol,
revolver or firearm which will or is designed to or may readily
be converted to expel a projectile by the action of an explosion
and the barrel length of which, not including a revolving,
detachable or magazine breech, does not exceed 12 inches.
B. Seizure and forfeiture of a handgun possessed or transported by a
person in violation of unlawful possession of a handgun; exception.
(1) A handgun is subject to seizure and forfeiture by a law enforcement
agency when the handgun is possessed or transported by a person
in violation of the offense of unlawful possession of a handgun by a
person.
(2) A handgun seized pursuant to a violation of unlawful possession of
a handgun by a person shall not be subject to replevin, but is
deemed to be in the custody of the law enforcement agency, subject
only to orders and decrees of the District Court.
(3) When a handgun is seized pursuant to the provisions of this
subsection, the handgun may be disposed of pursuant to the
provisions of NMSA 1978 § 29-1-14.
(4) A handgun shall not be forfeited when the owner of the handgun
establishes that the offense of unlawful possession of a handgun by
a person was committed without the knowledge and consent of that
owner. A forfeiture of a handgun encumbered by a bona fide
security interest shall be subject to the interest of a secured party if
the secured party did not have knowledge of or did not consent to
the offense of unlawful possession of a handgun by a person.
A. Negligent use of a deadly weapon consists of:
(1) Discharging a firearm into any building or vehicle or so as to
knowingly endanger a person or his property;
(2) Carrying a firearm while under the influence of an intoxicant or
narcotic;
§ 319-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 319-6
1:437
Chapter 323
WRECKERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Regulation of businesses — See Ch. 158. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 305.
§ 323-1. State regulations adopted.
There is hereby adopted by the City, for the purpose of regulating wrecker
services within the City, that certain regulation known as the "State
Corporation Commission of New Mexico Wrecker Tariff No. 1-B," governing
the transportation by wrecker of disabled, abandoned or damaged motor
vehicles, and motor vehicles incapable of self-propulsion due to mechanical
defects or defects of such motor vehicle, and personal effects and/or cargo
in the custody of the wrecker service by towing or hauling only, issued
September 29, 1969, effective October 30, 1969, and any amendments or
changes thereto, including any and all new editions thereof, and the same is
hereby adopted by reference and incorporated as fully as if set out verbatim
in this chapter.
§ 323-2. Availability of copies.
One or more copies of the State Corporation Commission Wrecker Tariff
No. 1-B, adopted by § 323-1, together with any and all amendments thereto,
including new editions thereof, shall be available and subject to inspection
at all reasonable times in the office of the City Manager in the municipal
building.
(3) Endangering the safety of another by handling or using a firearm or
other deadly weapon in a negligent manner; or
(4) Discharging a firearm within 150 yards of a dwelling or building,
not including abandoned or vacated buildings on public lands
during hunting seasons, without the permission of the owner or
lessees thereof.
B. The provisions of Subsection A(1), (3) and (4) of this section shall not
apply to a peace officer or other public employee who is required or
authorized by law to carry or use a firearm in the course of his
employment and who carries, handles, uses or discharges a firearm
while lawfully engaged in carrying out the duties of his office or
employment.
C. Whoever commits negligent use of a deadly weapon is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
§ 319-6 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 323-3
1:438
§ 323-3. Removal of glass and debris.
Notwithstanding any provision of the regulation adopted by § 323-1, or
any subsequent changes or amendments to such regulation, all wreckers
operating within the City shall keep and maintain on such wrecker a broom
and shovel for removing broken glass and debris from the highway,
resulting from a motor vehicle accident. All glass and debris shall be cleared
from the highway by the wrecker personnel before departure from the point
of disability.
Chapter 350
ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Master Plan — See Ch. 72.
Building codes — See Ch. 150.
Development permits and fees — See Ch. 171.
Excavations — See Ch. 180.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 200.
Housing standards — See Ch. 222.
Sprinkler systems — See Ch. 290.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 294.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 311.
§ 323-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 323-3
1:439

ARTICLE I
General Provisions; Definitions
§ 101. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "City of Española Development Code."
Additionally, this chapter may be referred to from time to time as the
"Zoning Ordinance" or "Zoning Code of the City of Española."
§ 102. Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in NMSA 1978,
Chapter 3, Municipalities, and the Charter of the incorporated City of
Española.
§ 103. Jurisdiction.
§ 104. Purpose and scope.
The purpose and scope of this chapter is to provide development regulations
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan in order to:
A. This chapter shall be effective and apply to all public and private lands
and uses within the municipal boundaries and the planning and platting
jurisdiction of the City of Española, except as provided in this section
and § 1203.
B. However, the City of Española shall be exempt from compliance with
this chapter in its construction, improvement, development or
government use of public improvements or land.
C. This chapter shall apply, to the maximum extent permitted by law, to all
public lands owned or controlled by other governmental or sovereign
entities within the municipal boundaries.
A. Promote the health, safety and welfare of the City of Española;
B. Facilitate orderly growth and development of the City of Española
consistent with the goals, concepts, strategies and policies of the
Comprehensive Plan and amendments thereto;
C. Lessen congestion in the streets and public ways; secure safety from
fire, floodwaters, panic and other dangers; promote health and the
general welfare, provide adequate light and air, and prevent the
overcrowding of lands; avoid undue concentration of population;
facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, sewage, schools,
parks and other public requirements; and control and abate the
unsightly use of buildings or land pursuant to NMSA 1978 § 3-21-5.
D. Give consideration to the character of districts, conserve the value of
buildings and land, and encourage the most appropriate use of land
throughout the City of Española pursuant to NMSA 1978 § 3-21-5B;
§ 101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104
1:441
§ 105. Comprehensive Plan.
The scope and authority of the Comprehensive Plan shall be as follows:
E. Establish land use districts and provide for the appropriate regulation
of land use within those districts;
F. Divide the City of Española into zoning districts according to the use of
land and structures and the intensity of such use;
G. Guide the location and use of structures and land for commercial,
industrial, public and residential uses where they are, or can be made
to be, compatible with neighboring land uses;
H. Provide for harmonious development in the City of Española;
I. Provide for coordination of street and infrastructure development;
J. Provide for safety in the community;
K. Preserve the natural beauty, vegetation and topography, and prevent
the pollution of air, water and the general environment;
L. Ensure adequate drainage and availability of utility resources and
facilities;
M. Provide flexible regulations which encourage compatible, creative and
efficient uses of land;
N. Provide for the administration and enforcement of this chapter; and
O. Provide guidance to applicants and property owners working with the
provisions and procedures of this chapter.
A. A Comprehensive Plan for the physical development of the City of
Española shall be prepared by the Planning Commission with the
assistance of such staff and other professionals as are necessary; the
plan shall then be recommended for approval to the City Council.
B. The Comprehensive Plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts
and descriptive and explanatory matter, shall show the physical
development of the City of Española, and may include, among other
things:
(1) The general location, character and extent of streets, bridges,
viaducts, parks, parkways, playgrounds, airports and other ways,
grounds, places and spaces.
(2) The general location of public schools, public buildings and other
public property.
(3) The general location and extent of public utilities and terminals,
whether publicly or privately owned, for water, light, power, heat,
sanitation, transportation, communication and other purposes.
§ 104 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 105
1:442
§ 106. Applicability of provisions.
(4) The acceptance, widening, removal, extension, relocation,
narrowing, vacation, abandonment or change of use of any of the
public ways, grounds, places, spaces, buildings, properties, utilities
or terminals.
(5) The general location, character, layout and extent of community
centers and neighborhood units and the general character, extent
and layout of the replanning of blighted districts and slum areas.
C. Any areas outside the boundaries of the City of Española and within its
planning and platting jurisdiction, which, in the Planning Commission's
judgment, bear relation to City of Española planning, shall be included
in the plan.
A. In interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be
held to be minimum requirements. Nothing in this chapter is intended
to impair, annul or abrogate any easement, covenants or other
agreement between parties, public or private. However, when the
requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of
any lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the most
restrictive or those imposing the higher standard shall govern.
B. The following general regulations apply:
(1) Uses. No land, building, structure or premises shall be used for any
purpose or in any manner other than for a use permitted in the
zoning district in which such land, building, structure or premises
are located.
(2) Setbacks. No designated setbacks surrounding any building or
structure shall be encroached upon or reduced in any manner
except in conformity with the building site requirements, nor shall
any setbacks associated with any building or structure for the
purpose of complying with the requirements be considered as
providing setbacks for any other building or structure.
(3) Renovations. No building or structure shall be erected or moved
onto a site and no existing building or structure shall be altered,
enlarged, or reconstructed except in conformity with this chapter.
(4) Height and density. No building shall hereafter be erected or
altered so as to exceed the height limit, or to exceed the density
regulations for the district in which it is located.
(5) Lot size. No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent
lots of record, shall be reduced in size so that the lot width or
depth, front, side or rear yards, lot area per dwelling or other
requirements of this chapter are not maintained.
§ 105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106
1:443
§ 107. Construction approved prior to adoption; existing
nonconforming uses and structures.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any change in any existing
building or structure, construction or planned use of a proposed building
which would conform to a completed application for a site plan, special use
permit, variance or subdivision meeting the requirements of this chapter
which were in effect at the time the complete application was filed and/or
for which building permit plans are on file and have been approved by the
of the City of Española prior to the effective date of this chapter, and the
construction of which building or structure shall have been started within
the time requirements of such building permit and diligently worked upon
to its completion. Nothing in this section shall be construed to make an
illegal nonconforming use or structure into a legal nonconforming use or
structure.
§ 108. Definitions; rules of construction.
(6) One structure per lot. Only one principal building and its customary
accessory building may hereafter be erected on any lot, except as
authorized in the RM Multifamily District.
(7) Street frontage. No building shall be erected on any lot which does
not abut at least 25 feet on a publicly dedicated street.
A. Rules of construction. The following rules apply to definitions listed in
this chapter:
(1) Usage. Any numbers, abbreviations, terms or words defined in this
section shall be used and interpreted only as defined herein. All
other numbers, abbreviations, terms and words shall have their
generally accepted meanings.
(2) Word forms. Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary,
words used in the present tense include the future tense and words
used in the future tense include the present tense; words used in
the plural number include the singular and words used in the
singular include the plural.
(3) Interpretation of specific terms. The words "shall" and "will" are
mandatory. The word "may" is permissive. The word "structure"
includes a "building"; the word "building" or "structure" includes
any part thereof. The word "person" includes an individual, a
partnership, a corporation, an incorporated association of persons
such as a club, and any other legal entity.
(4) Definitions listed in the New Mexico Building Code. Words not
defined in this chapter but which are defined in the New Mexico
Building Code as adopted by the City of Española are to be
construed as defined therein.
§ 106 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 108
1:444
(5) This chapter shall be construed as gender-neutral. All words, terms
or phrases expressing the masculine identity shall be deemed to
include the feminine.
B. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ABANDONED STRUCTURE — A structure that has not been used for a
period of three consecutive months which the City has duly determined
to be a public health, safety or welfare concern.
ABUT — Next to, touching; to share a common property line.
ACCESS and ACCESSWAY — The means of ingress to or egress from a
property
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — Separate living quarters on the same lot
as, and used in conjunction with, a main dwelling.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building, the use of which is incidental
to the use of the main building on a lot. A building attached by an
interior (as opposed to yard) wall or roof to the main building is not an
accessory building, but is a part of the main building.
ACCESSORY USE — A use incidental and subordinate to the permitted
or special use of the premises.
ADJACENT — Next to; sharing a common boundary. In establishing
adjacency, public rights-of-way are not considered. For example, an
industrial district across the street from a residential district is adjacent
to that district.
AGENT — Any person representing himself or herself to the City to be a
legally authorized designee of an owner or applicant. Also see "owner."
The City assumes no responsibility for ascertaining the property rights
and interests of applicants asserting that they are agents and will rely
upon the representations made in signed applications and documents.
AGGRIEVED PARTY — Any person who:
ALLEY — A public way which is a secondary means of vehicular access
to abutting properties.
APARTMENT HOUSE — A multiple-family dwelling structure.
APPLICANT — Any person or his or her legally authorized agent making
application to initiate any action provided in this chapter.
APPLICATION — A formal request made by an applicant to initiate any
action as provided in this chapter.
(1) Is required to be served with notice by mail under this chapter; or
Has an immediate, pecuniary and substantial interest, with respect
to any final action taken pursuant to this chapter.
(2)
§ 108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108
1:445
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — A retail business engaged solely
or primarily in the sale of motor fuels, goods or services generally
required in the operation and maintenance of motor vehicles and in the
fulfilling of a motorist's needs. Major automobile repair activities such
as body painting, body and fender repair, major mechanical repair, tire
recapping, or the rental of equipment and the sale or rental of other
merchandise are not uses included in the uses of a service station.
BALCONY — An open platform projected from a wall of a building or
structure above the first floor level, and totally unsupported by any
additional means by or to the ground.
BANNER — Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is
temporarily or permanently mounted to a pole, structure or a building.
National flags, state or municipal flags shall not be considered banners.
BAR — See "cocktail lounge or bar."
BASELINE DATA — Information on the current usage of a public facility
compared with its capacity, including, but not limited to, streets,
sewers, water lines, drainageways, etc.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — An owner-occupied dwelling unit that
contains no more than five guest rooms where lodging is provided for
compensation, with or without meals.
BENCHMARK — A mark on a permanent monument indicating
elevation and serving as a reference in topographical surveys.
BLOCK — A unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination
of streets and public land or any other barrier to the continuity of
development.
BOND — Any form of security, including a cash deposit, surety bond,
collateral, property or instrument of credit in an amount and form
satisfactory to the City Attorney and the City Council. All bonds shall
be reviewed by the City Engineer wherever a bond is required by this
chapter.
BOUNDARY MONUMENT — A permanent object indicating a corner in
the boundary of a lot.
BREEZEWAY — A roofed, open-sided passageway which provides direct
access between buildings.
BUFFER AREA — A strip of land designed to separate portions of a
subdivision or development from adjacent arterial or collector streets
or from uses located on adjacent properties.
BUILDING — Any structure built and maintained for the support,
shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any
kind.
BUILDING, MAIN — A building within which is conducted one or more
permitted or special uses. There may be more than one main building
on a lot depending on the district designation.
§ 108 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 108
1:446
BUSINESS PARK — A building or assembly of buildings on a single
lot adaptable to a combination of office, light storage, distribution, and
showroom uses, where a minimum of 25% of the floor area is used for
office space and where common parking and access are provided.
CALIPER — The diameter of the main stem of a tree or shrub. It is
measured eight inches above the ground.
CAMPGROUND — An open area where temporary overnight residency
is available for tent, trailer, truck campers and/or recreational vehicles.
CARPORT — A permanent roofed structure with not more than two
enclosed sides used for automobile storage.
CAR WASH —
CHILD-CARE CENTER — A home or business which provides care,
service and supervision for children for fewer than 24 hours per day
and which is regulated by the State of New Mexico.
CHURCH — A permanent building used primarily for religious worship,
fully enclosed with walls, including windows and doors, and having a
permanent roof.
CITY ATTORNEY — The City Attorney for the City of Española or his
designee.
CITY CLERK — The City Clerk for the City of Española or his designee.
CITY COUNCIL — The governing body of the City of Española.
CITY ENGINEER — The engineer or engineering firm as may be hired
or serving under contract for the City of Española.
CITY MANAGER — The City Manager for the City of Española or his
designee.
CITY OF ESPAÑOLA — The incorporated City of Española, New Mexico.
CLUB, PRIVATE — An association of persons, whether or not
incorporated, for social or recreational purposes and for purposes and
activities generally not for personal gain and not elsewhere defined as
a commercial or professional purpose or activity; it does not mean a
business for profit.
COCKTAIL LOUNGE OR BAR — Premises where alcoholic beverages
are sold to the public for consumption on the premises.
AUTOMATIC CAR WASH — Facilities for washing automobiles
using production-line methods with a chain conveyer, blower,
steam-cleaning device or other mechanical devices.
(1)
SELF-SERVICE CAR WASH — Facilities for washing automobiles
wherein the customer parks the vehicle in a bay and washes the
vehicle using equipment provided.
(2)
§ 108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108
1:447
COMMERCIAL — For the purpose of purchase, sale or other financial
transaction of any article, substance, commodity or service by for-profit
and not-for-profit entities.
COMMERCIAL CENTER — A building or assembly of buildings that
may contain retail, offices, restaurants, lodging, theaters, automobile
services, or other uses permitted by the zoning district, and that
provides common parking and access.
COMPLEX — A combination of two or more uses located on the same lot
and sharing common facilities. Included in this definition are multiplebuilding
complexes.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The plan adopted by the City of Española
to guide overall growth and development, and includes amendments to
that plan, including area master plans and district plans.
CONCEPT SITE PLAN — A site plan that depicts only a general design,
intended for review by City of Española staff or the Development
Review Committee.
CONDOMINIUM — An estate in real property consisting of an
individual interest in common in a parcel of real property, together with
separate ownership of space within such real property. A condominium
is not a cooperative.
CONSOLIDATION PLAT — A plat combining two recorded lots into one
lot.
CONSTRUCTION PLANS — The maps or drawings submitted prior to
a final subdivision plat showing the specific location and design of
improvements to be installed in a subdivision, including, but not limited
to, streets, sidewalks, utilities and drainage facilities.
CONVALESCENT HOME — A public or private facility which provides
bed and ambulatory care, not at the level of a hospital, for patients and
for persons who are unable to care for themselves; it does not mean a
facility which provides care or treatment of alcoholics, drug addicts or
persons with mental diseases or afflictions.
COOPERATIVE — A development that is collectively owned by members
and operated for their mutual benefit. Each member is an owner and
has an individual interest in the entire development. Each member in a
residential cooperative has a lease for his own apartment, space or site
but does not own the apartment, space or site. A cooperative is not a
condominium.
CORRECTION PLAT — The plat filed for the correction of an error,
other than a lot line adjustment, for an approved and recorded plat.
COURT and COURTYARD — An open space unoccupied by structures
on the same lot with a main building, and bounded on two or more sides
by such building or exterior walls or fences.
CROSSWALK — That portion of a pedestrian walkway which crosses a
street.
§ 108 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 108
1:448
CUL-DE-SAC — A street with one end open for vehicular and pedestrian
access and the other end terminating in a vehicular turnaround.
DAY-CARE CENTER/FACILITY — A home or business which provides
care, service and supervision for at least five but no more than 12
children for fewer than 24 hours per day and regulated by the State of
New Mexico.
DAY-CARE HOME — A residence which provides care, services and
supervision for not more than four children at one time, who do not
normally reside in the home, for fewer than 24 hours per day and
regulated by the State of New Mexico.
DAYS — Calendar days, whenever used as a means of calculating a time
limit or constraint, except as otherwise expressly stated.
DEBRIS — The remains of past construction, hobbies and other
activities which have not been removed for over a year.
DECISION-MAKING AUTHORITY — The Planning Director, the
Planning Commission, or the City Council, as appropriate, which has
been given the authority to take final actions (though subject to appeal)
regarding an application under this Development Code.
DEDICATED LAND — Land transferred to the City of Española, in feesimple
ownership, and expressly accepted by the City for public use.
DENSITY — The total number of dwelling units permitted on a given
area of land. Density is usually expressed in dwelling units per acre.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owners of a lot or parcel of any
land proposed for inclusion in a development, including an agent and/
or the holder of an option or contract to purchase.
DEVELOPMENT — The construction, reconstruction, conversion,
structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any buildings, any
use or change in use of any buildings or land, any extension of any
use of land or any clearing, grading or movement of land, for which
permission is required pursuant to this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT CODE — The City of Española Official Development
Code, which is adopted by ordinance, and may be amended from time
to time.
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW TEAM (DRT) — The purpose of the DRT
is to review development applications and to advise the Planning
Commission, other boards and commissions and the City Council. The
Development Review Team shall consist of the Planning Director (who
shall act as Chairman), Utilities Director, Public Works Director, Parks,
Recreation Director, City Engineer, Police Chief, Fire Chief and any
other department head who could or may have issues with the proposed
development.
DISTRICT PLAN — A plan developed for a specific zoning or overlay
district within the City of Española.
§ 108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108
1:449
DORMITORY — A building used principally for sleeping
accommodations, related to an educational or research institution.
DRAINAGE —
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Natural swales and/or man-made improvements
designed to accommodate drainage on a parcel.
DRIVE-IN OR DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY — That portion of a
commercial establishment which is designed and operated for the
purpose of serving a motorist in a vehicle.
DRIVEWAY — A vehicular accessway to off-street parking.
DUPLEX — See "two-family dwelling."
DWELLING — A building containing one or more dwelling units,
including the following:
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms used as a residence by one
family and constituting a separate and independent housekeeping unit,
with a single kitchen. It does not mean quarters for transients in a club,
hotel or motel.
EASEMENT — A real property interest in land for a specific purpose,
granted by the owner of the property to another person.
EQUESTRIAN TRAIL — A trail or pathway intended for use by persons
on horseback, or pedestrians.
(1) Surface water runoff;
The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains,
grading or other means, which include runoff controls to minimize
erosion, flooding and sedimentation during and after construction
or development.
(2)
GROUP DWELLING — A combination or arrangement of dwellings
on one lot.
(1)
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing three or
more dwelling units on one lot.
(2)
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing only one
dwelling unit; it does not mean manufactured housing.
(3)
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING — A building containing
only one dwelling unit and joined on one or more sides by a
common wall without openings to another or other single-family
dwellings on separate lots.
(4)
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — A building containing
only one dwelling unit, set back from other structures.
(5)
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing two dwelling
units on one lot.
(6)
§ 108 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 108
1:450
ESCROW — A sum of money deposited to ensure completion of
subdivision improvements to City of Española standards.
ESCROW AGREEMENT — A signed contract between a developer and
the City of Española that ensures completion of subdivision
improvements in compliance with the standards of this chapter.
FAMILY — An individual living alone; two or more persons related
by blood or marriage, or between whom there is a legally recognized
relationship, occupying the same dwelling unit; or a group of not more
than five unrelated persons occupying the same dwelling unit.
FENCE — Any structural device forming a physical barrier between two
properties. It may be made of wire mesh, steel mesh, chain link, louver,
stake, masonry, lumber or other similar materials or any combination
thereof.
FENCE HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the approved
grade (ground) level to the highest adjacent board, rail, post, or wire,
including retaining walls.
FINDINGS — A written statement of the reasons supporting a decision
made by any reviewing body in the land development review process.
FLAG — Any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors,
patterns or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political
subdivision or otherwise excluded from the definition of a banner.
FLOOR AREA —
FRONT — That side of a building or property serving as the principal
entrance.
FRONTAGE — That side of a lot abutting a public right-of-way and
determined, by the Planning Director, to be the front of the lot.
GARAGE — A portion of a main building or a detached accessory
building having a roof and enclosed by walls on not less than three sides
used for the housing of vehicles.
GATE — An opening in a wall or fence that permits ingress and egress.
The area of all floors, including a basement, in a building, exclusive
of exterior courts, garages and carports, but including enclosed
porches. All horizontal measurements are taken from the exterior
faces of walls.
(1)
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the total horizontal areas of
all the floors of all structures on a lot, measured from the outside
faces of exterior walls. Basements, elevator shafts, hallways and
stairwells at each story, floor space used for mechanical equipment
with structural headroom of six feet, six inches or more,
penthouses, attic space whether or not a floor has actually been
laid that provides structural headroom of six feet, six inches or
more, interior balconies, and mezzanines are all included.
(2)
§ 108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108
1:451
GRADE — The average elevation of the finished ground surfaces
surrounding a building. The term "grade" is expressed as the slope in
percentage terms.
GRADING PLAN — The plan that describes both existing contours and
the finished grade for the site upon completion of all construction
operations.
GREENHOUSE — A structure constructed chiefly of glass, plastic or
translucent material, which is devoted to the cultivation of flowers or
other tender plants.
GROSS SITE AREA — The area of a horizontal plane within the property
lines of a lot before the area of public streets, easements or other land
to be designated for public use is deducted.
GROUND COVER — Any landscaping material other than permanent
hard surfaces (i.e., sidewalks, driveways, structures) which covers the
natural earth. The definition includes living matter (plants) and
nonliving materials (rock outcroppings).
GROUP HOME — Any congregate residence, maternity shelter, or
building which provides room and board to the residents within the
facility and provides, either directly or through contract services, at
least one of the following: programmatic services, assistance with the
activities of daily living in accordance with the program directive, or
general supervision of up to eight individuals who have difficulty living
independently or managing their own affairs, or who are handicapped
within the meaning of 42 U.S.C. § 3602(h)(1) of the Fair Housing
Amendments Act (1988). "Group home" does not include facilities for
persons currently in custody of or recently released by correctional
authorities that are designed to offer an alternative to imprisonment
and/or to facilitate ex-offender reintegration into community life, nor
does it include facilities for persons who require such services by
reason of the effects of current alcohol or drug abuse. "Group home"
includes facilities for recovering alcohol or drug abusers who require
group home services.
GUEST — A social visitor or any person hiring or occupying a room for
living or sleeping purposes.
GUESTHOUSE — A dwelling unit within an accessory building for use
by guests of the occupant of the main building; it does not mean a
dwelling that is rented or otherwise used as a separate main building.
GUEST ROOM — A room, having no kitchen facilities, for occupation by
one or more guests.
HEDGE — A plant or series of plants or other landscape material so
arranged as to form a physical barrier or enclosure.
HEIGHT OF STRUCTURE — The vertical distance between the highest
point of any part of the structure and the natural grade or finish cut
grade directly below that point, whichever is greater. If a structure
is placed on fill, the depth of the fill is included in the height of the
§ 108 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 108
1:452
structure. If the natural grade is lowered in a cut, the depth of the cut
is included in the height of the structure.
HOME BUSINESS — A home occupation that employs more than one
nonfamily member.
HOME OCCUPATION — A business, profession or service which is
conducted and/or operated in a residential zoning district and is clearly
incidental and secondary to the dwelling purpose and does not change
the character thereof.
HOSPITAL — An acute care, short-term general hospital.
HOTEL or MOTEL — A building or group of buildings operated as
one enterprise, containing rooms or suites of rooms (with or without a
kitchen) to be occupied by transient or permanent tenants.
HOUSING — Residences of any kind as further described in this
chapter.
IMPACT REPORTS — Studies conducted to identify the potential
adverse effects of proposed development on public infrastructure and
land as well as adjoining private properties. Impact reports may
include, but are not limited to, traffic generation reports; stormwater
drainage reports; utility capacity analysis reports; and soils reports.
IMPROVEMENT — An addition made on property and intended to
enhance its value, utility or beauty, or to adapt it to new or further uses.
INDUSTRIAL USE — The manufacture, fabrication, processing,
reduction or destruction of any article, substance or commodity, or
any other treatment thereof, in such a manner as to change the form,
character or appearance thereof, and including storage, warehousing
and wholesaling.
INOPERABLE VEHICLE —
JUNK — Used machinery, electronic/electrical components, scrap iron,
steel or other ferrous and nonferrous metals, tools, implements or
Any motor vehicle or vital component parts thereof which are
either:
Unusable or inoperable because of lack of or defects in vital
component parts;
(a)
Unusable or inoperable because of damage from collision,
deterioration, alteration or other factors;
(b)
(c) Beyond repair; or
(d) Without a current vehicle registration.
(1)
For the purposes of this definition, the term "vital component parts"
shall mean those parts of a motor vehicle that are essential to the
mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including, but not limited to,
the motor, drive train and wheels.
(2)
§ 108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108
1:453
portions thereof, glass, plastic, cordage, building materials, or other
waste that has been discontinued from its original use and may be used
again in its present form or in a new form.
JUNKYARD and SALVAGE YARD — An open area where junk, including
dismantled or wrecked automobiles, is bought, sold, exchanged, stored,
baled, packed, disassembled or handled. A junkyard includes an
automobile wrecking yard.
LANDSCAPE PLAN — A plan graphically showing the areas to be
landscaped, types of landscaping materials, irrigation, the final design
of all landscaping areas, and long-term maintenance.
LANDSCAPING — The planting and maintenance of various forms of
vegetation and/or the use of architectural materials to aesthetically
enhance and complement structures and the sites on which they are
located.
LEGAL HOLIDAY — A holiday granted to regular employees of the City
of Española pursuant to personnel rules and regulations.
LOT — A parcel of land, the legal description of which is duly recorded
with the County Clerk and which includes:
LOT AREA — The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the
property lines of a lot.
(1)
CORNER LOT — A lot located at the intersection of two or more
streets at an angle of not more than 135°. If the included angle is
greater than 135°, the lot is an interior lot.
(2)
LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of the lot area covered by
structures, including accessory buildings, main buildings and
detached buildings. "Lot coverage" includes all aboveground
structures, including roof overhangs.
(3)
DOUBLE-FRONTAGE OR THROUGH LOT — Any lot having
frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets.
(4)
LOT FRONT — That part of an interior lot abutting the street, or
that part which is designated the front of a corner lot, reversecorner
lot, double-frontage lot, or a lot with three or more sides
abutting a street.
(5)
INTERIOR LOT — Any lot other than a corner lot, a reverse-corner
lot or a double-frontage lot.
(6)
(7) LOT LINE — Any line bounding a lot.
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT — A replat of the recorded lot lines of two
adjacent lots with no additional lots created.
(8)
(9) FRONT LOT LINE — The property line in the front yard.
§ 108 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 108
1:454
LOT SPLIT — The subdivision of one recorded lot into two lots.
LUMINANCE — The brightness of an object expressed in terms of
footlamberts, determined from a point five feet above grade on other
premises or the public right-of-way, but no closer than 20 horizontal
feet to the object measured.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING — A portable housing structure larger
than 40 feet in body length, eight feet in width or 11 feet overall height,
designed for one family for living and sleeping purposes. It does not
include structures built to the standards of the New Mexico Building
Code and National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety
Standards Act.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A parcel of land
designed and/or intended for the placement of manufactured housing
and accessory structures on sites that can be owned in fee simple, as
part of a condominium, a cooperative or a land-lease rental community.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK — A parcel of land under single
ownership on which two or more manufactured housing units are
located. It includes land-lease rental communities where individual lots
are rented, but not owned. It also includes limited-equity cooperatives
but not condominiums.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING SITE — The portion of a manufactured
housing park or development that is designated as the location for
manufactured housing and accessory structures.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING SUBDIVISION — A subdivision designed
and/or intended for the sale of individual lots for siting manufactured
housing. It can also include a condominium.
MASTER PLAN — A plan developed for a specific area within the City
of Española.
MULTIPLE-TENANT BUILDING — A single structure housing two or
more retail, office, commercial or industrial uses.
REAR LOT LINE — The lot line which is opposite and most distant
from the front lot line, or in the case of an irregular lot, a line a
minimum of 10 feet in length farthest removed from the front lot
line, and at or near right angles to the line comprising the depth of
such lot.
(10)
SIDE LOT LINE — Those lot lines of a lot which are not the front or
rear lot lines.
(11)
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot which does not conform to the
provisions of this chapter.
(12)
(13)LOT REAR — That part of a lot opposite the front of the lot.
REVERSE-CORNER LOT — A corner lot, the rear yard of which
abuts a side yard of another lot.
(14)
§ 108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108
1:455
NET FLOOR AREA — The area of all floors in a building, excluding
basements, garages, carports, enclosed porches, mezzanines, hallways,
service areas and similar areas. All horizontal measurements are from
exterior faces of walls.
NET SITE AREA — The area of a horizontal plane within the property
lines of a lot, less the area of all land designated for public use.
NET USABLE AREA — The total floor area designed for tenant
occupancy and exclusive use, expressed in square feet measured from
the inside of walls.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure lawfully existing on
the date of adoption of this chapter, which was designed, erected or
structurally altered for a use which is not a permitted use in the district
in which it is located, or which is not in compliance with the site
development requirements of the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use of a building or land, existing on the
date of adoption of this chapter which does not conform to the uses
permitted in the district in which it is located.
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP — The map adopted by the City of Española as
a component of this chapter, showing the location of the various zoning
districts within the City of Española.
OFF-SITE — Any place not within the boundary of the property to be
developed, subdivided or improved, whether or not in the ownership of
the developer or subdivider.
OFF-STREET PARKING — The area required by this chapter for
temporary vehicular parking.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR-FREQUENCY
RAINSTORM —
OPEN SUN SCREEN — A latticed or louvered assemblage, open on at
least two sides, used for partial shade, providing no weather protection
and not influencing ventilation or the amount of impervious cover of a
lot.
OVERLAY DISTRICT — A set of zoning requirements that are described
in the text of this chapter, are mapped, and are imposed in addition
to those of the underlying district. Development within the overlay
districts must conform to the requirements of both zoning districts or,
when that is not physically possible, the more restrictive of the two.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year and as
defined elsewhere in this chapter; and
(1)
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR-FREQUENCY RAINSTORM — That total
accumulation of 5.24 inches of rain at the end of a one-hour period.
(2)
§ 108 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 108
1:456
OWNER — Any person, group of persons, firms, corporations, public
agency or any other legal entity having legal or equitable interest in
property subject to this chapter. Also see "agent."
PARKING FACILITY — Any space on the streets or off the streets used
for the purpose of parking motor vehicles, including buildings erected
above or below the surface of the ground.
PARKING SPACE — Space for the parking of one automobile, exclusive
of driveways, ramps, columns, loading areas, within a parking facility.
PARKLAND — Public open space that is designed to serve public needs
for recreation, and areas that serve to satisfy public needs for visual
and/or psychologically pleasing spaces.
PARKWAYS — The public right-of-way of a dedicated street located on
either side of the actual street roadway improvements (curb, gutter and
pavement). Parkway areas may or may not contain sidewalks and/or
utilities.
PATIO — Roofed or unroofed space on a lot; if roofed, with at least 50%
of the side surface unscreened or unenclosed with a solid material.
PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY — An accessway generally located between
lots for pedestrian use and either publicly or privately owned, which
may or may not be improved.
PERCENT OF SLOPE — The relation of the vertical rise from or to
the contour line at horizontal intervals of not more than 50 feet and
calculated as follows:
S = H - L * 100
D
Where
H = highest elevation of the portion of tract measured
L = lowest elevation on the portion of the tract measured
D = horizontal distance between H and L
Percent of slope is used to measure grade.
PERMITTED USE — The specific, primary use of a lot allowed by this
chapter. A lot may be put to more than one use at a time.
PET TRAINING OR BREEDING OR KENNELS — The boarding,
breeding, raising, grooming or training of two or more dogs, cats, or
other household pets of any age in exchange for remuneration.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — Two or more dwellings
planned and developed as a whole, including dwellings commonly
known as "townhouses" or "row houses" or "cluster housing," together
with related land, buildings and structures.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the City of
Española.
§ 108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108
1:457
PLANNING DIRECTOR — The Planning Director of the City of Española
or his designee.
PLAT — A map, drawing or chart depicting land and improvements
thereto.
PORCH or DECK — An open platform above ground level attached
to the wall or foundation of a building or structure and primarily
supported in some structural manner from the ground; it may be roofed
or unroofed.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — An engineer registered by the New
Mexico State Board of Registered Engineers and Surveyors.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — Those services provided by accountants,
architects, engineers, business or management consultants, attorneys,
planners or other professionals typically hired as consultants.
PUBLIC GARAGE — A building used for the care, repair, equipping,
hire, sale or storage of motor vehicles.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway,
sidewalk, street, pedestrianway, tree, lawn, off-street parking area,
lot improvement or other facility for which the City of Española may
ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total area of land deeded, reserved by
plat or otherwise acquired, occupied or owned by the City of Española
or any other public entity, primarily for the public movement of people,
goods and vehicles. A public right-of-way may be used for other public
purposes pursuant to this chapter.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR — The Public Works Director for the City
of Española or his designee.
RADIO AND TV TOWERS AND ANTENNAS — Any structure that is
used for transmitting or receiving television, radio or telephone
communications, excluding those used exclusively for dispatch
communications.
RAMP — A sloping roadway or passage used to join two different levels
of streets, structures or buildings, or a driveway leading to parking
aisles.
REAL PROPERTY — Land easements and appurtenant rights to land
along with whatever is erected or affixed to land.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is composed of a chassis,
or a frame with wheels, which either has its own motive power or is
drawn by another vehicle, and has a camping body primarily designed
or converted for use as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping or travel activities.
RECREATION EQUIPMENT — Equipment whose primary function or
design is for recreational purposes, whether originally so designed or
subsequently modified, and is not capable of being self-propelled on
§ 108 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 108
1:458
land, and shall include the following or similar types of equipment:
boats, boat trailers, campers when dismounted from a truck bed or
chassis, horse trailers, houseboats, house trailers, rafts, tent trailers,
travel trailers and utility trailers when converted to recreational
purposes.
RECYCLING STATION — A use where recyclable solid waste materials,
including aluminum, glass, paper, metal and similar materials, are
purchased or procured.
RESIDENCE — A building used, designed or intended to be used as a
home or dwelling by one or more families or lodgers. A manufactured
house is a residence.
RESTAURANT — A business establishment that serves prepared food or
beverages primarily to persons seated within the building. This includes
businesses which may provide an area for food consumption outdoors
in addition to indoor dining.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN OR TAKEOUT — A business establishment
that serves prepared food or beverages primarily for the consumption
by customers within motor vehicles either on or off the premises.
RETAIL — The sale of goods to the ultimate consumer for direct
consumption and not for resale.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — See "public right-of-way."
ROOM — An unsubdivided portion of the interior of a building; it does
not mean a bathroom, closet, hallway or service porch.
RUBBISH — Waste or rejected material; anything worthless or
valueless in its present form; trash.
RUINS — Buildings in a state of disrepair and falling down.
RUNOFF — The water from natural precipitation which flows over the
surface of the land and does not percolate into the soil.
SCHOOLS — Includes the following:
PRIVATE OR PAROCHIAL SCHOOLS — A school, academy or
institution which conducts academic instruction at kindergarten,
elementary, secondary or collegiate levels not under the
jurisdiction of the Española Public Schools; it does not mean a
commercial or trade school.
(1)
PUBLIC SCHOOLS — Schools under the jurisdiction of the
Española Public Schools or, in the case of a post-high-school
institution, under the jurisdiction of a Board of Regents established
by the state.
(2)
TRADE OR COMMERCIAL SCHOOLS — Private schools offering
preponderant instruction in the technical, commercial, or trade
skills, such as real estate schools, business colleges, electronics
(3)
§ 108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108
1:459
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY — Any real property designed and
used for the purpose of renting or leasing individual storage spaces to
tenants who have access to such spaces for the purpose of storing and
removing personal property.
SENIOR CITIZEN MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
— A residential development providing dwelling units specifically
designed for the need of ambulatory elderly persons, with residents
of such development being a minimum of 60 years of age (except
that in the case of married couples only one person needs to be 60
years of age) and with such developments consisting of apartments or
condominiums, or a combination of both dwelling types, but consisting
of a minimum of 30 dwelling units within the project.
SETBACK — The least horizontal distance between a lot line and a
building or structure, exclusive of projections such as roof overhangs
and includes:
SIDEWALK — A publicly owned pedestrian way with permanent
surfacing.
SIGN —
SITE PLAN — The plan graphically showing proposed or actual
development of the property, including, but not limited to, the location
of structures, height and exterior facades, placement of parking and
traffic circulation, method of exterior lighting, landscape treatment,
location and size of signs, and any other such information as may be
requested by planning staff.
SLOPE — Includes:
schools, automotive and aircraft technician schools, and similar
commercial establishments.
MINIMUM SETBACK — The distance from the lot line to any
setback or the main building setback, as required by this chapter.
(1)
Any written, printed or symbolic device capable of visual
communication or attraction, including any announcement,
declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia, structure
or symbol, or architectural feature which serves no other purpose
than communication, used to advertise or promote the interest of
any person; or
(1)
Any official notice issued by any court or public body or officer,
or directional, warning or information signs or structures required
by or authorized by law or by federal, state or City of Española
authority.
(2)
BUILDING SITE SLOPE — The difference between the highest
natural elevation on the building footprint and the lowest natural
elevation of the building footprint divided by 100.
(1)
§ 108 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 108
1:460
SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEM — Includes:
SPECIAL USE — A use which has been determined to be compatible
with the purposes of the district, but which has one or more
characteristics that could make it incompatible with other uses in the
district; and as further described by this chapter.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT — A permit for a use classified as a special use,
as detailed elsewhere in this chapter.
SPOT ZONING — Rezoning of a lot or parcel of land for a use
incompatible with surrounding uses and not for the purpose or effect of
furthering the Comprehensive Plan.
STORAGE — An area or space, either indoors or outdoors, where
something is kept, housed or located for future use. Storage may
include:
STORM DRAINAGE PLAN — A detailed plan showing the location
and proposed topography of streets, lots and other areas within a
development, along with any proposed storm sewer facilities and
easements for surface drainage, intended to satisfy the storm drainage
performance standards of this chapter. It is further meant to include
any drainage calculations requested by the City of Española.
PARCEL SLOPE — The difference between the highest natural
elevations at each end of the one-hundred-foot horizontal
difference divided by 100.
(2)
ACTIVE SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEM — A mechanical
system for heating or cooling a structure by collecting, storing and
transporting solar energy.
(1)
PASSIVE SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEM — A system that
employs siting and orientation, structural materials and
landscaping to take advantage of solar energy for structural
heating.
(2)
AUTOMOBILE STORAGE — A lot used to store vehicles, either for
repair or salvage, when towed or driven to the site. Lots providing
for more than five vehicles must provide screened security fencing
of not less than six feet in height surrounding the entire perimeter
of the lot. This use is determined to be incompatible with
residential uses and therefore shall not be allowed or granted
special use status or permits.
(1)
CONTRACTOR'S STORAGE YARD — An area where heavy
equipment, materials, machinery, aggregates, and other objects
used for the development of land or structures are stored. This
use is determined to be incompatible with residential uses and
therefore shall not be allowed or granted special use status or
permits.
(2)
§ 108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108
1:461
STORY — That portion of a building included between the upper surface
of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that
the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between
the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or above. If
the finished floor level directly above a usable or unused under floor
space is more than six feet above grade for more than 50% of the total
perimeter or is more than 12 feet above grade at any point, such usable
or unused under floor space shall be considered a story.
STREAM — A low point on the natural topography where runoff collects
and stormwaters flow on a periodic basis or a continuously running
waterway.
STREET — A strip of land or way subject to vehicular traffic (as well
as pedestrian traffic) that provides direct or indirect access to property
and may include:
STREET CENTER LINE — The center of a street or right-of-way as
established by official surveys; normally the midpoint of a street cross
section.
STREET FRONTAGE — The distance for which a lot line adjoins a public
street, from one lot line intersecting such street to the furthest distant
lot line intersecting the same street.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or built which requires location
on or in the ground or is attached to something having a location on
or in the ground. Underground storage tanks, patio slabs, paved areas,
walks, tennis courts and similar facilities, the tops of which are not
more than 30 inches above ground, are not structures.
TEMPORARY USE — A use of a temporary, seasonal or transitory
nature, as detailed elsewhere in this chapter, but not to exceed six
months in any one calendar year.
TENANT — Any person who occupies any land or building who is not
the owner but is granted the right of use by the owner.
TRAFFIC ENGINEER — The City of Española employee or contractor
responsible for the administration and enforcement of City of Española
traffic control regulations.
ARTERIAL STREET — A street which is or will, because of its
design, location, or intensity of use with reference to other streets
and other sources of traffic, be used primarily for larger volumes of
traffic.
(1)
PRIVATE STREET — A street as defined elsewhere in this chapter
but differing in that it is not accepted by the City of Española as a
public improvement.
(2)
PUBLIC STREET — A street owned and maintained by the City of
Española or other public entity.
(3)
§ 108 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 108
1:462
TRAILER — Any vehicle without motive power, designed for carrying
persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
TRAILER SALES LOT — An automobile and trailer sales lot, inclusive
of the sale of manufactured housing, as governed by the State of New
Mexico Taxation and Revenue Department.
USE — Any development, use or activity upon lands within the City of
Española.
UTILITIES DIRECTOR — The Utilities Director for the City of Española
or his agent.
VACATION —
VARIANCE — An adjustment in the application of the specific
dimensional regulations of this chapter to a particular piece of property
as more specifically set forth under the laws of the State of New
Mexico.
VETERINARY SERVICE FACILITY — An enclosed structure in which
animals are given medical or surgical treatment or temporary housing
as an accessory use to the veterinary service facility.
WALKWAY — A cleared way for pedestrians, which may or may not be
paved.
WALL — A vertical structure that separates properties, portions of
properties or portions of a building.
WAREHOUSING — A building for the storage of goods of any type with
more than 500 square feet of storage space.
WHOLESALING — The selling of goods for the purpose of resale.
WRECKAGE — Broken, disrupted, disordered mechanical or
automotive parts, machinery or vehicles.
Reversion of all or a portion of a recorded subdivision to a single
lot; or
(1)
The elimination of an easement or right-of-way in a part of a
recorded subdivision.
(2)
§ 108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108
1:463

ARTICLE II
Administration and Enforcement
§ 201. Administration: Planning Director.
The Planning Director shall have the following powers and duties:
A. Public information. The Planning Director shall supply the public with
information about and interpretations of this chapter, the Official
Zoning Map and the Comprehensive Plan.
B. Authority and duty. The Planning Director shall hold public hearings in
accordance with Article X and shall approve, conditionally approve or
disapprove applications for approval of residential site plans for
expansion to existing residence or associated accessory structures,
where the expansion amounts to 20% or less of the floor area of the
structure(s) existing at the time of adoption of this chapter, not to
exceed a total area of maximum of 5,000 square feet of gross floor area.
Commercial site plans shall require review and recommendation by the
DRT. Upon such review, the Planning Director may approve,
conditionally approve or refer the site plan to the Planning Commission
for further review.
C. Administrative authority and duty. The Planning Director may approve,
conditionally approve or disapprove the following applications:
(1) Signs. Sign permits may be approved or conditionally approved by
the Planning Director if the application satisfies the provisions set
forth in Article IX.
(2) Fences and accessory structures.
(a) Applications may be filed with the Planning Director for
construction of fences and accessory structures. The Planning
Director may order issuance of a permit if the application
satisfies the provisions of § 603.
(b) For the purposes of this subsection, "accessory structures" are
those structures that do not require a building permit, such as
those defined in this chapter as a temporary use, but meet the
site development standards set forth in § 1203, provided that
all provisions within the Española Municipal Code are met.
(3) Temporary use permits. Applications shall be filed with the
Planning Director for temporary use permits. The Planning
Director may issue the permit if the application satisfies the
provisions of § 608.
(4) Landscape plans. Application may be made for landscape plans
after site plan approval or conditional approval or when required as
part of the conditional approval of a special use permit by the
Planning Director or the Planning Commission. The Planning
§ 201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201
1:465
§ 202. Administration: Planning Commission.
Director may approve or conditionally approve landscape plans in
accordance with §§ 1002J, 1304 and 1305.
D. Referral to the Planning Commission. The Planning Director shall refer
any application to the Planning Commission when required by this
chapter or when the Planning Director determines that there are
unusual conditions or unique circumstances that warrant review and
decision making by the Planning Commission.
E. Code interpretation. The Planning Director shall interpret the
Development Code and may take any necessary or appropriate action
based on such interpretation. The Planning Director shall not be
required to accept an application or take any other action inconsistent
with the Planning Director's interpretation of the Development Code.
The Planning Director shall, upon request, provide the applicant with a
written explanation of the Director's actions under this subsection.
F. Enforcement. The Planning Director shall be responsible for carrying
out the provisions of this chapter and for taking actions necessary to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
A. Establishment and membership. A Planning Commission is hereby
established, which shall consist of seven members, appointed by the
Mayor and approved by the City Council. The members shall serve
staggered two-year terms and shall continue to serve until they are
removed or their successors are appointed. Four members constitute a
quorum, and the Chairman shall vote on all questions.
B. Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term.
C. Removal of members. Members may be removed for cause by the
Mayor with approval of the City Council upon written explanation and
after public hearing. Members may be removed for cause after four
unexcused absences. Excused absences require 15 days' advance
notice to the Planning Director.
D. Proceedings of the Planning Commission. The Commission shall keep
the minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon
each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of
which shall be filed in the office of the Planning Department and shall
be a public record.
E. Meeting dates. Meetings shall be held at the call of the Planning
Director or Chairman and at such other times as the Commission or
Planning Director may determine but at all times in compliance with the
City's Open Meetings Act Resolution.
§ 201 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 202
1:466
F. Members of the Commission shall elect a Chair and Vice-Chair by
secret ballot on a yearly basis. No member shall serve as Chair for more
than two successive years.
G. Members of the Commission shall live within the planning and platting
jurisdiction of the City of Española. No more than two members shall
live outside the municipal boundaries.
H. The Planning Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) Final decisions. The Planning Commission shall hold a public
hearing in accordance with the requirements of Article X and shall
have the authority to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove
the following:
(a) Applications for variances.
(b) Applications referred to the Planning Commission by the
Planning Director.
(c) Applications for approval of a site plan, except an application
on which the Planning Director acts pursuant to § 201B.
(d) Applications for a special use permit;
(e) Appeals in accordance with this article, including appeals from
a decision of the Planning Director requiring an interpretation
of the Development Code. The Planning Commission shall
affirm the interpretation of this Code determined by the
Planning Director, or remand the matter to the Planning
Director for further consideration in accordance with the
instructions of the Planning Commission.
(2) Advisory powers and duties. The Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing in accordance with the requirements of Article X
and shall forward a recommendation to the City Council on the
following applications:
(a) Application for adoption of and amendments to the text of this
chapter.
(b) Application for adoption of and amendments to the Official
Zoning Map (rezoning).
(c) Application for adoption of and amendments to the
Comprehensive Plan. The Planning Commission may from time
to time recommend amendments, extensions or deletions to
the Comprehensive Plan or carry any part or subject matter
into greater detail.
(d) Application for addition, deletion or change to the use
categories allowed in any district.
§ 202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202
1:467
§ 203. Administration: Development Review Team (DRT).
I. Duties of the Chairman. The Planning Commission Chairman shall
report to the City Council monthly reports covering the following areas:
(1) Matters of the Commission currently at hand.
(2) Status of all applications pending before the Commission.
(3) Needs of the Planning Commission.
J. Biennial review. The Planning Commission should complete a biennial
review of the text of this chapter, the Official Zoning Map and the
Comprehensive Plan to determine whether each is correct, and that no
conflicts exist, and shall forward a recommendation to the City of
Española Council for any necessary or desirable corrections or
changes.
K. Meetings. Four members of the Planning Commission shall be a quorum
for the conduct of business of the Commission and shall require a
motion and affirmative vote of at least a majority of the Planning
Commission present to approve or overturn a decision of the Planning
Director or the Development Review Team. The Planning Commission
shall automatically continue matters not acted upon by virtue of a lack
of quorum.
A. The Development Review Team shall consist of the Planning Director
(who shall act as Chairman), Utilities Director, Public Works Director,
Parks, Recreation Director, City Engineer, Police Chief, Fire Chief and
any other department head who could or may have issues with the
proposed development.
B. The purpose of the DRT is to review development applications and to
advise the Planning Commission, other boards and commissions and
the City Council.
C. All members of the DRT shall issue written recommendations,
comments or findings to the appropriate decision-making authority. If,
upon review, conditions are found that do not impact a specific
department, a statement to that effect shall be issued by the
appropriate department.
D. The DRT shall hold regular meetings at times and places prescribed by
the Chairman. The DRT shall determine its own rules and order of
business.
E. The DRT shall review all matters as set forth in § 302.
F. The DRT shall review complete applications within 30 days of receipt by
the Planning Department and make timely recommendations to the
Planning Director or the Planning Commission, as appropriate, on the
following:
§ 202 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 203
1:468
§ 204. Enforcement: purpose.
It is the purpose of §§ 205 through 208 to establish a City official responsible
for executing those duties associated with the administration and
enforcement of this chapter and to establish a procedure for taking
remedial action on complaints and code violations.
§ 205. Enforcement: responsibilities of Planning Director.
The Planning Director shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of
this chapter, except where the provisions of this chapter clearly designate
enforcement authority to another official. If the Planning Director finds that
any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, he shall notify in
writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of
the violation and setting forth the necessary corrective action.
§ 206. Enforcement: review of zoning compliance.
No department, official or employee of the City of Española shall issue
any building permit or otherwise authorize any type of construction or
improvement to land or buildings or a combination thereof until there has
been an endorsement of zoning compliance in writing by the Planning
Director.
(1) Proposed amendments to the Official Zoning Map.
(2) Special use permits.
(3) Commercial site plans.
(4) Determination of uses and additions, deletions or changes in
category to uses allowed.
(5) Other matters referred to it by the Planning Director, Planning
Commission, City Manager or the City Council.
G. The DRT shall automatically continue matters not acted upon by virtue
of a lack of a quorum no more than 20 working days.
A. He shall be authorized to demand:
(1) Discontinuance of illegal uses of lands, buildings or structures.
(2) Removal of illegal buildings or structures or additions, alterations
or structural changes thereto.
(3) Discontinuance of any illegal work being done.
B. He shall take any other actions authorized and deemed necessary to
ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
§ 203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207
1:469
§ 207. Enforcement: filing of complaints.
Whenever an alleged violation of this chapter occurs, any person may file
a complaint. Complaints shall be filed with the Planning Director, who shall
be responsible for conducting an investigation and may take such actions as
he deems necessary to gain compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 208. Enforcement: violations and penalties.
A. Violators of the provisions of this chapter or persons failing to comply
with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a
fine up to but not more than $500 and/or 90 days in jail, or both, for
each violation found. Each calendar day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
B. The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises or its part or
any architect, builder, contractor, agent or any person who commits,
participates in, assists in or maintains a violation may each be found
guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties provided in this
section.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the City from taking
such other lawful action as may be necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation or to bring an action to enjoin any violation of this chapter.
§ 207 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 208
1:470
ARTICLE III
Application Requirements
§ 301. Purpose of article.
It is the purpose of this article to specify the procedures and requirements
for making applications as required by this chapter.
§ 302. Types of applications; requirements.
A. Amendment to text.
(1) Applications for amendment to the text of this chapter may be
made by the City Council, the Planning Commission, the City
Manager, the Planning Director or by the owner of any parcel of
property to be affected, and shall be submitted to the Planning
Department.
(2) All applications for amendment to the text of this chapter shall
include all applicable information, materials and fees required by
this section or by any resolution establishing fees, and any
additional information specifically requested by the Planning
Director.
(3) The application shall include a statement explaining how it
conforms to the pertinent review criteria.
(4) Within 30 days following receipt of a complete application, the
Planning Director shall set a date for public hearing before the
Planning Commission on the text amendment request. Notice of
public hearing shall be given as provided in Article V of this
chapter. If DRT review is not complete prior to the scheduled public
hearing, the application shall be deemed to have been passed by
the DRT without recommendation.
B. Amendment to Official Zoning Map.
(1) Applications for amendment to the Official Zoning Map may be
made by the City Council, the Planning Commission, the City
Manager, the Planning Director or the owner of any parcel of
property to be affected, and shall be submitted to the Planning
Department.
(2) All applications for amendment to the Official Zoning Map shall
include all information, materials, and fees required by this section
or by any resolution establishing fees, and any additional
information specifically requested by the Planning Director.
(3) The application shall include a statement explaining how it
conforms to the pertinent review criteria.
(4) Within 30 days following receipt of a complete application, the
Planning Director shall set a date for public hearing before the
§ 301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 302
1:471
Planning Commission on the Official Zoning Map amendment
request. Notice of public hearing shall be given as provided in
Article V of this chapter. If DRT review, as required by § 203, is
not complete prior to the scheduled public hearing, the application
shall be deemed to have been passed by the DRT without
recommendation.
C. Commercial site plan approval.
(1) Applications for commercial site plan approvals may be made by
the owner of any parcel of property to be affected and shall be
submitted to the Planning Department.
(2) All applications for commercial site plan approvals shall include all
information, material, and fees required by this section or by any
resolution establishing fees, and any additional information
specifically requested by the Planning Director.
(3) The application shall include a statement explaining how it
conforms to the pertinent review criteria.
(4) Within 30 days following receipt of a complete application, the
Planning Director shall set a date for public hearing on the
commercial site plan request. Notice of public hearing shall be
given as provided in Article V of this chapter. If DRT review, as
required by § 203, is not complete prior to the scheduled public
hearing, the application shall be deemed to have been passed by
the DRT without recommendation, unless the DRT, having found
that more information or review is necessary, continues the matter.
At no time shall the review extension exceed more than 30 days
beyond the public hearing date.
D. Variances.
(1) Applications for variance may be made by the owner of any parcel
of property to be affected and shall be submitted to the Planning
Department. Applications for variances associated with a
subdivision request shall be submitted with the preliminary plat
application or with the summary subdivision application, as
applicable.
(2) Applications for variance to this chapter shall include all
information, materials and fees required by this section.
(3) The application shall include a statement explaining how it
conforms to the pertinent review criteria.
(4) Within 30 days following receipt of a complete application, the
Planning Director shall set a date for public hearing on the variance
request. Notice of public hearing shall be given as provided in
Article V. If DRT review, as required by § 203, is not complete prior
§ 302 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 302
1:472
to the scheduled public hearing, the application shall be deemed to
have been passed by the DRT without recommendation.
E. Special use permits.
(1) Applications for special use permits may be made by the owner of
any parcel of property to be affected and shall be submitted to the
Planning Department.
(2) All applications for special use permits shall include all
information, materials and fees required by this section.
(3) The application shall include a statement explaining how it
conforms to the pertinent review criteria.
(4) Within 30 days following receipt of a complete application, the
Planning Director shall set a date for public hearing on the special
use permit request. Notice of public hearing shall be given as
provided in Article V. If DRT review, as required by § 203, is not
complete prior to the scheduled public hearing, the application
shall be deemed to have been passed by the DRT without
recommendation.
F. Determination of uses; additions, deletions, or changes in category of
uses allowed.
(1) Applications for determinations of uses and additions, deletions or
changes in category, of uses allowed, may be made by the City
Council, Planning Commission, City Manager, Planning Director or
by the owner of any parcel of property to be affected and shall be
submitted to the Planning Department.
(2) Applications for determinations of uses and additions, deletions or
changes in category, of uses allowed, shall include all information,
materials and fees required by applicable items of this section.
(3) The application shall include a statement explaining how it
conforms to the pertinent review criteria.
(4) Within 30 days following receipt of a complete application, the
Planning Director shall set a date for public hearing on the request.
Notice of public hearing shall be given as provided in Article V. If
DRT review, as required by § 203, is not complete prior to the
scheduled public hearing, the application shall be deemed to have
been passed by the DRT without recommendation.
G. Landscape plans.
(1) Applications for landscape plans may be made by the owner of any
parcel of property to be affected and shall be submitted to the
Planning Department.
§ 302 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 302
1:473
(2) Applications for landscape plans shall be submitted as part of the
original application for the site plan or special use permit.
(3) Applications for landscape plans shall include all information,
materials, and fees required by applicable items of this section or
by any resolution establishing fees, and any additional information
specifically requested by the Planning Director.
(4) The application shall include a statement explaining how it
conforms to the pertinent review criteria including §§ 1304 and
1305 and shall depict:
(a) General location of all existing trees six inches or greater in
diameter.
(b) General location and type of ground cover:
[1] Nonliving (pavement, sidewalks and other hard surfaces);
[2] Living (domestic and indigenous); and
[3] Other features (rock outcroppings).
(c) Location and type of shrubbery and trees; e.g., canopy,
understory, evergreen by common name.
(d) Number of parking spaces required.
(e) A summary of the square footage of the overall site and
landscaping area (including living and nonliving ground cover).
(f) North arrow and scale.
(g) Adjacent site landscaping treatments.
(h) Finished topographic contours.
(5) The decision-making authority shall not take final action on a site
plan or special use permit application without prior review and
approval of a landscape plan by the Planning Director. When the
applicant has completed the final plat, the Planning Director shall
review the final landscape plan for action in accordance with § 201
and determine whether it should be forwarded to the Planning
Commission for its consideration.
H. Amendment to the Comprehensive Plan.
(1) Applications for amendment to the Comprehensive Plan may be
made by the City Council, the Planning Commission, the City
Manager, the Planning Director or by the owner of any parcel of
property to be affected, and shall be submitted to the Planning
Department.
(2) Applications for amendment to the Comprehensive Plan shall be in
conformance with this section.
§ 302 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 302
1:474
(3) The application shall include a statement explaining why the
amendment is necessary and shall cite the sections of the
Comprehensive Plan to be amended.
(4) Within 30 days following receipt of a complete application, the
Planning Director shall set a date for public hearing before the
Planning Commission on the Comprehensive Plan amendment
request. Notice of public hearing shall be given as provided in
Article V. If DRT review, as required by § 203, is not complete prior
to the scheduled public hearing, the application shall be deemed to
have been passed by the DRT without recommendation.
I. Temporary uses.
(1) Applications for temporary use permits may be made by the owner
of any parcel of property to be affected and shall be submitted to
the Planning Department. No temporary use permit shall be
approved, by the Planning Director, for more than six months.
Initial requests involving request for more than six months shall be
made to the Planning Commission.
(2) Applications for temporary use permits shall be in conformance
with this section and shall contain sufficient information to
determine the yard area, sanitary facilities and parking space
required for the proposed use.
(3) In issuing a temporary use permit, the Planning Director or
Planning Commission may indicate the permitted hours of
operation and any other conditions, such as lighting, parking or
protective fences, which are deemed necessary to protect adjacent
property or the public health, safety and welfare.
(4) Each site occupied by a temporary use shall be left free of debris,
litter or any evidence of the temporary use upon the expiration of
the temporary use permit and the cessation of the temporary use.
Before issuing a temporary use permit, the Planning Director or
Planning Commission shall require a cash deposit or letter of credit
as may be determined to be adequate to ensure the cleaning up of
the property covered by the temporary use permit. If the property
and the surrounding area are not in the condition required, then
the City may restore it to that condition, in which event the City
shall have the right to be reimbursed for the costs incurred from
the deposit or other security.
(5) Upon written application, the Planning Director or Planning
Commission may modify any of the conditions contained in the
temporary use permit, if the Planning Director or Planning
Commission determines that the modification does not conflict with
the purposes of the zoning requirements.
(6) Upon written application, the Planning Director may extend the
time of operation of the temporary use permit no more than 20%
§ 302 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 302
1:475
above the total time initially allowed. Extension of time beyond 20%
shall be approved by formal action of the Planning Commission.
(7) A use requiring a temporary use permit but continuing beyond the
allowed temporary use period, as provided in this chapter, shall
constitute an offense under this chapter and shall be subject to the
general penalties for such offense.
(8) Following receipt of a complete application, the Planning Director
or Planning Commission may issue the requested temporary use
permit when the Planning Director finds that all of the conditions
can be met as set forth in this subsection.
§ 302 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 302
1:476
ARTICLE IV
Review Criteria
§ 401. Purpose of article.
This article establishes the specific review criteria for development requests
that shall be used by the Planning Director, DRT, Planning Commission and
City Council in their review and decision making of development requests.
§ 402. Site plan required.
An approved or conditionally approved site plan shall be required for all
development(s) of property or alteration or addition to existing structures
prior to issuance of a building permit, except as follows:
§ 403. Development plan review criteria.
A. Changes to the interior of an existing structure may be made without
any prior site plan approval under this chapter.
B. Facade changes, as defined by the latest adopted edition of the Uniform
Building Code, either through architectural or material means, may be
made without any prior site plan approval under this chapter, except if
the building or structure is located in an historical site district.
C. The construction of an open sun screen which complies with the site
development requirements of this chapter and all other applicable rules
and regulations of the City of Española may be made without any prior
site plan approval.
A. Applicants for new construction of individual buildings or additions
shall receive Planning Commission approval of a development plan
prior to issuance of a building permit in the following circumstances:
(1) Any new commercial development.
(2) Any application for subdivision into three or more lots for
residential or commercial use.
(3) Any expansion of a use on an existing site for which there has never
been an approved development plan.
(4) Any change of use for an existing site with or without an approved
development plan.
(5) Any expansion of more than 2,000 square feet of gross floor area
and/or land use area for an existing site with an approved
development plan.
B. For the purpose of this section, "development plan" means a plan drawn
to scale, certified by an engineer and/or architect, showing the
locations of existing and new structures; location map, lot coverage,
height and gross floor area of structure; lot area; the placement and
§ 401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 403
1:477
arrangement of buildings; and the uses to be included; topography, onsite
drainage, retention and detention areas, drainage flow, proposed
lighting of the premises; internal vehicular and pedestrian circulation;
vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress from adjoining streets;
recorded and proposed easements; location of off-street parking and
loading facilities; any significant natural features, including drainage
and vegetation; location and type of landscaping; and the type of visual
screening such as walls, fences and landscaping. If it is proposed
to develop the plan in phases, the phases of development shall be
indicated along with any other information requested by the Planning
Staff, DRT, or Planning Commission.
C. During the course of its review of any development plan, the DRT shall
utilize the following criteria in formulating a recommendation to the
Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall utilize the
following criteria in making its determination of approval, conditional
approval or denial:
(1) The development plan shall substantially conform to the
Comprehensive Plan and shall not be materially detrimental to the
health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Española.
(2) Ingress, egress, traffic circulation and parking on the site shall be
accomplished with safety for motorists, bicyclists and pedestrians.
Provisions shall be made for the safe ingress, egress and
circulation of vehicles, bicyclists and pedestrians.
(3) The necessary provisions shall be made for controlling stormwater
drainage on-site and off-site consistent with the City of Española
Design Guidelines.
(4) The necessary easements shall be provided for ingress, egress,
access, and all required amenities, including also existing and
proposed utilities, on-site and off-site. No existing easement shall
be vacated or relocated without provision for a suitable alternate,
and all new easements shall be provided as necessary.
(5) The site plan shall include a landscape plan that will enhance the
site and immediate vicinity. The landscape plan shall conform to the
requirements set forth in §§ 1304 and 1305.
(6) The proposed on-site improvements shall preserve, to the extent
practical, outstanding topographical features and natural
amenities on the site.
(7) In areas located within the same zoning district having different
uses, appropriate screening and/or buffering shall be provided
between properties; to be designed, built and paid for by the more
intense use, provided that the more intense use was the most
recent developed.
§ 403 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 403
1:478
§ 404. Review criteria for amendments to Official Zoning Map.
D. For development plans involving more than two lots for single-family
dwellings, the following additional provisions shall apply:
(1) Parking lots, outside storage areas, outside mechanical equipment
and outdoor lighting shall be designed to serve the intended use of
the development while minimizing adverse impacts on adjacent
properties or public rights-of-way.
(2) The capacity of those public services and facilities required to
serve the proposed development (including but not limited to
water, sanitary sewer, electricity, gas, storm sewer, streets, etc.)
shall conform with, or if improvements are required, shall be made
to conform with, the requirements of the City of Española Design
Guidelines.
(3) Provisions shall be made to serve the development with tot lots
and/or neighborhood parks in accordance with the adopted
Comprehensive Plan.
(4) In all R-1 and R-2 Districts, provisions shall be considered for the
incorporation of or exclusion of recreational vehicle parking and
storage.
(5) Adequate screening and buffering, if appropriate, shall be provided
between properties. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the
Planning Director shall review and approve the landscape plan.
A. A request for amendment to the Comprehensive Plan shall, if necessary,
be submitted, processed, heard and decided upon concurrently with the
request for amendment to the Official Zoning Map.
B. During the course of the review of any request for an amendment to the
Official Zoning Map, the DRT shall utilize the following criteria in
formulating a recommendation to the Planning Commission. The
Planning Commission shall make findings as to whether or not the
proposal meets the following criteria and shall make a recommendation
for approval, conditional approval or denial to the City Council. The City
Council shall make findings as to whether or not the proposal meets the
following criteria at the time of its approval, conditional approval or
denial:
(1) The request substantially conforms to the Comprehensive Plan and
is not materially detrimental to the health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of Española.
(2) The requested zoning shall be reviewed considering the available
development potential in the proposed district.
(3) Consideration shall be given to the existing and programmed
capacity of on-site and off-site public services and facilities,
§ 403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 404
1:479
§ 405. Special use permit review criteria.
including, but not limited to, water, sanitary sewer, electricity,
gas, storm sewer, streets, sidewalks, traffic control, parks, fire and
police to adequately serve the property should a rezoning result in
any increase of the intensity of use of the property.
(4) The establishment, maintenance or operation of uses applied for
will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be
detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons
residing or working adjacent to or within the proximity of the
subject property.
(5) The existing zoning is inappropriate for one or more of the
following reasons:
(a) It was established in error;
(b) Changed conditions warrant the rezoning; or
(c) A different zone is more likely to meet goals contained in the
Comprehensive Plan.
(6) The proposed zoning will not result in spot zoning or strip zoning as
defined in Article I of this chapter, or one or more of the following
exceptions to the prohibition of spot zoning or strip zoning is met:
(a) Granting such zoning accomplishes the policy and intent of the
Comprehensive Plan;
(b) Unique characteristics specific to the site exist; or
(c) The zoning serves as an appropriate transition between land
uses of higher and lower intensity.
A. The DRT shall utilize the following criteria in formulating a
recommendation to the Planning Commission, and the Planning
Commission shall utilize the following criteria in making its
determination of approval, conditional approval or denial:
(1) The request substantially conforms to the Comprehensive Plan, and
the establishment, maintenance or operation of the use applied for
will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be
detrimental to the health, safety, peace, comfort or general welfare
of persons residing or working in the vicinity of such proposed use,
or be detrimental or injurious to property or to the value of
property in the vicinity, or to the general welfare of the citizens of
Española.
(2) There are sufficient parking facilities that are adequately designed,
shielded, landscaped and lighted to serve the use applied for based
on the requirements of this chapter as found in Article VIII of this
chapter.
§ 404 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 405
1:480
§ 406. Variance review criteria.
(3) The provisions for on-site and off-site ingress/egress and traffic
circulation are in conformance with the City of Española Design
Guidelines, the public streets serving the use applied for are
adequate to meet the traffic needs of the proposed use, and the
proposed use will not adversely affect neighboring properties by
virtue of the type of traffic generated by the use.
(4) The setbacks of buildings and parking facilities from the property
lines, right-of-way, and adjacent land uses are in conformance with
this chapter and provide protection to and a transition from
residential development, existing and contemplated, in the vicinity;
and the height and bulk of the proposed buildings and structures
are compatible with the general character of development in the
vicinity of the use applied for.
(5) The site plan, including, but not limited to, landscaping, screen
planting, and fencing of the proposed development, demonstrates
that the site development will be compatible with adjoining areas
and will conform to the site development standards of the district
regulations.
B. The Planning Commission shall prescribe the point in time at which the
special use is to begin, not to exceed 90 days from the meeting date,
and the point in time when the special use shall expire, not to exceed
five years.
C. Failure to begin or complete any required action authorized at the time
of granting the special use shall void the special use.
D. Special use permits are not transferable, and a transfer of the land
ownership shall invalidate the special use.
A. During the course of review of any variance request, the Planning
Commission shall determine whether all of the requirement in this
section have been met and shall make a determination of approval,
conditional approval or denial:
(1) The practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship is inherent to the
lot and is peculiar because of the size, shape, topography or some
other characteristic of the lot which differentiates it from other lots
in the vicinity or in the district. The hardship created is not selfimposed.
(2) The practical difficulty or hardship created is caused by a strict
interpretation of the provisions of this chapter, is not self-imposed
and is not generally shared by other lots in the vicinity or the
district.
§ 405 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 406
1:481
§ 407. Review criteria for amendments to text.
§ 408. Review criteria for determination of uses and addition,
deletion or change in category of uses allowed.
During the course of the review of any request for a determination of uses or
for addition, deletion or change in category of uses which may be allowed in
any zoning district, the DRT shall utilize the following criteria in formulating
a recommendation to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission
shall utilize the following criteria in making its recommendation of
approval, conditional approval or denial to the City Council, and the City
Council shall utilize the following criteria in making a determination of
approval or denial:
(3) The granting of the requested variance is necessary for the
preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the
applicant which is possessed by other owners in the vicinity.
(4) The granting of the variance sought will not be contrary to the
purpose or intent of this chapter, or injurious to property within
100 feet or otherwise detrimental to the general health, safety, or
general welfare of the community.
B. Should any request for variance not meet all four of the above-listed
criteria, the Planning Commission shall deny the request.
A. A request for amendment to the Comprehensive Plan shall, if necessary,
be submitted concurrently with the request for amendment to the text
of this chapter.
B. When reviewing a request for amendment to the text of this chapter, the
DRT shall utilize the following criteria in formulating a recommendation
to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall utilize the
following criteria in making its recommendation to the City Council.
The City Council shall utilize the following criteria in making its
determination of approval or denial:
(1) The request substantially conforms to the Comprehensive Plan; and
(2) The request is not materially detrimental to the health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of Española.
A. The proposed change will not result in land use inconsistent with the
purpose of the district.
B. The proposed change will not permit the establishment of a use
incompatible with a use allowed in the district.
C. The proposed change substantially conforms to the Comprehensive
Plan.
D. The proposed use is not materially detrimental to the health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of Española.
§ 406 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 408
1:482
ARTICLE V
Public Notice
§ 501. Purpose of article.
It is the purpose of this article is to establish minimum public notice
requirements for land use decisions and to assure that the general public
is adequately notified or otherwise made aware of land use regulations,
permits and decisions which may directly or indirectly affect lands within
the City of Española.
§ 502. Planning Commission public hearing requirements.
A. When the Planning Commission proposes to act on requests for
adoption of or amendments to the Comprehensive Plan, amendments to
this chapter, amendments to the Official Zoning Map, determination of
uses, and additions, deletions or changes in category of uses allowed,
applications for a site plan, for a special use permit, for a variance, or
requests for an appeal of a written interpretation by the Planning
Director, notice of public hearing shall be as set forth in this section.
(1) Agenda requirements. For all public hearings before the Planning
Commission, City staff shall place the tentative agenda in a local
newspaper of general circulation at least 15 calendar days prior to
the scheduled meeting. In addition, the City staff shall post the
tentative meeting agenda in City Hall at least 15 calendar days
prior to the scheduled meeting.
(2) Posting requirements. For all public hearings before the Planning
Commission, the property shall be posted by the applicant with
posters not less than 24 inches by 36 inches in size obtained from
the Planning Department. Such posters shall be prominently
displayed, visible from a public street and securely placed on the
subject property at least 15 calendar days prior to the scheduled
meeting. The posting shall indicate the nature of the change
proposed, identify the subject property and the time, date and
place of the meeting.
(3) Mailing requirements. Notice of the time, date and place of the
public hearing shall be mailed by the applicant by U.S. Mail at least
15 calendar days prior to the public hearing to property owners of
record within 200 feet of the subject property, exclusive of the
public right-of-way. A sample notice letter will be given to the
applicant for use. Return receipts shall be delivered by the
applicant to the Planning Department prior to the public hearing.
[Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
B. City as applicant. Where the City is the applicant and the project plan
area is greater than 50 acres, the City shall place in the public right-ofway
one poster at each major intersection within the plan or project
area. All posters shall be placed at the appropriate site at least 15
§ 501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 502
1:483
§ 503. City Council public hearing requirements.
When the City Council proposes to act on requests for adoption or
amendment of the Comprehensive Plan or this chapter, amendment to the
Official Zoning Map, or determination of uses and addition, deletion or
changes in category of uses allowed, notice of public hearing shall be as set
forth in the current City Council Open Meetings Resolution.
calendar days prior to the scheduled meeting and shall indicate the
nature of the change proposed and identify the plan or project area and
the time, date and place of the meeting.
§ 502 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 503
1:484
ARTICLE VI
Use Regulations
§ 601. Fences, hedges and gates; sight obstructions.
A. Height. Solid or open fences or hedges shall not exceed six feet in
height, with the exception of:
(1) Front yard. Fences shall only be allowed in front yards, provided
they meet the requirements set forth in Subsection C(1) below on
sight obstruction.
(2) Side and rear yards on reverse-corner lots. Solid fences, open
fences or hedges not exceeding eight feet in height are permitted in
any district in the required side yard area and within a projection of
the same width through the rear yard to the rear property line in
those side and rear yard areas adjacent to a street. These
limitations are subject to the additional requirements of Subsection
C of this section.
(3) Commercial, Industrial and BP Districts. Fences or walls not
exceeding eight feet in height are permitted in any of these
Commercial, Industrial and BP Districts, but not within required
front yards.
(4) Double-frontage lots. Fences, hedges or walls on double-frontage
lots are limited in § 602.
B. Gates. Gates shall not be constructed so as to obstruct the public rightof-
way or to obstruct the view of vehicular or pedestrian traffic as set
forth in Subsection C of this section. Gates shall not exceed 12 feet in
height, except in the R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts where structural
support members of any gate shall not exceed 20 feet in height in any
yard. The structural support of any gate not exceeding 20 feet in height
in the R-1 District is permitted.
C. Sight obstruction.
(1) It shall be the sole duty and responsibility of the owner or occupant
of any corner lot to ensure that unobstructed vision for traffic
safety is maintained such that there shall be located no structure,
fence, wall, hedge, natural growth, sign or other object which
materially impairs vision within an area bounded by the lot lines
and a line joining points along each lot line 30 feet from their point
of intersection with each other and the extension of the line into the
unpaved area of the adjacent right-of-way, between a height of
three feet and 10 feet above the center-line grade of the
intersecting streets, except as provided for in Subsection C(3) of
this section.
(2) Whenever any owner or occupant suffers or permits the existence
of a sight obstruction, the Planning Director, upon complaint or his
§ 601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 601
1:485
own initiative, shall give notice in writing to the owner or occupant
of the existence of the sight obstruction and of the owner's
responsibility, within 30 days of receipt of such notice, to remove
the sight obstruction or to show cause in writing to the Planning
Director why such obstruction should not be removed. Such notice
shall be served to the property owner or occupant either personally
or by certified mail. The owner's or occupant's failure to remove the
sight obstruction or to show cause within the time specified shall
be deemed to be:
(a) An admission of the existence of the sight obstruction; and
(b) A consent for the City of Española to enter the property and
remove the sight obstruction. In so entering, the City of
Española may, in its discretion, use its own personnel or may
contract with third parties for the removal of the sight
obstruction. All removal costs shall be charged to the property
owner; the full amount shall be payable by the property owner
and shall constitute a lien in favor of the City of Española
against such property.
(3) The requirements of Subsection C(1) and (2) of this section shall
not apply to:
(a) Legal nonconforming structures;
(b) Public utility poles;
(c) Vegetation, so long as it is not planted in the form of a hedge
and is trimmed to the trunk to a height of at least 10 feet above
the center-line grade of the intersecting streets;
(d) Official traffic control signs and signals; and
(e) Existing ground contours penetrating above the three-foot
height limitation.
(4) The requirements of Subsection C(1) through (3) of this section are
declared to be the minimum and in no way prohibit the City of
Española from applying more restrictive height and location
standards where such action is warranted in consideration of the
health, safety, and general welfare of the community.
(5) Any structure, fence, wall, hedge, natural growth, tree, sign or
other object erected, placed or allowed to remain in place which
does not comply with the requirements of Subsection C(1) through
(4) of this section is a sight obstruction.
D. Grade level differences. Where there is a difference in grade level
between two properties, the permitted height of any fence within five
feet of the common lot line shall be computed from the average grade
level within that ten-foot distance, but in no case shall the fence height
be limited to less than 42 inches.
§ 601 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 601
1:486
§ 602. Yards and setbacks.
E. Barbed wire prohibited; exceptions. Barbed wire fences are prohibited,
except for ranching and agricultural uses as follows:
(1) In the R-1 District, in the rear yard but not on lot lines, abutting
equestrian trails, public rights-of-way or City-owned lands.
(2) In all zoning districts where needed for security or safety purposes,
barbed wire is permitted to be added to fences above six feet.
Barbed-wire fences are not permitted on residential lots except as
allowed for lots in the R-1 District.
F. Finished side of fences. The finished side of the fence shall front or face
the right-of-way or adjacent property.
G. Permit required for fences and walls. A fence/wall permit is required
prior to commencing construction of any fence or wall as required by
the provisions of § 201.
A. Corner lots in residential districts.
(1) On a corner lot in a residential district, the owner has a choice of
which yard is the front yard and to construct the dwelling unit
accordingly, unless the front yard is designated on the recorded
plat of the subdivision.
(2) The elected or designated front yard shall conform to the site
development requirements for the district. The other yard abutting
a street is a side yard and shall have a minimum setback of 15 feet.
B. Double-frontage or through lots. On double-frontage lots, one yard shall
be designated as the front yard, and the other yard abutting a street
shall be the rear yard, but shall be subject to all site development
requirements of a front yard of the district. Fences and hedges in the
required rear (second front) yard are subject to the height limitations of
a rear yard as defined in Subsection A(1) of this section, except that
when the rear yard faces or is adjacent to the front yard of a
neighboring lot, the height limitations and setback requirements of a
front yard shall be imposed as defined in this article.
C. Lots in commercial or industrial districts abutting residential
properties. Any lot in commercial or industrial districts which abuts a
residential district must have a minimum side or rear yard setback
equal to the required minimum side or rear yard setback of the
adjoining residentially zoned lot.
D. Projections into required setbacks.
(1) Eaves, cornices, sills, chimneys, awnings and other nonstructural
features may project no more than two feet into any required
setbacks.
§ 601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 602
1:487
§ 603. Accessory buildings and structures.
(2) Fire escapes and fire-resistive outside stairways may project into
any required rear or side yard as permitted by the latest version of
the New Mexico Building Code and/or Uniform Building Code.
(3) A roofed breezeway connecting a main structure and accessory
structures may project into the required rear setback in any
residential district if the breezeway is a minimum of five feet from
all lot lines and open on all sides except for the supporting posts.
(4) Covered patios, porches or decks attached to the main structures
may extend to a maximum of 40% of the distance into the required
rear setback; provided, however, that the space under the cover is
open on at least three sides; the covers may not extend into the
required front or side setbacks, except in the R-1 through R-4
Districts, where a covered, one-story porch, open on three sides,
may encroach not more than five feet into the required front
setback. In both cases, the eave of the patio or porch cover may
project an additional two feet into the required setback.
(5) Uncovered porches or decks may extend 40% of the distance into a
required rear setback but may not extend any distance into a
required side or front setback. Uncovered walkways, driveways,
steps, patios or courtyards may extend any distance into any
required yard.
(6) Open balconies or bay windows may project five feet into any
required rear setback and two feet into the required front yard.
(7) A carport, consisting of a roof that has no walls, or wholly or
partially enclosed walls, except those that are part of the main
structure to which it is attached, shall project no more than 40% of
the distance into the required front yard setback.
E. Use of required setbacks. Except as provided elsewhere in this chapter,
every required setback shall be open, unobstructed and free of ruins,
wreckage, rubbish and debris. No setback provided around any
building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this
chapter shall be considered as providing a setback for any other
building or site.
A. Location.
(1) No accessory building may be located closer to the front property
line than the main structure on any lot, except as may be modified
by Subsection A(3) and (4) of this section.
(a) Garages and carports may be located in the front yard behind
the minimum front setback in residential districts. No other
accessory building may be located in the front yard within 20
feet of the front property line in any district.
§ 602 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 603
1:488
(b) Accessory buildings and structures may not be located in
required side yards in any district.
(2) Accessory buildings, uses, and structures shall not be located
within five feet of any rear lot line in any residential district, except
as may be modified by the provisions of Subsection A(3) and (4) of
this section.
(3) In the manufactured housing park manufactured housing
developments, accessory buildings and structures shall not be
located within 20 feet of a manufactured housing park roadway or
within 10 feet of a manufactured housing site boundary.
(4) In the manufactured housing parks and development districts,
accessory buildings and structures shall not be permitted within 20
feet of the front property line.
B. Lot coverage. In residential districts, the lot coverage of all types of
accessory buildings and structures located in the required rear yard
shall not exceed 25% of the required rear yard area.
C. Permit required. An accessory structure permit shall be required prior
to commencing construction of any accessory structure pursuant to
§ 201.
D. Number of accessory buildings and structures.
(1) In the R-3, R-4, R-6 and Planned Unit Development Districts, a
detached garage or carport and not more than two additional
accessory buildings per dwelling unit are permitted; in the R-2
District, four accessory buildings per dwelling unit are permitted;
in the R-1 District, four accessory buildings, in addition to a carport
or garage, are permitted.
(2) In districts where dwelling units are not the primary use, the area
of accessory buildings is subject to site plan review and shall not
exceed 20% of the primary structure square footage.
E. Accessory dwelling units. [Added 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
(1) R-1, R-2, R-3 and B-2 Districts. Accessory dwelling units are
permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and B-2 Districts, provided that the
properties are being served by City water and City sewer.
(a) Accessory dwelling units shall not be more than 50% of the
main dwelling and not greater than 1,200 square feet;
(b) The total lot coverage by all structures shall not exceed the
provisions set forth in Table I, Table II and Table III of
Ordinance 203-15;
(c) Accessory dwelling units shall not be less than five feet from a
side or rear lot line; and
§ 603 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 603
1:489
§ 604. Height of structures.
§ 605. Swimming pools.
§ 606. Outdoor lighting.
(d) Accessory dwelling units shall not be less than 25 feet from the
front lot line.
A. Chimneys, television and radio masts and antennas (whether receiving,
transmitting, or both, and related to amateur use only), except satellite
dish antennas, are exempt from the structural height limitations of this
chapter.
B. Churches, hospitals, institutions and schools, when permitted in any
residential district, may exceed the structural height permitted in the
district; provided, however, that any part of the building or structure
exceeding the height limit is set back from adjoining lot lines at least
the distance of the required yard plus one foot for each foot of
additional building or structural height above the district requirements.
A. No public or private swimming pool may be located in any required
front yard.
B. Public or private swimming pools may be located in any rear yard, but
no pool may be located within 10 feet of any lot line. However, the
location of the pool coping, walks or apron is not restricted by this tenfoot
setback requirement. A structure designed to enclose a pool shall
meet the applicable accessory or main structure setback, height and
coverage requirements.
C. Every outdoor swimming pool, or the yard in which it is located, must
be completely surrounded by a fence not less than six feet in height,
and all fence gates or doors opening to the pool must be equipped with
at least a self-closing and self-latching device for keeping the gates or
doors securely closed at all times when not in actual use.
D. No private swimming pool shall be operated as a business or as a
private club, unless in accordance with other provisions of this code.
A. All outdoor lighting fixtures shall be designed to comply with the Design
Guidelines.
B. Neither the direct nor reflected light may create a hazard to operators
of motor vehicles.
C. No lights that resemble traffic control devices may be used.
D. No beacon lights or blinking, flashing or fluttering or other illuminating
devices which have a changing light intensity, brightness or red, blue or
orange color may be used or displayed in any district, except holiday
decorations.
§ 603 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 606
1:490
§ 607. Home occupations.
No property in a residential district shall be used for a home occupation
unless the home occupation meets the following standards and conditions:
E. Recognizing that outdoor lighting is an important component of the
nighttime ambiance of the community and acknowledging that the
night skies are a valuable natural resource which should be protected,
the community lighting goals shall be to keep outdoor lighting to a safe
minimum and to eliminate or reduce, to the maximum extent feasible,
light pollution and light trespass.
F. Commercial outdoor lighting, private outdoor lighting which is part of a
designated private utility improvement and public outdoor lighting,
including but not limited to roadway, parking lot, walkway, bikeway,
park, and outdoor sports lighting, are subject to the conditions required
by the local electric provider.
A. In the R-1 District:
(1) The home occupation or profession shall be carried on within the
main building, an enclosed garage or other accessory building, or
any combination of these, except agricultural, horticultural or
animal husbandry uses may be carried on outside a building.
(2) Not more than 25% of the area of the main dwelling may be used
for home occupations. There is no limitation to the area of the lot or
accessory buildings that may be used for agricultural, horticultural
or animal husbandry home occupations; the total area used in other
home occupations shall not exceed 25% of the area of all buildings
on the lot. Any area of the main dwelling used in the home
occupation shall be included in determining the total area so used.
(3) Retail sales on the premises shall be permitted, but shall be
restricted to not more than 10% of the dwelling unit floor area for
storage and display of goods to be sold.
(4) No more than one person outside the family shall be employed in a
home occupation on the lot.
(5) There shall be no visible exterior display or storage of materials
used in the home occupation, except that materials used in
agricultural, horticultural and animal husbandry occupations may
be stored outside of a building or in such a way as to be visible from
off the lot. Other than the exception in this Subsection A(5), there
shall be no exterior indication of the home occupation or variation
from the residential character of the main building or lot, except
that a two-square-foot sign designating the permitted home
occupation may be located on the lot. Also see Article IX for sign
requirements.
§ 606 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 607
1:491
(6) There shall be no noise, vibrations, smoke, dust, odor, heat or glare
detectable beyond the boundaries of the lot on which the home
occupation is located, so as to constitute a nuisance.
(7) The home occupation shall not create hazardous waste; or create
pedestrian, automobile or truck traffic, or parking congestion
significantly in excess of the normal amount found in a residential
district.
(8) No equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or
audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the
premises or causes fluctuation in the electrical line voltages off the
premises.
(9) The use shall not involve the use of signs or structures other than
those permitted in the district.
(10) The use must be clearly incidental and secondary to the primary
use of the lot.
(11) The use is the same as or similar to, but not restricted to, the
following:
(a) Art, craft or technical work.
(b) Assembly and mechanical repair, including instruments, time
pieces, sporting equipment and household appliances where
articles are hand portable.
(c) Repair of electric motors less than five horsepower in rated
capacity; and repairs of mechanical and electrical components
of automobiles which have been removed from the vehicle and
brought to the premises.
(d) Office for the conduct of a profession, trade or service.
(e) Sewing and alteration of garments and home furnishings.
(f) Music lessons, dance lessons and tutoring.
(g) Conduct of a business related to a sport or hobby.
(h) Food cooperative.
(i) Testing, tune-up and repair of internal combustion engines less
or equal to 10 horsepower, subject to Subsection A(6) of this
section.
(j) Agricultural, horticultural and animal husbandry.
(12) The following uses are not allowed:
(a) Contractor's yard.
(b) Salvage yard or junkyard.
§ 607 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 607
1:492
(c) Automobile repair or body and paint shop.
B. In all other residential districts:
(1) The home occupation or profession shall be carried on within the
main building, an enclosed garage or other accessory building, or
any combination of these.
(2) An area no larger than 25% of the combined dwelling unit area and
areas of all accessory buildings may be used for home occupations,
but not more than 25% of the area of the main dwelling may be so
used. In the remaining districts, an area no larger than 25% of the
dwelling unit area may be used for home occupations, without
regard as to how the area is apportioned between the dwelling unit
and any accessory buildings.
(3) Retail sales on the premises shall be permitted, but not more than
10% of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used for storage
and display of goods to be sold.
(4) No more than one person outside the family shall be employed in a
home occupation on the premises.
(5) There shall be no visible exterior display or storage of materials
used in the home occupation, and no other exterior indication of
the home occupation or variation from the residential character of
the main building or lot, except that an unlighted, two-square-foot
sign designating the permitted home occupation may be located on
the lot. Also see Article IX for sign requirements.
(6) There shall be no noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat or glare
detectable beyond the boundaries of the lot on which the home
occupation is located, so as to constitute a nuisance.
(7) The home occupation shall not create hazardous waste; or create
pedestrian, automobile or truck traffic, or parking congestion
significantly in excess of the normal amount found in the district.
(8) No equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or
audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the
premises or causes fluctuation in electrical line voltages off the
premises.
(9) The use shall not involve the use of signs or structures other than
those permitted in the district.
(10) Such use must be clearly incidental and secondary to the primary
use of the lot.
(11) The use is the same as or similar to, but not limited to, the
following:
(a) Art, craft or technical work.
§ 607 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 607
1:493
§ 608. Temporary uses.
The following regulations govern operation of the temporary, transitory or
seasonal uses listed in Subsection B of this section:
(b) Assembly or mechanical repair, including instruments, time
pieces, sporting equipment and household appliances where
articles are hand portable.
(c) Repair of electric motors less than five horsepower in rated
capacity; and repairs of mechanical and electrical components
of automobiles which have been removed from the vehicle and
brought to the premises.
(d) Office for the conduct of a profession, trade or service.
(e) Sewing and alteration of garments and home furnishings.
(f) Music lessons, dance lessons and tutoring.
(g) Conduct of a business related to a sport or hobby.
(h) Testing, tune-up and minor repair of internal combustion
engines less than or equal to 10 horsepower, subject to
Subsection B(6) of this section.
(12) The following uses are not allowed:
(a) Contractor's yard.
(b) Salvage yard or junkyard.
(c) Automobile repair or body and paint shop.
A. Applications. Application for a temporary use permit shall be made to
the Planning Director or Planning Commission as set forth in § 302.
B. Uses. The following temporary uses are subject to the following specific
regulations as well as to the regulations of the zoning district in which
the use is located:
(1) Carnival or circus. A temporary use permit may be issued for a
carnival or circus for a period not longer than 15 days in any sixmonth
period at the same site.
(2) Holiday tree sales.
(a) In any commercial district, lot sales of holiday trees are
permitted for a period of not longer than 45 days, expiring
December 30 of each year.
(b) In any other zoning district, lot sales of holiday trees are
permitted for a period of not longer than 45 days, expiring
December 30 of each year. The City Manager shall designate
§ 607 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 608
1:494
those municipal lands where lot sales of Christmas trees are to
be permitted.
(3) Contractor's office, equipment sheds and security fencing. In any
district, a temporary use permit may be issued for a contractor's
temporary office and equipment shed or manufactured housing
incidental to a construction project. Such permit shall expire one
year after the date of issuance or upon the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy, temporary or final, whichever occurs first. As part of
the temporary use permit for a contractor's temporary office,
security fences not exceeding eight feet in height may be erected
on the construction site, with the location and material of the fence
to be approved by the Planning Director as part of the temporary
use permit for the contractor's office and/or equipment shed.
Barbed wire may be utilized for added security, but only at the top
of the fence above six feet. Such fences shall be removed on or
before the expiration of the temporary use permit.
(4) Caretaker's unit. In conjunction with the temporary use provisions
of Subsection B(3) of this section, a temporary use permit may be
requested for and issued for a caretaker's unit. Also see § 108,
Definitions; rules of construction; for family use as part of a
caretaker's unit.
(5) Real estate office. In any district, a temporary use permit may be
issued for a temporary real estate sales office in any new
residential subdivision or development, such permit to expire one
year after the date of issuance or upon completion of sales or
rentals of all other property or units within the subdivision or
development, whichever occurs first. A model home may be used as
a temporary sales office. No residential use may be made of the
office or model home.
(6) Religious tent meeting. In any district, a temporary use permit may
be issued for a tent or other temporary structure to house religious
meetings for a period of not more than 10 days.
(7) Temporary dwelling units during construction of a permanent
single-family dwelling unit. For the purposes of this subsection,
manufactured housing and recreational vehicles may be allowed as
temporary dwellings. A temporary use permit may be issued for the
use of a temporary dwelling unit during the construction of any
single-family or two-family dwelling, subject to the following
conditions:
(a) The permit shall expire one year after the date of issuance or
upon the completion of construction, whichever occurs first.
(b) The applicant shall arrange for appropriate utility services to
the temporary dwelling unit.
§ 608 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 608
1:495
§ 609. Recreational vehicles and equipment.
(c) The temporary dwelling unit's location on the site shall
conform to the site development standards of the residential
district in which it is to be located.
(d) The temporary dwelling unit shall be removed from the site on
or before occupancy of the dwelling unit.
(8) Nonprofit fund-raising.
(a) In any district, nonprofit fund-raising shall be permitted only
with the consent of the owner of such property.
(b) Nonprofit fund-raising within the City of Española is subject to
the following conditions:
[1] Applicants shall comply with the provisions of Business
Registration and Vendors Ordinance.28
(c) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, nonprofit
fund-raising on the public rights-of-way is prohibited.
(9) Seasonal sales of farm produce. A temporary use permit may be
issued for the sale of unprocessed farm produce in any district,
provided that the produce is sold from the same location in which it
is grown. The permit shall be for a period of time not longer than
the growing and harvest season in a year and may be issued to
individuals, groups or organizations. Products sold at the Española
farmers market are exempt from this provision.
(10) Outdoor arts and crafts shows and exhibits. A temporary use
permit may be issued for outdoor arts and crafts shows or exhibits
located on public or private land or on public rights-of-way in any
district, for a period not longer than 15 days in any ninety-day
period. Vendors within New Mexico highway rights-of-way must
obtain permits from the New Mexico Department of
Transportation.
(11) Temporary use permit. All commercial and professional activities
conducted in commercial districts may request a temporary use
permit to periodically conduct sidewalk or outdoor sales limited to
not more than 30 calendar days in any twelve-month period, unless
an alternative requirement is provided for elsewhere in the
Española Municipal Code.
A. Under no circumstances shall recreational vehicles or equipment be
parked or stored in front yards in such a manner to produce a visual
safety hazard or encroach on the public right-of-way.
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 158, Regulation of Businesses.
§ 608 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 609
1:496
§ 610. Inoperable vehicles.
B. Recreation equipment shall not be parked or stored in front yards
except for periods of not more than 10 days at a time for loading or
unloading purposes; except if the lot, because of topography or shape,
and the structures located on the lot, cannot reasonably accommodate
the location of recreation equipment in areas other than the front yard,
and there is no visual safety hazard or encroachment on the public
right-of-way, then the recreation equipment may be located in the front
yard.
C. Recreational vehicles and equipment shall not be used for dwelling
purposes in any district, except under the following conditions:
(1) In residential districts, they may be temporarily used for a period of
up to 30 days, with no more than two such periods per calendar
year, by house guests of the residents of the premises, provided
that no money is received by the residents of the site for this
privilege, or as a temporary dwelling during the construction of a
single-family or two- family dwelling, through the issuance of a
temporary use permit.29
A. Findings. The City Council, through this chapter, finds that the
existence of numerous inoperable vehicles is aesthetically unpleasing
and creates a nuisance condition that can lead to lower property values,
and so imposes the following conditions:
(1) In all districts, the storage of inoperable vehicles is not permitted.
However, they may be stored in an enclosed building in a rear yard
and a maximum of three inoperable vehicles may be stored in a
combination of the rear yard and side yard; provided, however, that
they are kept within a sight-obscuring fence six feet in height or
that each is covered with an opaque cover designed to fit the motor
vehicle.
(2) In all residential districts, storage of inoperable vehicles is not
permitted within the area between the front property line and the
front of the main structure; except if the lot, because of topography
or shape, and/or the structures located on the lot, cannot
reasonably accommodate the location of inoperable vehicles in
areas other than the front yard, and there is no visual safety
hazard, one inoperable vehicle may be stored in a front yard;
provided that it is covered with an opaque cover designed to fit the
motor vehicle.
(3) Within commercial and industrial districts, storage of inoperable
vehicles is permitted, as part of a permitted or special use and
provided that it complies with all use requirements of the district
29.Editor's Note: See § 608B(7).
§ 609 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 610
1:497
and all conditions, if any, imposed by the Planning Commission or
City Council.
(4) Inoperable vehicles are prohibited in the public right-of-way or
from encroaching upon the public right-of-way.
B. Notice to remove. Whenever an abandoned or inoperable vehicle is
located in any district, within the City of Española and not in
compliance with the provisions of this section, the Planning Director
shall issue a notice to remove to the owner, his agent, or occupant of the
property upon which the vehicle is located.
C. Contents of notice. The notice to remove the vehicle issued under the
provisions of this article shall contain:
(1) An order to abate the nuisance or to request a hearing within a
stated time, which shall be reasonable under the circumstances.
(2) The location of the nuisance, address as well as physical location
within said property.
(3) A description of the abandoned vehicle.
(4) An order to remove said vehicle or other acts necessary to abate
the nuisance, such acts to be completed within 10 days from
receipt of notice, unless a hearing is requested pursuant to
Subsection C(6) below.
(5) A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and no
request for a hearing is made within the prescribed time, the City
will abate such nuisance and assess the cost of such abatement
against such person.
(6) Any person receiving notice of an order to abate a nuisance may
request a hearing before the municipal court on such matter within
10 days from the date of filing of the notice. Any notice of
abatement served by the City shall advise the person allegedly
committing the nuisance of his right to request a hearing before the
municipal court.
D. Service of notice. The notice to abate a nuisance shall be served as any
other legal process may be served pursuant to law.
E. Abatement by City. Upon the failure to remove the vehicle, or otherwise
bring it into compliance, the Planning Director shall request that the
City Manager order the abatement of the nuisance and shall prepare a
statement of estimated costs incurred in the abatement of such
nuisance. The City Manager may order municipal crews to conduct
such abatement or provide for hiring an outside contractor for such
service.
F. City's costs declared lien. Any and all costs incurred by the City in the
removal of the vehicle under the provisions of this section shall
§ 610 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 610
1:498
§ 611. Day care.
constitute a lien against the property upon which vehicle was located,
which lien shall be filed, proven and collected as provided for by law.
Such lien shall be notice to all persons from the time of its recording,
and shall bear interest at the legal rate thereafter until satisfied.
G. Exemptions. Exempt from the provisions of Subsections A through C of
this section are vehicles that are classified as vehicles of historic and
special significance under the provisions of NMSA 1978 § 66-11-1 et
seq., except that such vehicles, when stored in the front yard, will be
covered with an opaque cover designed to fit the vehicle.
A. Day-care homes shall be an accessory use and home occupation in all
districts.
B. Day-care facilities and child-care centers shall be a special use,
requiring a special use permit.
C. Day-care homes, day-care facilities and child-care centers shall meet
the following standards with an "X" indicating the applicable standard:
Day-Care
Homes
Day-Care
Facilities
Child-Care
Centers
As a condition of the special use
permit, the applicant must
obtain a state license prior to
conducting business. The state
license will be required to be
submitted to the Planning
Director, prior to commencing
business. A copy of the state
license shall be kept by the
Planning Director.
X X
Business license must be
secured from the City of
Española
X X X
Off-street parking of one space
per employee and a procedure
for pickup and delivery of
children according to a plan filed
with the application
X X X
Residential districts: no major
alterations to the structure are
allowed that prevent the
continuing use of the structure
as a residence
X
§ 610 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 611
1:499
§ 612. Screening and storage.
Day-Care
Homes
Day-Care
Facilities
Child-Care
Centers
Special use permit shall specify
the extent of structural
alterations to be allowed
X X
As a condition of the special use
permit, the Planning Commission
shall establish the maximum
number of children allowed
X
Recreation areas shall be fenced
from adjoining residential
properties
X X X
Walls or fences may be
considered by the Planning
Commission as part of the
special use permit, if necessary
to shield neighboring properties
from the day-care use
X X
Outdoor activities for children
shall not be allowed before 7:30
a.m. or after 6:00 p.m.
X X X
Levels shall be governed by the
provisions of Article III,
Ordinance 18, of this Code
X X X
A. In all commercial districts, screening and storage requirements for
permitted uses or activities shall be as described in this subsection.
Every reasonable effort shall be made to store merchandise,
manufactured products, raw materials, equipment, scrap, junk or solid
waste in such a manner so as not to create a nuisance. A reasonable
effort shall include but not be limited to compliance of all such material
that shall be stored within a building, with the following exceptions:
(1) Where such inside storage is not practicable and is justified with
regards to health, safety or fire codes.
(2) Where the outside storage of merchandise, manufactured products
or raw materials open to view from the public right-of-way is a
normal and standard practice, such as in auto sales, recreational
vehicles, nursery stock and the like, but not including the storage
of secondhand goods or materials and junk.
(3) Where the outside storage is necessary during construction. In
such case, the outside storage shall be allowed only during the time
that the required building permits are active. Outside storage of
such material shall create no hazard or visual obstructions as set
§ 611 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 612
1:500
§ 613. Group homes.
To promote noninstitutional living arrangements for handicapped persons
while preserving the residential character of the neighborhood and
minimizing the effect of the group home on traffic congestion in the
neighborhood, a group home shall be permitted in any residential zoning
district upon a showing of the following to the Planning Director:
forth in § 601, sight obstructions, or create a fire, safety or health
hazard.
B. In all residential districts, storage and screening requirements for
permitted uses or activities shall be as described in this subsection.
Storage pertaining to residential activities shall comply with the same
requirements as specified elsewhere in this section and in addition shall
comply with the following:
(1) Appliances and other mechanical equipment which are no longer
operable or functional shall not be stored outside for a period of
time exceeding 30 days. Refrigerators and freezers stored outside
for any period must have doors removed.
(2) Inoperable vehicles shall be stored in compliance with the
provisions of § 610.
(3) Recreational vehicles shall be stored in compliance with the
provisions of § 609.
(4) Storage in the public right-of-way is prohibited.
C. A six-foot-high solid fence or wall is required along a common lot line
between the residential property and nonresidential property except as
restricted by § 601.
A. That, prior to occupancy of the group home, the operation is licensed by
the State of New Mexico or, if not required, evidence confirming that
such licensing is not required;
B. That the group home conforms to existing zoning regulations applicable
to other residential uses permitted in the zoning district;
C. That the group home has certified by affidavit to the City of Española
that its residents and programs comply with the definition of "group
home" as set forth in this chapter, which requirements are intended to
preserve the residential character of the neighborhood;
D. That parking requirements for group homes set out in § 810 are met
and an agreement, signed by the operator of the group home, is
provided to the City of Española assuring that these requirements will
continue to be met during the time the group home is operating;
§ 612 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 613
1:501
§ 614. Agricultural uses.
E. That, in any block, there shall be no more than one group home nor
shall there be a group home on the corner of a block located diagonally
to a block with an existing group home; and
F. That there is nothing on the exterior of the group home that would
distinguish it from other residential uses in the zoning district.
A. Generally. Agricultural and ranching uses are allowed in R-1 and R-2
Districts, provided the following requirements are met:
(1) That the sale of animals or their by-products is limited to those
raised or produced on-site, no importing of goods or products is
being conducted:
(2) That the sale of agricultural products is limited to those raised onsite
and that no importing of goods or products is being conducted.
(3) That the sale of all goods listed as agricultural and ranching uses is
restricted to being a secondary source of income of and for the
household of the lot in question, and that the owner acquires, as
well as complies with the requirements of, a home occupation
permit.
(4) That none of the aforementioned uses creates a nuisance condition
as defined by Chapter 254, Nuisances, of the Española Municipal
Code, or amendments thereto.
(5) That the aforementioned uses are maintained within a restrained
area and not adjacent to riparian area.
B. Farm animals:
(1) R-1 Rural Residential District. Farm animals are allowed in this
district at the following ratios:
Type of Animal Ratio
Cattle (including horses) 1 per 10,000 square feet*
Goats and sheep 1 per 4,000 square feet*
Swine (including pets) 1 per 2,000 square feet*
Chickens and other fowl 1 per 500 square feet*
* Based on the total lot area
(2) R-2 Semi-Rural Residential District. Farm animals are allowed in
this district at the following ratios:
Type of Animal Ratio
Cattle (including horses) None
Goats and sheep 1 per 4,000 square feet
§ 613 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 614
1:502
§ 615. Individual manufactured homes.
Type of Animal Ratio
Swine (including pets) 1 per 2,000 square feet
Chickens and other fowl 1 per 500 square feet
C. Agricultural and ranching uses are not allowed in any other districts.
A. When three or more manufactured homes are involved on any one lot,
in any district, the manufactured housing park regulations shall apply
as set forth in this chapter.
B. Purposes.
(1) This chapter recognizes that differences between site-built homes
and manufactured homes exist, and that such differences provide
for a need to have separate regulations governing the placement
and use of manufactured homes. It is the intent of this section to
provide adequate regulations governing the placement and use of
manufactured housing units.
(2) Additionally it is the intent of this section to:
(a) Prevent overcrowding of land.
(b) Provide adequate open area to assure privacy, natural light,
and ventilation for each manufactured home.
(c) Provide sufficient open areas for outdoor uses essential to the
manufactured housing.
(d) Ensure the furnishing of adequate water supply and sewage
disposal systems.
(e) In general, provide those amenities available in sound
residential areas.
C. Location of manufactured homes.
(1) Permitted districts; unrestricted residential uses. Manufactured
homes are permitted as primary residences, including rental units,
in R-1 Rural Residential and R-2 Semi-Rural Residential Districts.
(2) Permitted districts; restricted residential uses. Manufactured
homes are allowed in R-3 Suburban Residential, R-4 Large Lot
Residential and R-6 Urban Residential Districts as primary
residences only, but not to be used as rental units.
(3) Restricted districts. Manufactured homes are not permitted in the
following districts, except as temporary or emergency housing:
(a) R-O-I Residential-Office-Institutional District.
§ 614 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615
1:503
(b) RM-PUD Residential Multifamily Planned Unit Development.
(c) RC-PUD Residential Compound Planned Unit Development.
(d) B-1 Local Commercial District.
(e) B-2 General Commercial District.
(f) LI Light Industrial District.
(g) MSD Main Street District.
(h) HI Heavy Industrial District.
(i) BP Business Park District.
D. Requirements for the use of manufactured homes on individual lots.
(1) Permanent installation of manufactured homes. All manufactured
homes placed in any district shall be required to be placed on a
permanent foundation, with wheels and axles removed. All
permanent foundations shall comply with the New Mexico
Manufactured Housing Division Regulations for such structures.
Additionally, the manufactured housing shall be permanently
attached to said foundation by anchors, straps, tie-downs or similar
such devices as may be approved by the Building Inspector.
(2) Temporary installation of manufactured homes. All manufactured
homes intended to be placed on a less-than-permanent basis must
be placed on the piers and/or footings that are in general
compliance with those developed and approved by the New Mexico
Manufactured Housing Division. Temporary placement may be
approved for no more than six months at any one time with one
extension of no more than six months, and then only after special
findings of fact and full public hearing by the Planning Commission
as provided in this chapter.
(3) The construction of the manufactured housing shall comply with
the Standards for Manufactured Homes adopted by the New
Mexico Manufactured Housing Division.
E. Skirting.
(1) All manufactured housing units shall be skirted in a manner
approved by the Building Inspector, prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
(2) All materials shall be approved by the Building Inspector and must
be self-ventilating or provide for no less than a total of three square
feet per 250 square feet of floor area with all vents being located
diagonally from each other. All vents shall be installed to prevent
the entry of rodents and direct rainfall.
§ 615 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 615
1:504
(3) All skirting shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer's
recommended instructions or in accordance with the regulations
set forth and approved by the New Mexico Manufactured Housing
Division.
(4) Minimum requirements for lot size and front, side and rear yards,
and all other standards, shall be the same as the district in which
they are to be located. At no time shall any individual manufactured
home be located closer than 20 feet to another manufactured
home.
F. No manufactured home may be occupied before obtaining a certificate
of occupancy from the Building Inspector attesting to the conformance
with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable rules and
regulations of the City of Española.
§ 615 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615
1:505

ARTICLE VII
Nonconforming Uses
§ 701. Purpose and intent of article.
The provisions of this article shall apply to legally preexisting structures,
lands and uses or any combination thereof which are made nonconforming
as a result of the adoption and periodic revisions to the City's code and
regulations. It is the purpose of this article to permit these nonconformities
to continue until they are removed or changed to a conforming use but
not to encourage their survival. It is further the purpose of this article to
acknowledge that nonconformities shall not be used as grounds for adding
other structures or uses prohibited in the district or enlarging, expanding
or extending nonconformities except where expressly permitted under the
provisions of this article. Possession of a valid building permit for a building
or structure which will be nonconforming under the terms of this chapter
shall be proof of construction in progress, provided that construction is
pursued diligently to completion.
§ 702. Nonconforming vacant lots of record.
Permitted uses or structures may be established on a preexisting lot of
record, the description of which is on record on the date of adoption of this
chapter.
§ 703. Nonconforming uses of land.
Where a previously lawful use of land exists which is not permitted under
the provisions of this chapter, the use may be continued, provided that:
§ 704. Nonconforming structures.
Where a lawful structure exists on the date of adoption of this chapter and
fails to meet one or more of the requirements of this chapter, such structure
in its entirety is nonconforming; it may be used so long as it is otherwise
lawful, subject to the following provisions:
A. No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged, increased or extended to
occupy a greater area of land than was occupied on the date of adoption
of this chapter.
B. No such nonconforming use of land shall be moved in whole or in part
to any portion of the lot or parcel other than occupied by such use on
the date of adoption of this chapter.
C. If any such nonconforming use is ever discontinued for a period of more
than 90 days, any subsequent use of land shall conform to the
regulations for the district in which such land is located.
A. No structure may be enlarged or altered in any way which increases its
nonconformity unless the enlargement or structural alteration makes
the structure more conforming or is required by law. Should this
§ 701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 704
1:507
§ 705. Nonconforming uses of structures or structures and land in
combination.
If, on the date of adoption of this chapter, an otherwise lawful use of land
or a structure or land and structure in combination exists that would not
otherwise be allowed in the district under the terms of this chapter, the use
may be continued, subject to the following:
§ 706. Repair and maintenance.
Nothing in this article is deemed to prevent the ordinary day-to-day minor
repairs and maintenance of nonconforming structures. In addition, nothing
in this article shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe
condition of any nonconforming building declared to be unsafe by any City
of Española planning or building official.
structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50%
of the most recent County Assessor's full value or market value of the
structure at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except
in conformity with the then current City code.
B. Should any structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatsoever, unless such move is required by law, it shall thereafter be
made to conform to the regulations for the district into which it is
moved.
A. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted in the district in
which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed,
reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except as otherwise
provided in this article unless the use of the structure is changed to a
permitted use in the district in which it is located.
B. No nonconforming use may be extended into any other parts of a
building after the date of adoption of this chapter, and no such use shall
be extended to occupy any land outside such building.
C. Any nonconforming use of a structure or structure and land in
combination may be changed to another use, provided that the new use
is permitted within the district.
D. When a nonconforming use is replaced by a permitted use, the original
or any other nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
E. When a nonconforming use of a structure or structure and land in
combination is discontinued or abandoned for 180 days, the premises
shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the provisions of
the district in which it is located.
F. Where a nonconforming use is located in a structure which is
subsequently moved or destroyed, use of the property thereafter shall
be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 704 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 707
1:508
§ 707. Abandoned structures.
The Planning Director or the Planning Commission may refer
recommendations on abandoned structures requiring repair or demolition
to the City Council in accordance with NMSA 1978 § 3-18-5.
§ 707 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 707
1:509

ARTICLE VIII
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 801. Purpose of article.
It is the purpose of this article to provide for adequate, convenient and safe
off-street parking and loading areas for land uses addressed in this chapter.
§ 802. Applicability.
Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided as an accessory use
in all districts in accordance with the requirements of this article at the time
any building or structure is constructed, enlarged, relocated, or at the time
there is a change in its principal use.
§ 803. General requirements.
§ 804. Location of off-street parking.
All required off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same lot or
within 200 feet of the use to be served. If parking requirements are not
all met on the same lot, the proposed off-site parking spaces shall only be
allowed if they are not subject to termination during the existence of the
use served.
§ 805. Shared use for mixed occupancies on single lot.
A. The provision and maintenance of off-street parking and loading
facilities shall be a continuing obligation of the owners of a use and/or
parcel of property so long as the use of the property is in existence and
so long as parking and loading facilities are required in connection with
such given use.
B. It shall be unlawful to discontinue, reduce, modify or otherwise
dispense with parking and loading facilities that comply with the
requirements of this article.
C. The parking space requirements for any use not specifically listed in
this article shall be determined by the Planning Director based on
requirements for similar uses.
D. Where the application of the off-street parking requirements results in a
fractional number of spaces required, a fraction of 1/2 or greater shall
be resolved to the next higher whole number.
A. Business park. Parking requirements will be applicable regardless of
the mix, location or number of different uses within the business park.
B. Commercial center. Parking requirements will be applied regardless of
the mix, location or number of different uses within the commercial
center.
§ 801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 806
1:511
§ 806. Nonconforming sites.
Developed sites in existence prior to the passage of this chapter may
not meet the parking requirements of this article and will be considered
nonconforming as to parking requirements. All such sites shall be required
to conform to the requirements of this article at the time any of the
following events take place:
§ 807. Design requirements.
A. Professional, public, commercial and industrial sites.
(1) Any building on a lot served is enlarged.
(2) A new building is constructed on a lot.
(3) An original building is removed or demolished and a new building is
constructed.
(4) The use of a structure is changed to a use requiring more parking
spaces.
B. Residential sites.
(1) A new building (main structure) is constructed on a lot.
(2) An original building (main structure) is removed or demolished and
a new building (main structure) is constructed.
(3) The use of a structure or the number of units is changed, requiring
more parking spaces.
A. Minimum parking stall dimensions shall be nine feet by 18 feet. Parking
facilities shall meet the parking area dimensions design standards as
set forth in the Design Guidelines.
B. Driveways and maneuverability.
(1) The slope of entrance and exit driveways providing access to public
streets shall not exceed 8% unless an exemption is approved by the
Planning Director as necessary to make the lot buildable.
(2) All required parking spaces shall be maintained in conformance
with the requirements of this article and adequate ingress to and
egress from each space shall be provided without moving another
vehicle, except in single-family, two-family, and low-density
multifamily districts.
(3) Turning and maneuvering space shall be located entirely on private
property unless an exemption is specifically approved by the
Planning Director as necessary to make the lot buildable.
(4) All parking spaces shall be internally accessible to one another
without reentering an adjoining public right-of-way unless an
§ 806 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 807
1:512
exemption is otherwise approved by the Planning Director as
necessary to make the lot buildable.
(5) Ingress to and egress from any off-street parking area shall not be
located closer than 20 feet to the point of tangent to an intersection
or pedestrian crosswalk unless an exemption is otherwise approved
by the Planning Director as necessary to make the lot buildable.
(6) The Planning Director may require ingress separate from egress
for safer flow of traffic.
C. Surfacing requirements.
(1) All required parking facilities shall be paved and have grading and
drainage as approved by the Planning Director and shall be
constructed in conformance with the Design Guidelines. The
maximum grade slope of the parking lot or parking facility shall not
be more than 5% unless an exemption is determined by the
Planning Director to be necessary to make the lot buildable.
(2) All traffic control devices such as parking stripes, designated car
stalls, directional arrows for signs, wheelstops, curbs and other
developments shall be installed and completed as shown on the
approved site plan.
(3) Parking areas shall use paint or similar devices to delineate car
stalls, direction of traffic flow and pedestrian walkways.
(4) Bumper guards and/or wheelstops shall be required on the
periphery of all required parking facilities so that cars will not
protrude into the public right-of-way or strike a building, fence,
landscaping or protrude over public or private sidewalks.
(5) Pedestrian walkways shall be provided as appropriate within the
parking facility and shall be striped and signed.
D. Lighting provided for parking facilities shall meet the standards of
§ 606, Outdoor lighting. Such parking facility lighting may be subject to
review and approval by the Planning Department for energy efficiency
and by the Police Department for personal and property security.
E. Curb cuts.
(1) The number of curb cuts shall be kept to a minimum so as to reduce
potential traffic flow conflicts and conflicts with pedestrians. If the
proposed curb cuts are within 100 feet of each other on the same
street frontage or are within 100 feet of an existing curb cut on the
same street frontage, the number of curb cuts shall be reviewed
and approved by the Planning Director.
(2) Curb cuts providing access to and egress from the parking facility
shall be a minimum of 15 feet wide for one-way traffic and 30 feet
wide for two-way traffic.
§ 807 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 807
1:513
§ 808. Installation time limit.
Where a parking facility design has been approved by the Planning
Commission or Planning Director as part of a site plan, such parking facility
design shall be installed and completed subject to the approval of the
Planning Director and City Engineer prior to the issuance of the certificate
of occupancy for the use of the property or structure. The Planning Director
may, due to extenuating weather circumstances, authorize the issuance of a
temporary certificate of occupancy.
§ 809. Disabled parking. [Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-02]
§ 810. Off-street parking requirements.
(3) Joint use or shared curb cuts are encouraged and design of parking
facilities should take into account future use of shared curb cuts.
A. Disabled parking spaces shall be required for all nonresidential uses
and for multiple-family uses with common parking areas according to
the schedule adopted as part of the New Mexico Building Code.
B. Disabled parking spaces shall be:
(1) At least 12 feet in width and 20 feet in length or 8 1/2 feet in width
if an additional 3 1/2 feet at one side are protected and available for
disabled ingress or egress.
(2) Designated for use by the physically disabled by the international
symbol of accessibility. Signs shall be constructed according to the
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) and shall be
located on a vertical surface above the level of naturally fallen and
plowed snow.
(3) Centrally located to main building entrances.
(4) So located that occupants of vehicles in these spaces can go to the
related building on a path at least 36 inches wide, unobstructed by
bumpers, curbs or other obstacles to wheelchairs and without
going behind parked vehicles.
A. Minimum number of spaces. The following minimum off-street parking
space requirements are designated for the following uses:
Use Requirement
Residential Uses
Single-family1 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Two-family1 2 spaces per dwelling unit
§ 807 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 810
1:514
Use Requirement
Multiple-family, up to and
including 8 units
2 spaces per dwelling unit, plus 1
space for each 5 dwelling units;
parking spaces in front of garages
shall not satisfy the 1 space for
each 5 dwelling units
Multiple-family, 9 units or more
For dwellings less than 700
square feet of heated area
1 space per dwelling unit, plus 0.5
unassigned space per dwelling
unit
For dwellings 700 square feet
to 1,000 square feet of heated
area
1 space per dwelling unit, plus
0.75 unassigned space per
dwelling unit
For dwellings 1,000 square feet
to 1,400 square feet of heated
area
1 space per dwelling unit, plus 1
unassigned space per dwelling
unit
For dwellings more than 1,400
square feet of heated area
1 space per dwelling unit, plus 1.2
unassigned spaces per dwelling
unit
Boardinghouses, dormitories,
rooming houses
1 space per bed, plus 2 spaces per
owner or manager
Bed-and-breakfast 1 space per sleeping room, plus 2
spaces for owner/manager, if
applicable
Senior citizens, multiple-family
dwellings
1 space per dwelling, plus 1 space
for each 10 dwellings for guest or
recreation vehicle parking, plus 1
space for each permanent
employee at maximum shift level
Day-care homes and facilities and
child-care centers
1 space for each employee
Group homes: addition to spaces
otherwise required by this section
1 space for each employee on the
largest shift or in the largest
group of employees with
overlapping work hours
Professional/Office Use
Business park 1 space per 500 square feet of net
usable floor area
General, administrative,
professional services, including,
but not limited to, doctors,
dentists, medical practitioners,
attorneys, engineers, consultants,
and psychologists
1 space per 250 square feet of net
usable floor area
§ 810 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 810
1:515
Use Requirement
Commercial Uses
Retail uses such as art stores,
clothing stores, florists shops,
hardware, baker's shop, hobby
shops, jewelry stores, photo
shops, small markets, variety
stores, supermarkets and
laundries
1 space per 200 square feet of net
usable floor area
Restaurant, cocktail lounge 1 space for each 100 square feet
of net usable floor area
Restaurant, drive-in 1 space for each 100 square feet
of net usable floor area plus
stacking for 10 cars
Restaurant, takeout 1 space for each 100 feet of net
usable floor area
Sales of automobiles, boats,
campers, manufactured housings,
motorcycles and trailers
1 space per 2,000 square feet of
indoor and outdoor display area
Auto service stations and repair
shops2
4 spaces per service bay
Furniture, home furnishing and
appliance stores
1 space per 500 square feet of
gross floor area, including storage
areas
Builder's supplies, plant nurseries 1 space per 200 square feet of
enclosed net usable floor area plus
1 space per 500 square feet of
display area
Mortuaries 1 space per 3 seats of maximum
capacity in main meeting area
Day-care center 1 space per employee
Commercial center 1 space per 250 square feet of net
usable floor area
Service uses such as barbershops
and beauty shops, dry cleaners,
photographers, real estate offices
and small-item repair shops
1 space per 250 square feet of net
usable floor area
Self-service storage facilities 1 space for manager's office
For one-story buildings, with
two-lane traffic aisles
The area between buildings shall
constitute the parking area. When
one-lane traffic aisles are
proposed, the driveway aisle shall
be a minimum of 24 feet in width.
§ 810 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 810
1:516
Use Requirement
For multiple-story buildings 1 space per 1,000 feet of net
usable floor area for area on
second story, plus aisle width for
one-way or two-way traffic
Drive-in dairies, drive-in liquor
stores, drive-in laundries
1 space per 500 square feet of net
usable floor area plus stacking for
5 cars
Bowling alleys 4 spaces per lane
Hospitals 1 space per 1.5 beds
Convalescent homes 1 space per 3 beds
Automobile car wash 3 spaces for each washing station
Banks, financial institutions 1 space per 200 square feet of net
usable area
Hotels, motels and apartment
hotels
1 space per unit
Industrial Uses
Manufacturing 1 space per 350 square feet of net
usable floor area; or 1 space per 2
employees on maximum shift,
whichever is greater
Research and development 1 space per 1,000 square feet of
net usable floor area
Warehousing, wholesaling 1 space per 2,000 square feet of
net usable floor area
Institutional Uses
Churches 1 space per 4 seats in the main
meeting area, based on maximum
capacity (Each 30 inches of pew
space equals 1 seat.)
Elementary school 2 spaces per teacher
Junior high school 2 spaces per teacher
High school, including stadium
areas
7 spaces per teacher
Colleges and universities,
including stadium areas
0.75 space per student, teacher
and employee
Library 1 space per 600 square feet of net
usable floor area
Museum 1 space per 1,000 square feet of
net usable floor area
Recreational Uses
§ 810 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 810
1:517
§ 811. Loading space requirements.
Use Requirement
Auditoriums, clubs, lodges and
theaters
1 space per 4 seats at maximum
seating capacity
Athletic club, country club,
clubhouse, swimming club,
gymnasium
1 space per 4 persons at
maximum capacity
Golf course, in addition to
clubhouse requirements
5 spaces per hole
Tennis courts, public, private or
club
4 spaces per court
Community center 1 space per 2 persons at
maximum capacity
Park, in addition to recreation use 1 space per 3 acres open space
plus spaces for recreation use
Art galleries 1 space per 250 square feet of net
usable floor area used to display
art work
Ball fields, stadiums,
amphitheaters
1 space per 3 persons at
maximum capacity
1 For single-family and two-family dwellings with garages or carports
located on the same parcel of property as the dwelling unit, each
stall of the garage or carport shall be counted as complying with the
requirements of this section.
2 The bay itself may not be counted as a required space.
B. Landscaping requirements. Off-street parking facilities shall provide
landscaping as required in § 1304.
A. Whenever the normal operation of any development requires that
goods, merchandise or equipment be routinely delivered to or shipped
from that development, sufficient off-street loading and unloading areas
must be provided in accordance with this section to accommodate the
delivery or shipment operation in a safe and convenient manner.
B. Such loading spaces shall be of adequate size to accommodate the
number and size of vehicles simultaneously loaded or unloaded in
connection with the business conducted.
C. Loading and unloading areas shall be located and designed so that the
vehicles intended to use them can maneuver safely and conveniently to
and from a public right-of-way; complete loading and unloading
operations without obstructing or interfering with any public right-ofway
or any parking space, parking lot or parking facility aisle. No area
designated for loading and unloading may be used to satisfy the area
§ 810 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 811
1:518
§ 812. Shared parking in commercial districts.
requirements for off-street parking nor shall any portion of any offstreet
parking area be used to satisfy the area requirements for loading
and unloading facilities. If a loading or unloading area is required by
the Planning Commission or City Council as part of the approval or
conditional approval of a site plan, and the loading or unloading area
is part of or incorporated into the required off-street parking facility,
it shall be paved and maintained in accordance with the provisions of
this article. If a loading or unloading area is required by the Planning
Commission or City Council as part of the approval or conditional
approval of a site plan, and the loading or unloading area is separate
and distinct from the required off-street parking facility, the Planning
Commission or City Council may waive the paving requirements of the
loading or unloading area if the Planning Commission or City Council
finds that waiving of the paving requirement will not adversely affect
the operation or use of the loading or unloading area, and it will not
adversely affect adjacent properties or the neighborhood.
D. Day-care facilities and child-care centers shall provide loading spaces
for the pickup and drop-off of children.
A. Applicability. Parking spaces necessary to meet the minimum off-street
parking space requirements may be shared in accordance with this
section, provided that:
(1) Uses sharing parking are on adjoining lots, not separated by a
street;
(2) Uses sharing parking are on property within a commercial zoning
district;
(3) Uses sharing parking are professional/office and theaters; and
(4) The aggregate minimum number of off-street parking spaces
described in Subsection B(8) of this section are provided and
maintained while any or all of the uses for which the shared
parking is permitted continue to exist.
B. Criteria. Parking spaces necessary to meet the minimum off-street
parking space requirements of this chapter may be shared only if a
shared parking agreement is executed by the owners of the properties
for which parking will be shared. The shared parking agreement shall
include:
(1) The names and addresses of the owners;
(2) Legal descriptions, uses, and available parking spaces for each of
the properties covered by the agreement;
(3) The term of the agreement, which shall continue for at least the
period any or all of the uses for which parking is shared exist;
§ 811 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 812
1:519
(4) A provision stating that the agreement is binding upon the owners
of the properties, their successors and assigns, and that the
agreement shall run with the land;
(5) A provision granting from each owner to the other the rights to
shared use of the parking facilities;
(6) A provision for the maintenance of the parking facilities by both
owners;
(7) Such other provisions, not inconsistent with this chapter, as the
parties may deem advisable; and
(8) A provision specifying that, for the properties together, an
aggregate minimum number of off-street parking spaces will be
provided and maintained.
(a) The required number of off-street parking spaces shall be
computed as follows:
[1] The minimum number of parking spaces specified in § 810
for each property shall be multiplied by the "occupancy
rate" as determined by this table for each use for the
weekday night, daytime and evening periods, and weekend
night, daytime and evening periods respectively.
[2] The minimum number of off-street parking spaces
specified in § 810 for each of the uses referred to for each
time period shall be added to produce the aggregate
number of off-street parking spaces required for each time
period.
[3] The greatest of the aggregate number of parking spaces
for each period shall be determined to be the minimum
number of off-street parking spaces required for the
collective uses on the respective properties.
(b) Nothing herein contained shall reduce the total number of
disabled parking spaces that would otherwise be required for
each of the properties separately. [Amended 11-19-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-02]
C. Approvals. The shared parking agreement described in Subsection B
herein shall be submitted as a part of a site plan application for one or
more of the affected properties. If one of the properties is operating
pursuant to an existing approved site plan, then upon approval of the
site plan with which the shared parking agreement is submitted, the
site plan for the existing property shall be deemed to be amended, but
only insofar as the parking requirements for it are concerned.
D. Enforcement. Parking requirements specified by this section shall be
enforceable against any or each of the owners of properties subject to
§ 812 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 812
1:520
the shared parking agreement pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 812 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 812
1:521

ARTICLE IX
Signs
§ 901. Purpose of article. [Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-02]
The purpose of this article is to:
§ 902. Applicability; effect.
§ 903. Interpretation.
Words and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings set forth
in this article. Principles for computing sign area and sign height are
contained in § 911. All other words and phrases shall be given their
common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
A. Encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in
the City of Española;
B. Maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the City of
Española's ability to attract sources of economic development and
growth;
C. Improve pedestrian and traffic safety;
D. Minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and
private property; and
E. Enable the fair and consistent enforcement of the sign restrictions of
this article.
A. A sign may be placed, established, painted, created or maintained in the
City of Española only in conformance with the standards, procedures,
exemptions and other requirements of this chapter.
B. The effect of this article, as more specifically set forth, is to:
(1) Establish a permit system to allow a variety of types of signs in
commercial and industrial zones, and a limited variety of signs in
other zones, subject to the standards and the permit procedure of
this chapter.
(2) Allow certain signs that are small, unobtrusive and incidental to the
principal use of the respective lots on which they are located,
subject to the substantive requirements of this chapter, but without
a requirement for permits.
(3) Provide for temporary signs without commercial messages in
limited circumstances in the public right-of-way.
(4) Prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this article.
(5) Provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this article.
§ 901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 903
1:523
Section headings or captions are used for reference only and shall not be
used in the interpretation of this article.
§ 904. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, certain terms, phrases, words and their
derivatives shall be constructed as specified in this article or as specified in
the Building Ordinance. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their
ordinarily accepted meanings within the context in which they are used.
ABANDONED SIGN — Any sign that describes, directs attention to, gives
directions for locating any business or establishment no longer in operation,
or advertises a product no longer being marketed or any sign structure
lacking a sign face or sign copy for a period that exceeds six months.
A-FRAME SIGN — Any freestanding, temporary, and/or movable sign
usually constructed of two separate wood or metal sign faces attached at
the top.
ANIMATED SIGN — Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to
depict action or create a special effect or scene.
AWNING SIGN — Any sign that is painted, stamped, perforated, stitched, or
otherwise applied on a valance of an awning.
BANNER — Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is not
permanently mounted to a pole or a building by a permanent frame at one
or more edges. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flap of
any institutions or business shall not be considered banners.
BEACON — Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere
or directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source;
also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
BILLBOARD — Any sign which directs attention to a business, activity,
commodity, service, entertainment or communication which is not
conducted, sold or offered at the premises on which the sign is located, or
which does not pertain to the premises upon which the sign is located.
BUILDING FACADE — Any exterior wall of a building, including windows,
doors, and mansard, but not including a pitched roof.
BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGN — Any sign that serves to identify only
the name, address, and lawful use of the premises upon which it is located
and provides no other advertisements or product identification.
BUILDING MARKER — Any sign indicating the name of a building and date
and incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a
masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material.
BUILDING SIGN — Any sign attached to any part of a building.
CABINET SIGN — Any sign that contains all the text or logo symbols within
a single enclosed area.[Added 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
CANOPY SIGN — Any sign that is part of or attached to an awning, canopy
or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door, entrance,
§ 903 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 904
1:524
window or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy sign.[Added
11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular-shaped portion of land
established at street intersections in which there are restrictions on things
erected, placed or planted which would limit or obstruct the sight distance
of motorists entering or leaving the intersection.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE — Any sign wording, logo or other representation
that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises or calls attention to a business,
product, service or other commercial activity.
DEVELOPMENT SIGN — Any sign used to announce the name of a
development being, or to be, constructed; may include on it all firms
involved in the project who wish to advertise (to include licensing numbers
where appropriate).
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any sign limited to directional messages such as
"enter" or "exit." Logos and business names are permitted as needed to
complete the directional message.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN — Any sign containing a display consisting
of any array of light sources, panels, or disks that are electronically
activated. The definition of "animated sign" is also applicable.
FIXED BALLOON — Any lighter-than-air or gas-filled inflatable object
attached by a tether to a fixed place.
FLAG — Any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors,
patterns or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision
or other entity.
FLAG, DECORATIVE — Any sheet of fabric, square, rectangular or
triangular shape which is mounted on a pole, cable, or rope at one end,
which may or may not contain text or graphics.
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any sign supported by structures or supports
that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent
from any building or other structure. Types of freestanding signs include
pedestal and monument.
GOVERNMENT SIGN — A sign erected and maintained pursuant to and
in discharge of any government functions, or required by law, ordinance
or other regulation, including legal notices, advertisements, traffic,
identification, direction, and information signs on government property.
GRADE — The height of the top of the curb or, if no curb exists, the height
of the edge of the pavement in the lane of travel adjacent to the sign.
HANGING SIGN — Any sign that is suspended from and located entirely
under a covered porch, covered walkway, or an awning.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — Any sign of an identification or of informational
nature bearing no advertising.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign that is illuminated by electric lights or
luminous tubes located within the interior of the sign.
§ 904 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 904
1:525
INCIDENTAL SIGN — Any sign, generally informational, that has a purpose
secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as "no parking,"
entrance," "loading only," "telephone" and other similar directives.
LOT or ZONE LOT — A parcel of land, the boundaries of which have
been established by a legal instrument of record, that is recognized and
intended for the purposes of transfer of ownership, that is of sufficient
size to meet minimum zoning requirements for area coverage and use, and
that can provide yards and other open spaces as required by the zoning
regulations.[Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
MARQUEE — Any permanent, roof-like structure projecting beyond a
building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building,
generally designed and constructed to provide protection from
weather.[Added 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
MARQUEE SIGN — Any sign in any manner made a part of or attached to a
marquee.[Added 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
MONUMENT SIGN — Any freestanding sign which announces the name
of a commercial activity but does not exceed seven feet in height. The
nonmessage area (framework, supporting structures, and the like) of a
monument may not exceed the message area by more than 25%.
MURAL — Any picture or graphic illustration painted directly to a wall of a
building which does not advertise or promote a particular business, service,
or product.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign existing at the effective date of this
chapter that does not conform to the requirements of the chapter.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — Any sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity or service sold, offered, or existing elsewhere than upon the
same lot where such sign is displayed (includes billboards).
ON-PREMISES SIGN — Any sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity or service which is sold, offered or existing on the same lot
where such sign is displayed; provided that an on-site sign may also display
a noncommercial message.[Added 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
OPEN HOUSE SIGN — A sign used to announce a house held open to the
public for sale or tour by potential buyers. This applies to new and existing
homes.[Added 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
PARAPET WALL — The vertical extension of a building exterior wall
projecting above the plate line of the building.
PEDESTAL SIGN — Any freestanding sign that exceeds seven feet in height
and is no lower than seven feet from the bottom of the sign to the
ground.[Added 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
PENNANT — Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, usually in a
series, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a
rope, wire or string and designed to move in the wind.[Added 11-19-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-02]
§ 904 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 904
1:526
PERMANENT SIGN — Any sign permanently affixed to the ground or a wall.
PERSON — Any individual, association, company, corporation, firm,
organization, or partnership, singular or plural, of any kind.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or
other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including,
but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels;
signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons
used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or
painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless
the vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business (see
definition of "vehicle sign").
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — The building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is located. Lots with multiple principal uses may
have multiple principal buildings, but accessory structures shall not be
considered principal buildings.
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a
manner that its leading edge extends more than six inches beyond the
surface of the building or wall.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — Any temporary sign placed upon property for the
purpose of advertising to the public the sale or lease of the property.
RESIDENTIAL SIGN — Any sign located on a lot zoned for residential uses
that contains no commercial message except advertising for goods and
services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located, if offering
such service at such location conforms with all requirements of this chapter.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The public property adjacent to a roadway, excluding
medians, which is under the jurisdiction of the City of Española.
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the
roof of a building, supported by the roof structure. A sign attached to an
exterior wall of a building but whose face does not extend above the parapet
shall not be considered a roof sign.
SETBACK — The distance from the property line to the nearest part of
the applicable building, structure or sign, measured perpendicularly to the
property line.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of two or more retail or other commercial
establishments, having any or all of the following characteristics:
The establishments are connected by a party wall, partitions, canopies,
or similar features.
A.
Some or all of the establishments are located in separate buildings
which are designed as a single commercial group sharing common
parking areas and vehicular ways and which are connected by
walkways or other accessways.
B.
§ 904 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 904
1:527
SIGN — Any device, fixture, placard or structure that uses any colors,
graphics, illumination, symbol or writing to advertise, announce the
purpose of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate
information of any kind to the public.
SIGN DISTRICT — The classification for the purpose of calculating the
signage allowed for a particular lot.
SIGN MODIFICATION — Includes any changes in style, business name,
dimension or location; not to include alterations caused by ordinary
maintenance or minor repairs which do not increase the useful life of the
sign or are required for safety reasons.
SIGN REMODEL — Any change or update of a sign face or color of the sign.
STREET — A strip of land or way subject to vehicular traffic (as well
as pedestrian traffic) that provides direct or indirect access to property,
including, but not limited to, alleys, avenues, boulevards, courts, drives,
highways, lanes, places, roads, terraces, trails or other thoroughfares.
STREET BLIMPS — Parked or travelling cars used primarily for advertising,
sometimes referred to as "street blimps" due to the large display area.
Street blimps are subject to the same restrictions as a vehicle sign; however,
the parking of street blimps in a residential area is strictly
prohibited.[Added 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
STREET FRONTAGE — The distance for which a lot line of a lot adjoins a
public street, from one lot line intersecting the street to the furthest distant
lot line intersecting the same street.
SUBDIVISION SIGN — Any permanent sign placed on private property, in a
private easement at the entrance of residential or commercial subdivisions
for the purpose of identification of the subdivision, or the occupants, tenants
or businesses located within a commercial subdivision.
SUSPENDED SIGN — Any sign that is suspended from the underside of a
plane surface and is supported by the surface.[Added 11-19-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-02]
TEMPORARY POLITICAL SIGN — Temporary political signs may be located
in any zoning district, provided they are erected not more than 30 days
before an upcoming election and must be removed within five days
following said election.[Added 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign that is intended for a temporary period of
posting on public or private property; is typically constructed from semidurable
materials; and does not constitute a permanent structure.
VEHICLE SIGN — Any sign placed or painted on any motor vehicle,
recreational vehicle, trailer, or other movable device that reasonably
indicates the use of the vehicle, trailer, or device as a sign. Except where
an activity is legally offered, this includes the parking of a vehicle, trailer,
The establishments are under the same management or association
for the purpose of enforcing reciprocal agreements controlling
management or parking.
C.
§ 904 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 904
1:528
or device in a manner so as to constitute a sign, or when vehicles and
equipment are used as static displays to advertise a product, service, or
business.
WALL SIGN — Any sign attached parallel to, painted on the wall surface,
or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building
or structure, which is supported by the wall or building, and which displays
only one sign surface.
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof,
designed to communicate information about an activity, business,
commodity, event, sale, or service, that is placed inside a window or upon
the windowpanes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
§ 905. Exempt signs.
The following signs shall be exempt from the provisions of this article:
§ 906. Prohibited signs.
All signs not expressly permitted under this chapter or exempt from
regulation hereunder in accordance with § 905 are prohibited in the City.
§ 907. Nonconforming signs; time for compliance.
A. Official notices authorized by a court, public body or public safety
official.
B. Directional, warning or information signs authorized by federal, state
or municipal governments.
C. Memorial plaques, building identification signs and building
cornerstones when cut or carved into a masonry surface or when made
of noncombustible material and made an integral part of the building or
structure.
D. The flag of a government or a noncommercial institution, such as a
school.
E. Religious symbols and seasonal decorations within the appropriate
public holiday season.
F. Works of art that do not include a commercial message.
G. Holiday lights and decorations with no commercial message.
A. All business owners having existing legal nonconforming signs within
the current corporate boundaries of the City of Española established
before the effective date of these new regulations may continue to
display existing signs without sign modifications notwithstanding the
effect of any more restrictive regulations.
B. Within six years of December 2008 (by November 2014), any business
bringing legal nonconforming signs into compliance with this code shall
§ 904 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 907
1:529
§ 908. Violations and penalties.
be waived of all sign permit expenses by the City. The permit process
must still be followed and a permit must be obtained from the Planning
and Zoning Department as described.
C. The following categories of nonconforming signs shall be subject to the
regulations of this article:
(1) Any sign established or maintained without first complying with all
provisions of this code in effect at the time the sign is established.
(2) Any sign lawfully established once the use of the sign has been
discontinued, or its owner has abandoned the structure or use, with
which the sign has been associated for a period of at least 90 days.
(3) Any sign which has been destroyed or damaged, other than by
destruction or damage to its sign faces, to an extent greater than
50% of its in-place replacement cost, when repair or replacement
does not occur within 30 days of the damage.
(4) Any sign the owner of which is requesting to obtain either
permission for a sign remodel or permission to expand or enlarge
the building or land use with which the sign is associated, and the
sign is affected by the expansion or enlargement or change of use.
(5) Any sign the owner of which seeks permission to relocate the sign.
(6) Any temporary sign.
(7) Any sign which is unsafe or which is a hazard to the public.
A. Any of the following shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be
subject to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided by this
code and by state law:
(1) To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign in a way that is
inconsistent with any plan or permit governing the sign or the lot
on which the sign is located.
(2) To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign requiring a permit
without a permit.
(3) Failure to remove any sign that is installed, created, erected or
maintained in violation of this chapter, or for which the sign permit
has lapsed.
(4) To continue any violation. Each day of a continued violation of this
chapter shall be considered a separate violation when applying the
penalty portions of this chapter.
B. Penalties are hereby defined as $500 per violation per day and/or 90
days in jail.
§ 907 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 909
1:530
§ 909. Enforcement; remedies.
§ 910. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Planning Director or
any decision or order may appeal such decision to the Planning Commission.
§ 911. Computations of area and height.
A. Any violation or attempted violation of this chapter or of any condition
or requirement adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained, corrected
or abated, as the case may be, by injunction or other appropriate
proceedings pursuant to state law or municipal ordinance. A violation of
this article shall be considered a violation of this code. The remedies
shall include the following:
(1) Issuing a stop-work order;
(2) Seeking an injunction or other order of restraint or abatement that
requires the removal of the sign or the correction of the
nonconformity.
(3) Imposing any penalties that can be imposed directly by the City.
(4) Seeking, in any court of competent jurisdiction, the imposition of
any penalties that can be imposed by the court.
(5) In the case of a sign that poses an immediate danger to the public
health or safety, taking measures as are available to the City under
the applicable provisions of this code and the building code for
such circumstances.
(6) Signs posted in the public right-of-way contrary to this chapter
shall be removed by the Enforcement Officer.
B. The City shall have other remedies as are and as may from time to time
be provided for or allowed by state law or municipal ordinances for the
violation of this chapter.
A. The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and
sign height:
(1) Computation of area of individual signs. The area of a sign face
(which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only
one face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square,
circle, rectangle, triangle or combination thereof that will
encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation,
emblem or other display, together with any material or color
forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which
it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing or
decorative fence or wall when the fence or wall otherwise meets
§ 909 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 911
1:531
§ 912. Design, construction and maintenance.
All signs shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with
the following standards:
zoning ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental to the display
itself.
(2) Computation of area of multi-faced signs. The sign area for a sign
with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the
area of all sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical
sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be
viewed from any point at the same time, and when the sign faces
are part of the same sign structure, the sign area shall be computed
by the measurement of one of the faces.
(3) Computation of height. The height of a sign shall be computed as
the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of
the highest attached component of the sign.
(a) Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of:
[1] Existing grade prior to construction; or
[2] The newly established grade after construction, exclusive
of any filling, boring, mounding, or excavating solely for
the purpose of locating the sign.
(b) In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be
determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption
that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is
equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a
public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance
to the principal structure on the lot, whichever is lower.
(4) Computation of maximum total permitted sign area for a zone. The
permitted sum area of all signs on a lot shall be:
(a) The maximum square feet noted in Appendix C30; or
(b) The sum area as computed by applying the formula to the
linear street frontage of the zoned lot or to the ground floor
area of the principal building for the sign district in which the
lot is located.
B. Lots fronting on two or more streets are allowed only one freestanding
sign.
C. The total sign area that is oriented towards a particular street may not
exceed the portion of the lot's total sign area allocation that is derived
from the lot, building, wall area, or frontage on that street.
30.Editor's Note: See § 922.
§ 911 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 912
1:532
§ 913. Signs in public right-of-way.
§ 914. Temporary signs. [Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
A. All signs shall comply with the applicable provisions of the International
Building Code and the electrical code of the State of New Mexico and
this code.
B. Except for banners, flags, window signs, and other temporary signs
conforming in all respects with the requirements of this article, all signs
shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently
attached to the ground, a building or another structure by direct
attachment to a rigid wall, frame or structure.
C. All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, in compliance
with all building and electrical codes, and in conformance with this
code.
D. The numerical address of the business/development shall be placed
upon freestanding signage. The numbers shall be no less than 10 inches
in height.
A. No signs shall be allowed in the public right-of-way, except for the
following:
(1) Permanent signs: permanent signs, including public signs erected
by or on behalf of a governmental body to post legal notices,
government-approved community signs ("Adopt-A-Median"), signs
to identify public property, convey public information and direct or
regulate pedestrian and vehicular traffic; bus stop signs erected by
a public transit company; and informational signs of a public utility
regarding its poles, lines, pipes or facilities.
(2) Temporary signs: temporary signs posted for garage sales or
special events, not to exceed four square feet and not in obstruction
of clear sight or traffic flow.
(3) Warning signs: emergency warning signs erected by a
governmental agency, a public utility company or a contractor
doing authorized or permitted work within the public right-of-way.
(4) Promotional signs: Promotional signs advertising a special
community event such as a fair, farmer's market or parade may be
permitted to be located over the public right-of-way. The size,
location and method of erection of such signs shall be subject to
approval by the Zoning Official pursuant to good engineering
practices and shall be consistent with the paramount purpose of
public rights-of-way to provide safe and convenient traffic
circulation.
B. Other signs not expressly allowed by this section will be forfeited.
§ 912 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 914
1:533
A. Temporary political signs:
(1) Shall be permitted in all zones;
(2) Shall be erected not more than 30 days before an upcoming
election;
(3) Shall be removed within five days following the election;
(4) Shall not be erected or located in a public right-of-way except as
established and authorized by the public entity having jurisdiction
over said right-of-way; and
(5) Shall not require that a sign permit be issued.
B. Portable signs:
(1) Shall not exceed 32 square feet in total area. Such square footage
shall be applied and calculated as part of the total square footage
permitted for all businesses or property. If found to exceed the
maximum allowable area, such signs will not be permitted;
(2) Shall be displayed no more than 45 days cumulative during any
single calendar year;
(3) There shall be no more than one portable sign per parcel of
property or business, whichever is the lesser, permitted at any one
time;
(4) Electrification of all portable signs shall be in compliance with the
National Electric Ordinance as adopted by the state; and
(5) A portable sign shall not be established or placed prior to obtaining
a sign permit.
C. Real estate signs:
(1) Must be permitted in all districts, provided that such signs shall be
located on the property to which they apply, except as provided
under Subsection D, Special sale signs, of this section;
(2) Shall conform with the following maximum size requirements: four
square feet in area for the first 10,000 square feet in lot area, plus
four square feet for each additional 10,000 square feet of lot area,
not to exceed a total of 32 square feet;
(3) Shall be removed upon closing of the sale; and
(4) Signs placed at the entrance to a subdivision which are advertising
the sale of lots located within said subdivision shall be permitted,
provided that there is no more than one sign per entrance, the sign
shall not be greater than 32 square feet in area and no greater than
eight feet in height and shall not remain erected for longer than
§ 914 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 914
1:534
one year. Such signs may be installed for the purpose of directing
visitors to the property.
D. Special sale signs:
(1) Sale and grand opening signs shall be permitted in all zones,
provided that such signs are displayed no more than one block of
15 consecutive days for every three months. Such signs shall be
removed immediately upon termination of the sale or event which
they advertise;
(2) All such signs must be attached or affixed to the façade, wall or
window of the building in which the sale or event is taking place;
(3) No business shall have more than two such signs for each façade or
wall of the building to which they are attached; and
(4) The total size shall not exceed 50% of the size of the permitted
façade sign or four square feet in area, whichever is greater.
E. Promotional signs. Promotional signs advertising a special community
event such as a fair, farmers’ market or parade may be permitted to be
located over a public right-of-way. The size, location and method of
erection of such signs shall be subject to approval by the Zoning Official
pursuant to good engineering practices and shall be consistent with the
paramount purpose of public rights-of-way to provide safe and
convenient traffic circulation. Alternatively, such sign may be permitted
to be attached to the wall of a building subject to approval by the
Zoning Official.
F. Searchlights:
(1) The operation of searchlights or similar lighting for advertising,
display or any other commercial purpose is considered a temporary
sign pursuant to the provisions of this section;
(2) Such lights shall be displayed no more than five consecutive days
and in no event shall such lights be used for advertising greater
than 30 cumulative days during any single calendar year;
(3) Such lights shall not be permitted on the public right-of-way
without the required permission and may be immediately removed
from such right-of-way by the Zoning Official absent such
permission; and
(4) The Planning and Zoning Commission may permit the placement of
a searchlight or similar lighting source on a public right-of-way if
no reasonable alternative exists and if such placement will not
obstruct traffic or create a safety hazard. Any such permit must
comply with Subsection F(1) and (2) of this section.
G. Streamers:
§ 914 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 914
1:535
§ 915. Master sign plan for development complexes.
§ 916. Change in use; nonconforming signs.
(1) May be used to outline property lines and areas on a lot which
display merchandise outdoors;
(2) Shall be removed or replaced promptly when torn or faded;
(3) Displaying streamers for more than 90 cumulative days in a
calendar year shall be prohibited; and
(4) Shall not be attached to public utility facilities, including but not
limited to power poles, light poles and fences.
H. Temporary signs. One temporary sign is allowed per lot for a maximum
of 30 days per quarter year.
A. General. Signs for all development complexes shall comply with a
master sign plan for the development, approved by the Zoning Official
pursuant to this article. Said plan shall include all proposed sign
locations, materials, structures and installation details to the extent
known at the time of master sign plan submittal. Additional submittals
or amendments to the master sign plan may be necessary as a new
development complex becomes occupied or as businesses within a
complex change. Signs within a development complex shall be subject
to the following requirements.
B. Freestanding signs. Each development complex shall be permitted one
freestanding development complex sign per public street frontage. The
maximum permitted sign area for each development complex sign shall
be as provided within the applicable zoning district, plus a bonus of 12
additional square feet per business, enterprise, institution or franchise
within the development complex, not to exceed 150 square feet total.
A. Whenever the use of land or a structure changes, any signs that do not
relate to the new use or to any product or service associated with the
new use shall be removed or appropriately altered consistent with the
provisions of this article. Furthermore, it shall be the responsibility of
the property owner of the land to make improvements and/or remove
any sign or signs on premises where the associated use has been
discontinued for a period of more than 90 days.
B. Nonconforming signs. A sign which was conforming or grandfathered
prior to the enactment of Chapter 350, Article IX, but which is
subsequently nonconforming shall be deemed to be a grandfathered
nonconforming sign which shall not be required to be removed.
Whenever a business, person, enterprise or institution shall endeavor to
change, alter, enlarge or replace the grandfathered nonconforming
sign, the provisions of Chapter 350, Article IX, shall apply as follows:
[Added 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
§ 914 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 916
1:536
§ 917. Sign permits; fee.
(1) If the cost to repair, maintain or strengthen the nonconforming sign
equals or exceeds 25% of the total value of the sign, then the sign
shall be made to conform with all of the provisions of Chapter 350,
Article IX;
(2) Enlarging, reducing, amending or modifying the nonconforming
sign will require that the nonconforming sign be made to conform
to all of the provisions of Chapter 350, Article IX;
(3) Installation or erection of additional conforming signs shall require
that the nonconforming sign be made to conform to all of the
provisions of Chapter 350, Article IX; and
(4) Billboards that were conforming prior to the enactment of Chapter
350, Article IX, but are nonconforming as a result of Chapter 350,
Article IX, shall be removed, altered or replaced so as to fully
conform to all of the requirements of Chapter 350, Article IX,
within nine years after the date of enactment of Chapter 350,
Article IX.
A. If a sign requiring a permit under the provisions of this article is to be
placed, constructed, erected, or modified on a lot, the owner of the lot
shall secure a sign permit prior to the construction, placement, erection
or modification of a sign in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
B. No sign permit of any kind shall be issued for an existing or proposed
sign unless the sign is consistent with the requirements of this chapter
(including those protecting existing signs).
C. With the exception of those signs specifically exempt, no sign may be
erected without a permit from the Zoning Official. Application for
permits shall be submitted on forms obtainable at the Planning
Department. Each application shall be accompanied by plans which
shall:
(1) Indicate the proposed site by identifying the property by
ownership, location and use.
(2) Show the location of the sign on the lot in relation to property lines
and building, zoning district boundaries, right-of-way lines, and
existing signs.
(3) Show size, character, complete structural specifications and
methods of anchoring and support.
(4) Indicate that such sign has been approved by the Building
Inspector, if such approval is required by this chapter.
§ 916 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 917
1:537
§ 918. Abatement of illegal or abandoned signs.
§ 919. Special exceptions.
D. Permit fees. The permit fee for all signs installed within the City limits
as allowed by the terms of this chapter shall be not less than $5 per
square foot of each foot of sign that is proposed for installation.
E. If conditions warrant, the Zoning Official may require such additional
information as will enable him to determine if such sign is to be erected
in conformance with this chapter. Additionally, the Zoning Official may
require that a building permit be obtained prior to placing any sign
allowed by this chapter.
A. Failure of a property owner to abate an illegal or nonconforming sign
shall constitute a violation of this article.
B. The Zoning Official shall cause all nonconforming signs and/or illegal
signs to be removed, keeping a record of costs associated with the
removal. The cost of such removal shall be presented to the property
owner for payment. Failure to provide payment from the property
owner shall cause a lien to be placed on the subject property pursuant
to New Mexico state law.
A. An application for special exception may be made by submittal of an
application to the Planning Director, to be processed and submitted for
review by the Planning Commission. A special exception may be
requested to deviate from certain requirements herein specified for
signage, including but not limited to area, dimensions, height, location
and any other sign characteristics.
B. A special exception may be granted by the Planning Commission if the
Commission deems a special circumstance exists which warrants the
special exception. The following criteria shall be used in the review and
approval of requests:
(1) A literal application of the code would not allow the property to be
used at its highest and best use as zoned.
(2) The granting of the requested exception would not be materially
detrimental to the property owners in the vicinity.
(3) Conditions exist which are unique to the property or type and size
of development that would cause hardship under a literal
interpretation of the sign code.
(4) The granting of the special exception is in the best interests of the
public at large and would not be contrary to the general objectives
of the sign code and adopted land use plans.
§ 917 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 919
1:538
§ 920. Appendix A: Sign Districts.
The various zoning districts within Article XII, § 1203, of the Development
Code have been grouped together and classified as sign districts. Sign
districts therefore need not represent specific zoning districts and may
represent unique geographical areas. The Planning Director is responsible
for determining which is the most applicable sign district for any lot. More
than one sign district may apply to a lot if the lot has more than one street
frontage. On the tables in this chapter, the headings have the following
meanings:
RSF Residential, singlefamily
This sign district may include any singlefamily
or single-family residential
developments in the R-1, R-2, R-4, R-6
Zoning Districts
RMF Residential,
multifamily
This sign district may include any
multifamily residential developments in
the RC-PUD, RM-PUD Zoning Districts
RMH Residential, mobile
homes
This sign district may include all
residential mobile/manufactured housing
developments in the MHP-PUD Zoning
District
HIS Historical district This sign district is for any properties
designated as being located within
historic districts; MSD
INS Institutions This sign district applies to institutional
uses that are located in residential zoning
districts. The uses may include, but are
not necessarily limited to, churches,
schools, funeral homes and cemeteries.
NBD Neighborhood
business district
This sign district is for nonresidential
developments that are in close proximity
to residential developments; TC, R-O-I
COM Commercial business
district
This sign district includes all
nonresidential development typically
found in the B-1, B-2, LI, HI, BP Zoning
Districts
C. The Planning Commission may attach any additional conditions
necessary to maintain the intent and purpose of this chapter, in the
interest of the public.
D. Notice shall be given to all property owners within 100 feet of the
proposed sign location via certified letter no less than 15 days prior to
the scheduled hearing date.
§ 919 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 921
1:539
§ 921. Appendix B: Permitted Signs by Type and Sign District.
Appendix B, included at the end of this chapter, contains the type of signs
permitted in certain sign districts. Subdivision signage shall be exempt from
Appendices B and C.
§ 922. Appendix C: Area Requirements.
The maximum total area of any combination of signs; the dimensions of each
individual type of sign governed by Appendix B. Signs shall not exceed the
greater of the following:
Sign District
RSF
RMF
(a) RMH(a) HIS NBD INS(b) COM
Maximum
number of
total square
feet
8 100 100 100 200 200 300
Percentage of
ground floor
area of
principal
building
N/A N/A N/A N/A 1% 1% 1%
Square feet of
signage per
linear foot of
street frontage
N/A N/A N/A N/A 1.0 3.0 3.0
Notes:
a) The maximum sign area shown pertains to the allotment allowed for
identification of the multifamily development and not an individual unit.
Individual units are allowed signage as per the RSF sign district
b) Applies to institutional uses permitted under this chapter in residential
zoning districts. Such uses may include but are not necessarily limited
to churches and schools.
§ 921 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 922
1:540
ARTICLE X
Public Hearing and Decision-Making Procedures
§ 1001. Public hearings.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to specify the procedures
required for taking action on development applications. The Planning
Director, the Planning Commission, or City Council, as applicable, shall
conduct a public hearing to consider and review applications in
accordance with this article and shall take action in accordance with
the applicable section of this article.
B. Public hearing procedure.
(1) General. The public hearing will be called to order by the
responsible official at the time specified on the public notice. If the
hearing is before the Planning Commission or the City Council, a
quorum of the body must be present. Staff shall confirm that the
public notice requirements were met. The hearing shall be
conducted in a manner to protect the due process rights of parties
and affected parties, as required by New Mexico law. To the extent
required by law, all information presented by the applicant, any
affected party, by any witness for a party, or by City of Española
staff (other than legal advice given by the City Attorney) will be
given under oath, and subject to cross-examination of any persons
presenting information at the public hearing by the owner, any
affected party, and City of Española staff as directed by the
presiding official. Before hearing the matter, the members of the
decision-making authority will disclose any conflicts and ex-parte
contacts.
(2) DRT reports. With respect to applications relating to a particular
property, the DRT shall provide, at the request of the decisionmaking
authority, factual information regarding the particular
property, such as the lot dimensions, location, and topography. The
DRT report may also include reference to and copies of applicable
code requirements and other relevant factual information.
(3) Hearings on applications. The applicant shall present evidence
supporting the application and shall bear the burden of
demonstrating that the application should be granted. The
decision-making authority may ask attendees to select
representatives to express their views, in the interest of time,
under the standard that all persons shall have a reasonable right to
be heard. Objections may be made by aggrieved parties and such
objections will be noted in the record. The decision-making
authority may question the applicant, other parties and witnesses
at the hearing, and the staff at any time during the proceedings.
(4) Deliberations. Deliberations will be guided by Robert's Rules of
Order and such other rules and procedures as may be adopted by
§ 1001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1001
1:541
§ 1002. Decision making.
the decision-making authority. The decision-making authority shall
adopt written findings explaining the decision at the subsequent
meeting.
(5) Approval by affirmative vote. Approval by the Planning Commission
of an application requires a motion and affirmative vote of a
majority of the members present. Failure to approve an application
prior to the close of the meeting, unless tabled to a specific date,
shall constitute denial of the application based on the requirements
set forth in this chapter.
A. Amendment to text.
(1) If the Planning Commission, after hearing and deliberation,
determines (after making such changes as it deems necessary)
that:
(a) The amendment to text is in conformity with the provisions of
§ 407 and is not materially detrimental to the public welfare,
the Planning Commission shall forward a recommendation
(supported by findings) to the City Council that the proposed
amendment to text be approved.
(b) The proposed amendment to text does not conform to the
provisions of § 407, it shall forward its recommendation for
denial to the City Council.
(c) It is unable to arrive at a recommendation within 30 days from
the date of the first published legal notice, the proposed
amendment to text shall automatically be forwarded without
recommendation to the City Council for consideration.
(2) City Council determination. Following receipt of the Planning
Commission recommendation for the proposed amendment to text,
the City Council shall schedule and hold a public hearing as set
forth in § 503, to consider the proposed amendment to text and the
recommendation of the Planning Commission. The City Council,
after public hearing, shall approve, modify or disapprove the
proposed amendment, based on the provisions of § 407, or shall
vote to refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for
further proceedings, in which case the City Council shall specify
the time within which the Planning Commission shall report back to
the City Council its findings and recommendation on the matter(s)
referred to it. The final form and content of this ordinance, in any
event, shall be determined by the City Council.
B. Amendment to Official Zoning Map.
(1) If the Planning Commission, after hearing and deliberation,
determines that:
§ 1001 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1002
1:542
(a) The amendment to the Official Zoning Map is in conformity
with the provisions of § 404 and is not materially detrimental to
the public welfare or the property of other persons located in
the vicinity, it shall forward a recommendation (supported by
findings) to the City Council that the proposed amendment to
the Official Zoning Map be approved.
(b) The proposed amendment to the Official Zoning Map does not
conform to the provisions of § 404 or is otherwise not
appropriate, it shall forward its recommendation for denial to
the City Council.
(c) It is unable to arrive at a recommendation within 30 days from
the date of the first published legal notice, the proposed
amendment to the Official Zoning Map shall automatically be
forwarded with no recommendation to the City Council.
(2) City Council determination. Following receipt of the Planning
Commission recommendation for the proposed amendment to the
Official Zoning Map, the City Council shall schedule and hold a
public hearing as set forth in § 503 to consider the proposed
amendment to the Official Zoning Map and the recommendation of
the Planning Commission. The City Council, after public hearing,
shall approve or deny the proposed amendment to the Official
Zoning Map based on the provisions of § 404 or shall vote to refer
the matter back to the Planning Commission for further
proceedings, in which case the City Council shall specify the time
within which the Planning Commission shall report back to the City
Council its findings and recommendations on the matter(s) referred
to it. Final approval of the amendment to the Official Zoning Map
shall, in any event, be determined by the City Council.
C. Site plans. If the Planning Director or Planning Commission, as
applicable, after hearing and deliberation, determines that:
(1) The site plan request is in conformity with the provisions of § 403,
the request shall be approved.
(2) The site plan request can be made to be in conformance with the
provisions of § 403, the site plan request shall be approved with
conditions.
(3) The site plan request is not in conformance with the provisions of
§ 403, or if the potential adverse impacts cannot be mitigated by
the imposition of conditions to a degree which assures that
adjacent properties will not be unreasonably impacted, the request
shall be denied.
D. Special use permits. If the Planning Commission, after hearing and
deliberation, determines that:
§ 1002 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1002
1:543
(1) The special use permit request is in conformity the provisions of
§ 405, the request shall be approved.
(2) The special use permit request can be made to be in conformance
with the provisions of § 405, the special use permit shall be
approved with conditions.
(3) The special use permit request is not in conformance with the
provisions of § 405, or if the potential adverse impacts cannot be
mitigated by the imposition of conditions to a degree which assures
that properties within 100 feet will not be unreasonably impacted,
the request shall be denied.
E. Variances. If the Planning Commission, after hearing and consideration,
determines that:
(1) The variance request is in conformity with the provisions of § 406,
the request shall be approved.
(2) The variance request can be made to be in conformance with the
provisions of § 406, the variance request shall be approved with
conditions which cause it to be in compliance with the provisions of
§ 406.
(3) The variance request is not in conformance with the provisions of
§ 406, the request shall be denied.
F. Adoption of or amendment to the Comprehensive Plan.
(1) If the Planning Commission, after hearing and deliberation,
determines (after making such changes as it deems necessary)
that:
(a) The adoption of or amendment to the Comprehensive Plan is in
the best interests of the community and is not materially
detrimental to the public welfare, the Planning Commission
shall forward a recommendation to the City Council that the
proposed Comprehensive Plan or amendment thereto be
approved.
(b) The proposed adoption of or amendment to the Comprehensive
Plan is not in the best interest of the community, it shall
forward its recommendation for denial to the City Council.
(c) It is unable to arrive at a recommendation, the proposed
Comprehensive Plan or amendment thereto shall be forwarded
without recommendation to the City Council for consideration.
(2) City Council determination. Following receipt of the Planning
Commission recommendation for the proposed adoption of or
amendment to the Comprehensive Plan, the City Council shall
schedule and hold a public hearing to consider the application and
the recommendation of the Planning Commission. The City Council,
§ 1002 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1002
1:544
after public hearing, shall approve, modify or disapprove the
proposed adoption or amendment, or shall vote to refer the matter
back to the Planning Commission for further proceedings, in which
case the City Council shall specify the time within which the
Planning Commission shall report back to the City Council its
findings and recommendation on the matter(s) referred to it.
(3) The City Council may adopt the Comprehensive Plan submitted by
the Planning Commission, as a whole, by a single resolution, or may
from time to time approve and adopt a part or parts thereof, any
such part to correspond generally with one or more of the
functional subdivisions of the subject matter of the plan.
(4) The plan so submitted to the City Council shall only become
effective as the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Española upon
approval by resolution of the City Council. The resolution shall
refer expressly to the maps, descriptive matter or other matters
intended by the Planning Commission to form the whole or part of
the Comprehensive Plan.
(5) The action taken by the City Council shall be recorded on the
approved and adopted plan or part thereof by the identifying
signature of the Mayor, attested to by the City Clerk. A copy of the
plan or part thereof shall be recorded in the office of the City Clerk.
G. Landscape plans. If the Planning Director determines that:
(1) The landscape plan request is in conformity with the provisions of
§ 1304, the request shall be approved.
(2) The landscape plan request can be made to be in conformance with
the provision of § 1304, the landscape plan request shall be
approved with conditions which cause it to be in compliance with
the provisions of § 1304.
(3) The landscape plan request is not in conformance with the
provisions of § 1304, or if the potential adverse impacts cannot be
mitigated by the imposition of conditions to a degree which assures
that properties within 100 feet will not be unreasonably impacted,
the request shall be denied.
H. Temporary uses.
(1) If the Planning Director determines that:
(a) The temporary use conforms to the permitted uses as set forth
in § 608 and the temporary use will not adversely impact
properties within 100 feet, the request shall be approved with
conditions.
(b) The temporary use can be made to be in conformance with the
permitted uses as set forth in § 608 and the temporary use can
§ 1002 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1002
1:545
§ 1003. Appeals from action of Planning Director.
Appeals from action of the Planning Director shall be made in accordance
with Article XI.
§ 1004. Appeals.
be made to not adversely impact properties within 100 feet, the
request may be conditionally approved.
(2) In issuing a temporary use permit, the Planning Director may
require information and impose conditions to assure area, sanitary
facilities and parking spaces are adequate for the proposed use;
indicate the permitted hours of operation, and any other conditions
such as lighting, parking or protective fences, which are deemed
necessary to protect adjacent property or the public health, safety
and welfare. Each site occupied by a temporary use shall be left
free of debris, litter or any evidence of the temporary use upon the
expiration of the temporary use permit and the cessation of the
temporary use.
(3) Before issuing a temporary use permit, the Planning Director may
require a cash deposit or letter of credit as may be determined to
be adequate to ensure the cleaning up of the property covered by
the temporary use permit. If the property and the surrounding area
are not in the condition required, then the City of Española may
restore it to that condition, in which event the City shall have the
right to be reimbursed for the costs incurred from the deposit or
other security.
(4) The cash deposit or letter of credit shall not be released except on
written release from the Planning Director, finding that the
premises have not been damaged and have been returned to the
condition required under the terms of the temporary use permit.
(5) Upon written application, the Planning Director may modify any of
the conditions contained in the temporary use permit, if the
Planning Director determines that the modification does not
conflict with the purposes of the zoning requirements.
(6) Upon written application, the Planning Director may extend the
time of operation of the temporary use permit no more than 20%
above the total time allowed for the temporary use involved.
Extension of time beyond 20% shall be approved by formal action of
the Planning Commission.
(7) If The temporary use is not in conformance with permitted uses as
set forth in § 608 or cannot be modified so as not to adversely
impact properties within 100 feet, the request shall be denied.
A. Jurisdiction over administrative appeals.
§ 1002 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1004
1:546
(1) Appeal of any action taken by the Planning Director and authorized
by § 201 of the Development Code is to the Planning Commission.
(2) Appeal of any interpretation of the City of Española Development
Code by the Planning Director made in accordance with § 201 is to
the Planning Commission.
(3) Appeal of any action taken by the Planning Commission is to the
City Council.
(4) Appeal of a decision of the City Council is to the District Court as
provided by law.
B. Applications.
(1) Administrative appeals shall be filed at the City of Española
Planning Department. Any decision which can be appealed under
Article XI is final unless an appeal is initiated by application to the
City of Española within 15 days of the announced decision. The City
of Española may prescribe forms for appeal, in which event the
appeal may be made on the prescribed form. The date of a
determination is not included in the fifteen-day period for filing an
appeal, and if the 15th day falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday,
the appeal must be filed no later than the next business day.
(2) Persons who have a personal or pecuniary interest or property
right adversely affected by the decision, which right or interest is
more than merely nominal or remote, may file an appeal of the
decision. The following persons are deemed to meet this criteria:
(a) Persons who were parties at the hearing conducted by the
decision-making authority, or the applicant for those matters
decided by the Planning Director without a public hearing.
(b) Persons who own a property interest within 100 feet of the
subject site or whose property will be adversely affected by the
decision.
(c) An organized neighborhood association, if the subject site or a
portion thereof is within the association's boundaries or within
300 feet of the subject site.
(3) Applications for an appeal that do not articulate the reasons for the
appeal and specifically cite one or more alleged errors will not be
accepted and will be returned to the appellant. Errors may include:
(a) Failure to consider adopted plans, policies, and ordinances in
arriving at the decision.
(b) Factual error.
(c) Appeals that are arbitrary, capricious, or a manifest abuse of
discretion.
§ 1004 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1004
1:547
§ 1005. Conditional approval.
C. Procedure. Appeal procedures are as set out in this section and in
Article XI.
A. The Planning Director, Planning Commission, or City Council may
impose conditions to assure the compatibility of the development,
which is the subject of the application, with the surrounding area and
with the Comprehensive Plan. A site plan shall be submitted as part of
an application for a development plan, variance or special use permit. A
site plan shall be required with applications for expansions of existing
structures and parking lots or parking facilities and may be required for
other zoning matters if deemed appropriate by the Planning Director.
When this site plan is approved or conditionally approved by the
Planning Director, the Planning Commission, or the City Council, the
development must be in accordance with the site plan as it may be
modified by any conditions attached to the approval.
B. Applicants shall file a certificate of approval with the City Clerk within
30 days from the expiration of the appeal period or of the final decision
on an appeal; and shall either obtain the necessary building permits or
shall commence the use as approved or conditionally approved within
12 months after the filing of the certificate of approval with the City
Clerk for approved or conditionally approved site plans, variances,
parking lot or parking facility expansions, or special use permits. The
Planning Director may grant no more than one twelve-month extension
of time if the applicant, prior to the expiration of the initial twelvemonth
period, shows good cause, in writing, for such an extension.
C. If an applicant fails to comply with the time requirements of Subsection
B of this section, or if the approved use of land has ceased for a
continuous period of more than 180 days, the site plan, special use
permit, parking lot expansion or variance shall be deemed to be
abandoned (also see Article VII, Nonconforming Uses) and shall be
subject to revocation by the Planning Director upon the following
procedures:
(1) The Planning Director shall serve upon the applicant by certified
mail, return receipt requested, a letter requiring the applicant to
show good cause, in writing, within 30 days, why the site plan,
special use permit, parking lot or parking facility expansion or
variance should not be revoked. If the applicant fails to respond
within 30 days from the receipt of the notice by the Planning
Director, the Planning Director shall issue a certificate of
revocation of the site plan, special use permit, parking lot
expansion or variance. The Planning Director shall file the
certificate of revocation with the City Clerk and serve upon the
applicant a copy of the certificate of revocation by certified mail,
return receipt requested.
§ 1004 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1005
1:548
§ 1006. Changes to original plan.
Proposed changes to approved or conditionally approved plans shall be
submitted by the applicant, in writing, to the Planning Director. The
Planning Director shall determine whether the proposed changes alter
the approved or conditionally approved plan by greater than 20% of any
site development standards. If the Planning Director determines that the
proposed changes may be approved by the Planning Director in accordance
with authority granted in § 201, the Planning Director shall approve the
proposed changes, in writing, and the development shall be in accordance
with the approved or conditionally approved plan as changed. If the
Planning Director determines that the proposed changes may not be
approved by the Planning Director in accordance with the authority granted
in § 201 or are not in substantial compliance with this chapter or other
ordinances, resolutions or regulations, the request for changes shall be
treated in all respects as a new request and shall be resubmitted to the
Planning Commission for review and final action.
§ 1007. Notification and recording of final action.
When an application for a site plan, variance, special use permit or any
other matter pertaining to the use of land or zoning is acted upon by
the decision-making authority, written notification of the final action listing
any conditions imposed, if the action was approved, shall be sent to the
applicant and to the City Manager, with a copy retained in the City of
(2) If the applicant responds to the letter but fails to show cause, the
Planning Director shall issue a certificate of revocation of the site
plan, special use permit, parking lot or parking facility expansion or
variance, the applicant shall have 15 days from such finding to file a
written notice of appeal with the Planning Commission. The
Planning Commission, upon appeal, shall conduct a public hearing
and shall affirm or reverse the decision of the Planning Director to
revoke the site plan, special use permit, or variance. Upon a final
determination that the site plan, special use permit, or variance
should be revoked, the Planning Director shall file a certificate of
revocation with the City of Española Clerk and serve upon the
applicant a copy of the certificate of revocation by certified mail,
return receipt requested.
(3) The Planning Director, upon being provided evidence that there is
good cause for an extension of time, may grant a one-time
extension not to exceed six months; provided there is clear
evidence that issuance of building permits or commencement of the
use will be completed within the six-month extension period. The
Planning Director may evoke compliance by the establishment of
due dates, a schedule of performance and other terms or conditions
as may be deemed appropriate. Failing this time extension, the
applicant shall be afforded the process of Subsection C(1) and (2) of
this section.
§ 1005 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1007
1:549
Española Planning Department. The action taken shall be final and
conclusive unless, within 15 days of the effective date of the final action,
an aggrieved party files an appeal as provided in this chapter. After the
expiration of the fifteen-day appeal period with no appeal filed, or after
approval or conditional approval or affirmation of approval or conditional
approval on appeal, the Planning Director shall issue the certificate of
approval, if appropriate, listing conditions that may have been imposed.
The applicant or agent shall file and record the certificate of approval in
the office of the City Clerk before proceeding with the development or use
approved. No building permit, license or occupancy permit may be issued
for the development or use approved before the expiration of the appeal
period and the filing of the certificate of approval.
§ 1007 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1007
1:550
ARTICLE XI
Appeals
§ 1101. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a uniform and consistent
procedure for appeals.
§ 1102. Time for filing, effect and notice.
§ 1103. Procedure for appeals to City.
A. An appeal from a decision or determination of the decision-making
authority may be taken by filing written notice of appeal with the
Planning Department within 15 days after the date of action. The day
following the date of action shall be the first day of the fifteen-day
appeal period, and the period shall end at the close of business on the
15th day.
B. The filing of an appeal shall suspend further action of the decisionmaking
authority until such time as the appeal shall be heard and acted
upon by the appellate body having jurisdiction as provided in this
chapter. No permit, license or certificate of approval or use of land or
structures involved in the application on appeal shall be issued until the
appeal has been acted upon.
C. For appeals to the Planning Commission, within 15 days following
receipt of a complete notice of appeal on a form provided by the
Planning Director, the Planning Director shall set a date for public
hearing before the Planning Commission on the appeal. For appeals to
the City Council, the Planning Director shall submit the notice of appeal
to the City Manager, who shall advise the City Council of the notice of
appeal. The City Council shall set a date for public hearing on the
appeal.
D. The appellate body shall hold a public hearing on the appeal. Notice of
public hearing shall be given as provided in Article V of this chapter.
E. The appellate body shall apply the review criteria applied by the
decision-making authority that considered the application.
A. By the affirmative vote of the majority of all its members, the appellate
body may, without a full hearing, remand an appeal to the decisionmaking
authority that heard the application for rehearing and decision
if it finds that rehearing would be likely to serve public policy or resolve
the appeal. If the appellate body remands the appeal without a full
hearing, the appellate body shall make findings of fact on which that
action is based.
B. An appellant may withdraw the appeal at any time, provided that notice
of the withdrawal is provided in writing to the Planning Director. The
§ 1101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1103
1:551
§ 1104. Impact reports.
fee for filing an application of appeal is not refundable, in whole or in
part.
C. The general procedure for an appeal hearing is as follows:
(1) The appellate body shall hold a hearing on the entire record sent to
it and reverse, affirm, or modify the decision appealed. The
appellate body shall affirm the decision appealed unless it finds
that the decision was not in accordance with adopted City of
Española plans, policies, and ordinances, the facts on which the
decision was based are not supported by the record, or the decision
was arbitrary, capricious, or a manifest abuse of discretion.
(2) The appellate body shall not accept or consider evidence outside of
the record sent to it for review.
(3) The appellate body may remand the matter for reconsideration. If
the appellate body remands the appeal, it shall state specifically
the matters to be reconsidered and the reasons for remand on
which that action is based.
(4) Staff of the appellate body may communicate with the appellate
body at any time and by any means. The foregoing shall not apply to
members of the City of Española Planning Department staff if the
City of Española staff brought the appeal.
(5) The appellate body shall take action on the appeal at the conclusion
of the hearing, and shall state and adopt, or make provision for the
adoption of, findings of fact supporting the decision. A decision to
reverse or modify the decision appealed will be effective only on
motion and affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the
appellate body present, and in no event fewer than four votes. If no
action is taken or approved at a hearing at which a quorum of the
members of the appellate body is present, the decision shall be
considered affirmed.
D. If an appeal is filed by a member of the City Council, that member shall
be excused from deliberations or voting on the appeal, if there is a
determination by the remaining members of the City Council that the
member has a conflict of interest or is an aggrieved party.
A. An appeal from a decision or determination of the City Engineer and/or
Planning Director to require or not require any or all of the impact
reports set forth in § 1301 may be taken by filing written notice of
appeal with the Planning Commission within 15 days after the date of
written decision of the City Engineer and/or Planning Director as
required in § 1301. The Planning Commission shall notify the City
Engineer and/or Planning Director of all such appeals the next working
day. The day following the date of the written decision shall be the first
§ 1103 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1104
1:552
§ 1105. Appeals to District Court.
Appeals of administrative decisions of the City on land use issues are
authorized in accordance with NMSA 1978 § 39-3-1.1 and Rule 1-074,
NMRA.
day of the fifteen-day appeal period, and the period shall end at the
close of business on the 15th day.
B. The filing of an appeal shall suspend the action of the City of Española
until such time as the appeal shall be heard and acted upon by the
Planning Commission. No decision, public hearing(s), permit, license or
certificate of approval or use of land or structures involved in the
application on appeal shall be held or issued until the appeal has been
acted upon.
C. The owner, owner's agent or any aggrieved party may appeal the
decision of the City Engineer and/or Planning Director made pursuant
to the provisions of § 1301.
D. Following the receipt of a complete notice of appeal on a form provided
by the Planning Department, the Planning Department shall place the
appeal on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
Planning Commission.
E. The Planning Commission shall concur with the City Engineer's and/or
Planning Director's decision, modify the decision or reverse the
decision.
F. Decisions of the Planning Commission regarding a decision of the City
of Española Engineer and/or Planning Director may be appealed to the
City of Española Council.
§ 1104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1105
1:553

ARTICLE XII
Zoning Districts and Uses
§ 1201. Official Zoning Map.
A. Adoption. The Official Zoning Map is an integral part of this article. It is
to be entitled the "Official Zoning Map of the City of Española," signed
by the Mayor of the City of Española and attested to by the City Clerk.
B. Amendment. The Official Zoning Map shall be amended in accordance
with the procedures set forth in this article. The Official Zoning Map
may be amended by an ordinance containing only textual material, or
by an ordinance containing textual material and a revision of all or part
of the Official Zoning Map.
(1) If the amending ordinance contains only textual material, then such
amending ordinance shall bear the legend "Revision No. _______ in
textual form, to the Official Zoning Map of the City of Española,
effective __________." In addition, such changes shall be made to the
Official Zoning Map. This is to be signed by the Mayor and attested
to by the City Clerk.
(2) If the amending ordinance shall include a revision to all or part of
the Official Zoning Map, such amending ordinance shall bear the
legend "Revision No. ______ to the Official Zoning Map of the City of
Española, effective __________," and it shall be signed by the Mayor
and attested to by the City Clerk. In addition, such changes shall be
made to the Official Zoning Map.
C. Location and authority. The Official Zoning Map and all revisions shall
be maintained in the offices of the Planning Department. That map, as it
may from time to time be revised, or a copy certified by the Planning
Director and City Clerk to be a true copy of the map or of the map as
revised, shall be conclusive on any question of the zoning district in
which a particular parcel may be located.
D. Replacement. In the event of the destruction, damage or loss of the
Official Zoning Map, or if the Official Zoning Map becomes difficult to
interpret because of the nature or number of amendments, the City
Council may by resolution adopt a replacement Official Zoning Map.
Upon adoption, the replacement Official Zoning Map shall be signed by
the Mayor and attested to by the City Clerk. The replacement Official
Zoning Map shall thereupon become the Official Zoning Map and a part
of this article. The replacement Official Zoning Map may correct
drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map,
but no change of substance shall be made by the adoption of the
replacement Official Zoning Map. Unless the prior Official Zoning Map
has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any
significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved, together with all
available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment.
§ 1201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1202
1:555
§ 1202. Rules for interpretation of district boundaries.
§ 1203. Official zoning districts; uses.
The area of the City of Española is divided into zoning districts. The location
of each of the zoning districts is shown by the Official Zoning Map. The
specific land use requirements of each district shall be found on Tables I, II
and III. The zoning districts and the purposes of each district are as follows:
A. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on
the Official Zoning Map, the following shall apply:
(1) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
roadways shall be construed to follow such center lines.
(2) Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed as following such lot lines.
(3) Boundaries indicated as approximately following City of Española
limits shall be construed as following such limits.
(4) Boundaries indicated as being an extension of any street, highway,
alley line or lot line shall be construed to be of the same course and
bearing as that line extended.
(5) Boundaries indicated as being parallel to features indicated in
Subsection A(1) through (4) of this section shall be so construed.
Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall
be determined by the scale of the map.
B. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other
circumstances not covered by Subsection A(1) through (5) of this
section, the Planning Commission shall interpret the district
boundaries.
C. Where a district boundary divides a lot in single ownership, the
Planning Director with approval and concurrence from the City
Manager, may permit the extension of districts to the property line of
said lot, provided that the extension does not exceed 25% or a
maximum of three acres, of the original district boundary. This
extension of districts can only be exercised once per original lot.
A. R-1 Rural Residential District. The R-1 Rural Residential District is
established in which the principal use of land is for single-family
residences. The regulations of this district are intended to protect
existing and proposed residential areas with a minimum lot size of
43,560 square feet (one acre); and to encourage the subdivision of
development into lots of the same minimum lot size. The regulations of
this district are meant to ensure a more rural setting. These regulations
are provided to discourage any use which, because of its character,
§ 1202 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1203
1:556
would interfere with the relatively rural nature of the district. Examples
of allowed uses in this district are as follows:
(1) Site-built single-family dwellings.
(2) Manufactured housing units.
(3) Public parks, playgrounds.
(4) Community, municipal or other public buildings.
(5) Churches or other buildings related to the practice of a religious
faith.
(6) Home occupations, within the parameters set forth in this chapter.
B. R-2 Semi-Rural District. The R-2 Semi-Rural Residential District is
established in which the principal use of land is for single-family
residences. The zoning regulations of this district are intended to
protect existing and proposed residential areas with a minimum lot size
of 21,780 square feet (1/2 acre); and to encourage the development of
lots that meet this minimum lot size. The regulations of this district are
intended for those persons desiring relatively large residential lots. The
regulations are intended to discourage any use which, because of its
character, would interfere with the residential nature of this district.
Examples of allowed uses in this district are as follows:
(1) Site-built single-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings (duplexes).
(3) Manufactured housing units.
(4) Public parks, playgrounds.
(5) Community, municipal or other public buildings.
(6) Churches or other buildings related to the practice of a religious
faith.
(7) Home occupations, within the parameters set forth in this chapter.
C. R-3 Suburban Residential. The R-3 Suburban Residential District is
established in which the principal use of land is for single-family
residences. The regulations of this district are intended to protect
existing and proposed residential areas with a minimum lot size of
14,520 square feet (1/3 acre); and to encourage the development of lots
that meet this minimum lot size. The regulations of this district are
intended for those persons desiring relatively large residential lots. The
regulations are intended to discourage any use which, because of its
character, would interfere with the residential nature of this district.
Examples of allowed uses in this district are as follows:
(1) Site-built single-family dwellings.
§ 1203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1203
1:557
(2) Two-family dwellings (duplexes).
(3) Manufactured housing units.
(4) Public parks, playgrounds.
(5) Community, municipal or other public buildings.
(6) Churches or other buildings related to the practice of a religious
faith.
(7) Home occupations, within the parameters set forth in this chapter.
D. R-4 Large Lot Residential. The R-4 Large Lot Residential District is
established in which the principal use of land is for single-family
residences. The regulations of this district are intended to protect
existing and proposed residential areas with a minimum lot size of
10,890 square feet (1/4 acre); and to encourage the development of lots
that meet this minimum lot size. The regulations of this district are
intended for those persons desiring relatively large residential lots. The
regulations are intended to discourage any use which, because of its
character, would interfere with the residential nature of this district.
Examples of allowed uses in this district are as follows:
(1) Site-built single-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings (duplexes).
(3) Manufactured housing units.
(4) Public parks, playgrounds.
(5) Community, municipal or other public buildings.
(6) Churches or other buildings related to the practice of a religious
faith.
(7) Home occupations, within the parameters set forth in this chapter.
E. R-6 Urban Residential. The R-6 Urban Residential District is established
in which the principal use of land is for single-family residences. The
regulations of this district are intended to protect existing and
proposed residential areas with a minimum lot size of 7,500 square feet,
and to encourage the development of lots that meet this minimum lot
size. The regulations of this district are intended for those persons
desiring a more traditional subdivision setting. The regulations are
intended to discourage any use which, because of its character, would
interfere with the residential nature of this district. Examples of
allowed uses in this district are as follows:
(1) Site-built single-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings (duplex).
(3) Manufactured housing units.
§ 1203 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1203
1:558
(4) Public parks, playgrounds.
(5) Community, municipal or other public buildings.
(6) Churches or other buildings related to the practice of a religious
faith.
(7) Home occupations, within the parameters set forth in this chapter.
F. R-O-I Residential-Office-Institutional District. This mixed zoning district
is intended to provide a place for those types of institutional and
commercial activities that require separate buildings and building
groups surrounded by landscaped yards and open area. Land, space
and aesthetic requirements of these uses make them desirable in
suburban locations near residential neighborhoods or rural
countrysides, and away from the concentration of people and traffic of
the retail, wholesale and industrial areas of the community. Examples of
allowed uses in this district are as follows:
(1) Art galleries.
(2) Assembly halls for nonprofits.
(3) Libraries.
(4) Museums.
(5) Music conservatories.
(6) Office buildings and offices for professional services.
(7) Site-built single-family dwellings.
G. RC-PUD Residential Compound Planned Unit Development District. The
RC-PUD District is intended to permit the development of tracts of five
acres or less in a manner consistent with existing patterns of the City's
compound areas. It is also intended to permit the flexibility for more
efficient design and greater intensity of land use. It provides for the
elimination of building setbacks where walls or fences enclose the
entire tract. Within these walls it allows for the reduction of minimum
lot sizes and the increase of maximum lot coverage, provided the
overall density requirements of the underlying zone are not exceeded
and open space, public or private, is provided. Examples of allowed
uses in this district are as follows:
(1) Site-built single-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings (duplexes).
(3) Community, municipal or other public buildings.
(4) Public parks, playgrounds.
H. RM-PUD Residential Multifamily. The RM-PUD District is intended
primarily for multifamily units and related uses in keeping with the
§ 1203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1203
1:559
character of the surrounding areas. To protect the integrity and
purpose of this district, all permitted developments shall be subject
to planned unit development requirements, prescribed in this article,
unless the requirements are waived by the Planning Commission or the
City Council. RM-PUD or RM may be utilized on a case-by-case basis at
the discretion of the Director of Planning on a finding by the Director
that such serves the public interest. Examples of allowed uses in this
district are as follows: [Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
(1) Multifamily dwellings.
(2) Rooming houses.
(3) Boardinghouses.
I. MHP-PUD Manufactured Housing Park Planned Unit Development. This
district should be referred to as the "Manufactured Housing Park
District" on the Official Zoning Map, upon approval of a manufactured
housing park in accordance with regulations and standards outlined in
this chapter. This district shall be considered as an overlay zone to be
allowed in any district except the LI Light Industrial and HI Heavy
Industrial Districts. An applicant for a manufactured housing park must
have a three-acre minimum. It is understood that while providing
residential lots, a manufactured housing park is a business venture and
subject to business license and other approvals of the City of Española
on a yearly basis. MHP regulations shall apply when three or more
manufactured housing units are involved in any one lot having a single
owner or several adjacent lots having at least one common owner.
J. B-1 Local Commercial District. This commercial district is intended for
the conduct of retail trade, and to provide personal services to meet the
regular needs, and for the convenience of the people of adjacent
residential areas. Because these shops and stores may be an integral
part of the neighborhood closely associated with residential, religious,
recreational, and educational elements, more light, air, open space, and
off-street parking is required than is required in other commercial
districts. Examples of allowed uses in this district are as follows:
Accessory buildings used for any of the below-enumerated purposes,
which may not have more than 40% of the floor area devoted to
purposes incidental to the primary use
Antique shops
Automobile parking lots
Bakery goods stores
Banks
Barber shops or beauty parlors
Book or stationary stores
Camera shops
§ 1203 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1203
1:560
Candy stores
Catering establishments
Cleaning, pressing, or laundry agencies
Clothing or apparel stores
Gift shops
Delicatessen stores
Dress shops, dry goods
Drugstores or pharmacies
Florists
Food stores
Laundromats/help-yourself laundries, which are defined as a business
providing home-type washing, drying and ironing machines for hire to
be used by customers on the premises
Hotels
Jewelry stores
Leather goods shops
Lodges or halls (facilities for civic groups)
Messenger or telegraph services
Office businesses
Outdoor or indoor courts for handball, racquetball, tennis, or sports
activity of a similar nature (provided that lighted outdoor courts may
not be operated later than 10:00 p.m., and lighting is to be arranged
to direct light away from any adjoining property in a residential
district.)
Photographer or artist studios
Restaurants
Retail stores and shops supplying the regular and customary needs of
the residents of the neighborhood and primarily for their convenience
Shoe repair shops
Storage, automobile temporary, provided that the lot not exceed one
acre in area, and further provided that a front setback of 25 feet is
provided for ingress to or egress from the lot. Storage lots of more
than one acre require a special exception.
Tailor shops
Toy stores
K. B-2 General Commercial District. This commercial district is intended
for the conduct of personal and business services and the general retail
business of the community. Persons living in the community and in the
surrounding trade territory require direct and frequent access. Traffic
generated by the uses will be primarily passenger vehicles and only
§ 1203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1203
1:561
those trucks and commercial vehicles required for stocking and
delivery of retail goods.
(1) Examples of allowed uses in this district are as follows:
Any use permitted in B-1 Local Commercial District, except for
mixed-use buildings
Amusement enterprises
New automobile sales and services, new machinery sales and
services, and public garages, provided no gas or gasoline is stored
above ground; used automobile sales, automobile and machinery
repairing, if conducted wholly within a completely enclosed
building, or any of the following uses:
Any use permitted in the R-O-I Residential-Office-Institutional
Zoning District
Any of the following:
Automobile, farm implement and machinery repair, sales and
service
Automobile service station
Bakery
Bus terminal
Carpenter and cabinet shop
Cleaning and dyeing works
Commercial school or hall
Department store
Electric transmission station or other utility substation
Feed and fuel store
Furniture repair and upholstery store
Furniture or interior decorating store
Golf course, miniature or practice range
Hardware or appliance store
Home improvement center
Heating, ventilating or plumbing supplies, sales and service
Ice plant or storage house for ice and food housing not more
than 10 tons' capacity
Key shop
Laundry
Liquor store
§ 1203 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1203
1:562
Lumber and building materials sales yard, provided the
materials are not produced or altered in any fashion of manner
to create such building materials, and further provided that the
yard shall be screened from public view on all sides
Mobile home sales
Music, radio or television shop
Paint, paper or glass store
Pawn shop
Pet shop and kennel
Plant sales outlet or garden supply store
Printing plant
Research laboratory, excluding chemical, biological, nuclear or
other hazardous materials handling, unless presented to the
Planning Commission and approved by the Fire Chief
Sign painting shop
Small animal hospital
Sporting goods store
Storage, automobile temporary, provided that the lot not
exceed one acre in area and further provided that a front
setback of 25 feet is provided for ingress to or egress from
the lot. Storage lots of more than one acre require a special
exception.
Storage warehouse, provided no combustible materials are
stored within the facility
Theater
Trailer camp, RV park
Wholesale distributing center
(2) Buildings, structures, and uses accessory and customarily
incidental to any of the above uses are allowed, provided that there
shall be no manufacture, processing or compounding of products
other than such as are customarily incidental or essential to retail
establishments and service.
L. B-3 Central Business District. The regulations for this district are
designed to permit a concentrated development of business uses within
the Central Business District (CBD), as designated on the Official
Zoning Map of the City of Española. [Added 11-19-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-02]
(1) Permitted uses and structures within the CBD:
§ 1203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1203
1:563
Auditoriums, libraries and museums operated by nonprofit
organizations
Offices
Hotels and motels
Financial institutions
Eating and drinking establishments
Business service establishments
Establishments offering repair services on items brought in by
customers
Filling stations
Amusement and recreation establishments and areas
Wholesaling from sample stocks only, provided that no
manufacturing or storage for distribution shall be permitted on
the premises
Business school, studios, vocational schools not involving
processing of a light or heavy industrial nature
Laboratories and establishments for production and repair of eye
glasses, hearing aids and prosthetic appliances
Clubs and lodges
Churches and other religious institutions, except elementary and
high schools
Parking lots and parking garages
Transportation terminals other than truck terminals
Manufacturing or handicraft products such as jewelry, pottery,
needlework, weaving and the like
Hospitals
(2) Permitted accessory uses and structures within the CBD. Uses and
structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental
and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures.
(3) Prohibited uses and structure within the CBD. Every use not
allowed specifically in Subsection L(1) and L(2) above.
(4) Special exceptions within the CBD. After a public hearing, as
required by Article X, §§ 1001 and 1002, other uses may be
permitted under a special exception, if, in the opinion of the Board
of Adjustment, the proposed use is not offensive or incompatible
and is in keeping with the character of the district.
(5) Dimensional requirements within the CBD.
(a) Lot area: none, except as may be needed to satisfy other
limitations of this chapter.
§ 1203 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1203
1:564
(b) Lot width: none, except as may be needed to satisfy other
limitations of this chapter.
(c) Yard requirements:
[1] No front yards are required;
[2] Minimal depth of rear yard required: 10 feet; and
[3] No side yards are required. However, if a side yard is
provided, all structures must be 10 feet from the property
line. Yards that are adjacent to residentially zoned lots
shall have a minimum side yard of eight feet.
(d) Maximum lot coverage: unrestricted.
(e) Building height: No building shall exceed 35 feet in height
except for flagpoles, antennas, chimneys and similar
accessories which are exempted from this height limitation.
(6) Off-street parking, loading and unloading within the CBD. There
are no off-street parking, loading and unloading requirements for
this district.
M. TC Tourist Commercial District. This district is intended to
accommodate the grouping of those commercial activities necessary to
supply the normal needs of tourists, and to protect these against other
incompatible commercial uses. This district is intended to be located in
defined areas, adjacent or convenient to arterials and/or other major
highways and at the intersections of arterials or highways and roads
leading into primary entrances of major public recreational areas.
Examples of allowed uses in this district are as follows:
Art gallery
Art supply store
Bar, lounge or tavern, private club
Bed-and-breakfast
Cafeteria or restaurant
Gift shop
Laundromat
Miniature golf course
Professional office
Service station
Souvenir shop
Sporting goods store
Theater, indoor
§ 1203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1203
1:565
N. MSD Main Street District. This commercial district is intended for the
conduct of personal and business services and the general retail
business of the community along the Main Street corridor. It differs
from other commercial districts in that standard off-street parking
requirements do not apply. This district was created primarily for those
commercial areas that already were so intensely developed that they
could not comply with the provisions for other commercial districts in
this chapter. Uses in this district are considered on a case-by-case basis
via application through the Development Review Team.
O. LI Light Industrial District. The Light Industrial District is intended to
accommodate light industrial and certain accessory commercial uses,
none of which create noise, smoke, odor, dust or similar emissions and
which generate a minimum of truck traffic. The regulations of this
district are intended to encourage attractively developed sites to
ensure further compatibility with adjoining areas of the community.
Uses in this district are considered on a case-by-case basis via
application through the Development Review Team.
P. HI Heavy Industrial District. The Heavy Industrial District is intended
to accommodate both light and heavy industrial uses in combination
with limited accessory commercial uses. The regulations of this district
are intended to ensure a compatible appearance and relationship with
surrounding areas of the community. Uses in this district are
considered on a case-by-case basis via application through the
Development Review Team.
Q. BP Business Park District. The BP Business Park District is intended to
accommodate retail, service and professional uses, compatible with
each other, to serve nearby residential districts. The regulations of this
district are intended to encourage the growth and development of this
type of commercial and professional facility. Uses in this district are
considered on a case-by-case basis via application through the
Development Review Team.
R. Santa Cruz Plaza Historic District. This subsection may be cited as the
"Santa Cruz Plaza Historic District" under the authority granted in
NMSA 1978 §§ 3-22-1 through 3-22-5. It is the intention of this district
to promote uses similar to the historical pattern of the area: limited
commercial community support functions around the Plaza, embedded
within a residential area. In general, the zoning shall remain the same
as indicated in the Española Zoning Ordinance. The following
commercial uses shall be permitted within the district: [Added
11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
(1) Permitted principal uses and structures. Permitted principal uses
and structures in the Santa Cruz Plaza Historic District are as
follows:
Bakeries
Branch banks
§ 1203 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1203
1:566
Barber shops and beauty shops
Bookstores
Eating establishments
General merchandise establishments
Grocery stores, with a total floor area of 3,000 square feet or less
Laundromats
Pharmacies
Professional offices
Single- and two-family dwellings
Studio and sales galleries where the proprietor’s main place of
residence is on the premises
(2) Permitted accessory uses and structures within the Santa Cruz
Plaza Historic District are uses and structures which:
(a) Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and
subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures;
and
(b) Are located on the same lot as the permitted use or structure,
or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership.
(3) Prohibited accessory uses and structures within the Santa Cruz
Plaza Historic District are every use not allowed specifically in
Subsection R(1) and (2) above.
(4) Special exceptions. If after a public hearing, as required by Article
X, §§ 1001 and 1002, the proposed use is held not to be offensive or
incompatible and is held to be in keeping with the character of the
Santa Cruz Plaza Historic District, then a special exception may be
granted.
(5) Dimensional requirements in the Santa Cruz Plaza Historic District
are as follows:
(a) Given that many of the lots in the historic plaza area, as
delineated on the accompanying plat,31 are small and vary in
size and given that the location of many of the buildings are
traditionally close together in keeping with the “traditional
character” of the plaza area, no minimum lot or yard
requirements shall be established. It shall be the responsibility
of the Española Planning Commission, in accordance with its
powers as specified in Ordinance No. 313, to see that the
“traditional character” of the Plaza is preserved.
31.Editor's Note: The plat is on file in the City offices.
§ 1203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1203
1:567
(b) Building height. No building shall exceed 26 feet in height,
except for flagpoles, reception antennas, chimneys, and similar
accessories which may be excepted from this height limitation.
(6) Preservation of "traditional character" of the Santa Cruz Plaza
Historic District shall be accomplished as follows:
(a) Review and approval of proposed work within district. At the
time application is made to the City for a permit for
construction, alteration or demolition, the application shall be
accompanied by such drawings, specifications and descriptions
as may be required to determine the characteristics of the
proposed project. The City Zoning Administrator shall notify
the Española Planning Commission of each application
received for work within the Santa Cruz Plaza Historic District
and shall not approve the issuance of a building permit until
approval by the Commission.
(b) Criteria for decisions. It is the intention of this subsection to
preserve the "traditional character" of Santa Cruz Plaza.
"Traditional character" shall be evaluated in terms of scale,
relationship of open spaces to buildings, color, types of
materials and, in general, those elements affecting the visual
quality of the district.
[1] It is not the intention of this subsection to limit the
creativity of designers in experimenting, exploring and
expressing new ideas in manners which are consistent
with the traditional character of the district.
[2] The traditional character of the Santa Cruz Plaza. The
Plaza was historically, and is currently, a large, open space
void of construction (with the historical exception of a
Torreon structure which is now demolished). The Plaza is
defined by the structures surrounding it: placitas and
linear buildings nearly abutting the Plaza’s open-space
boundaries with little to no open-space separation
between these placitas and linear buildings. These
structures form a continuous edge around the Plaza,
broken only by the roads into and out of the Plaza.
[3] Some of the buildings in the Santa Cruz Plaza Historic
District are made using the traditional Northern New
Mexico style of steep-pitched metal roofs with high,
straight, linear adobe walls. Other more recent buildings
have lower profiles with a more concentric massing. Some
historical and more modern buildings in the district also
have flat roofs. Building materials in the district were
initially adobe, wood and stone. Metal roofing, concrete
block and stucco were introduced as these materials were
developed and became available. Colors, which were likely
§ 1203 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1203
1:568
natural earth colors from the surrounding area initially,
have become much more varied with the development of
newer materials. All external walls shall be finished in
adobe or cement plaster in colors which are in keeping
with the traditional character of the District. No concrete
block shall remain exposed.
[4] Signs. Designs for all associated signs within the district
must accompany all building applications. Signs will be in
the traditional character of the District. Proper
illumination will be allowed so long as it is determined by
the City Zoning Administrator to be in keeping with the
traditional character and historical mood of the district.
No flashing lights, neon signs or offensive lighting will be
allowed.
[5] While the area immediately surrounding the Plaza can be
characterized by tight, contiguous building forms as
described above, the outlying areas were historically more
agricultural in character and the houses were set on large
parcels of land. In accordance with the powers herein and
otherwise lawfully conferred, the acequia systems within
the District which networked the community shall be
preserved and shall not be allowed to be filled in.
[6] Grounds for not approving or rejecting a proposed new
construction, remodel or alteration within the district
include proposals which would be contrary to the
traditional character described above. These include, but
are not limited to, design defects which cause depreciation
of traditional community character such as:
[a] Arresting or spectacular effects;
[b] Violent or offensive contrasts of materials or colors;
[c] A multiplicity or incongruity of details resulting in a
restless or disturbing appearance;
[d] The absence of unity and coherence with the dignity
and traditional character of the present structure in
the case of repair, remodel or enlargement of an
existing building or structure;
[e] The absence of unity and coherence with the
prevailing traditional character of the neighborhood
in the case of a new building or structure; or
[f] Design which is obviously incongruous with the
historical aspects of the surroundings and traditional
methods of land use.
§ 1203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1203
1:569
(7) Hearings, appeals and notice.
(a) Appeals to the City Council may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any aggrieved office, department or board of
the City affected by any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Board of Adjustments which pertains to
the subject matter of administration of this subsection. Such
appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as shall be
prescribed by the Council by general rules, by filing with the
City Manager and with the Council a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds for such appeal. The Board of
Adjustments shall then transmit to the Council within a
reasonable time all the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from is taken.
(b) An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from except when the Board certifies to the Council
after the notice of appeal is filed that a stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such a case, a stay of
proceedings may be avoided by a restraining order, which may
be granted by the City Council or by a court of record on
application or notice to the Board and on due cause shown.
(c) The City Council shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
the appeal, give public notice thereof, give due notice to all
interested parties and rule on the appeal within a reasonable
time. At the hearings of the appeal, any party may appear in
person or by agent or attorney. The concurring vote of 2/3 of all
members of the City Council shall be required to revise any
order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board of
Adjustments charged with administering this subsection. The
concurring vote of 2/3 of all members of the City Council shall
also be required to decide a case in favor of an application, any
matter upon which the Council is required to pass or to effect
any variation or special exception to the terms of these
regulations.
S. Plaza de Española Historic District. This subsection may be cited as the
"Plaza de Española Historic District" under the authority granted in
NMSA 1978 §§ 3-22-1 through 3-22-5. [Added 11-19-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-02]
(1) Creation. There is hereby created in and around the vicinity of the
Plaza de Española an historic district in the area designated for the
purpose of preserving, protecting and enhancing said historical
area and landmarks. The City may adopt and enforce, in addition to
this subsection, by resolution such regulations and restrictions
within this district relating to the erection, alteration and
destruction of those exterior features of buildings and other
structures subject to public view from any public street,
thoroughfare, way or public places.
§ 1203 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1203
1:570
(a) Description: all that certain real estate as shown in Map I of
this subsection.32
(b) Addition to the district: New areas may be annexed to the Plaza
de Española Historic District when application is made to the
City and when the property is contiguous to the existing
district with a common boundary of not less than 50 feet (such
50 feet shall not include public rights-of-way). The
requirements set forth in this chapter shall govern regarding
the application and zoning change process.
(2) Purpose.
(a) The purpose of this subsection is to promote the economic,
cultural and general welfare of the citizens of the City and to
promote the harmonious, efficient and orderly growth and
development of the City. It is considered essential to this
subsection that the City Council proceed in a manner which
protects the qualities relating to the history of the Española
Valley by maintaining a harmonious appearance which
preserves property values and attracts tourism. Some qualities
sought to be preserved by this subsection are:
[1] The continued existence and preservation of historical
areas, buildings and structures;
[2] The continued construction of buildings and structures
using material and designs which are recognized as being
in keeping with the architectural character and historical
styles of the district;
[3] The continued preservation of the mercantile character of
the district; and
[4] A general harmony as to style, form, color, proportions,
texture and material between buildings of historic design
and those of more modern design.
(b) Specific review and approval of proposed work within this
district is required. At the time application is made to the City
for a permit for construction, alteration, remodel or
demolition, the application shall be accompanied by drawings,
specifications and descriptions sufficient to adequately
determine the characteristics of the proposed project. The City
Zoning Administrator shall notify the Planning Commission of
each application received for work within the District and shall
not approve the issuance of a building permit until approval for
said application is received from the Planning Commission.
32.Editor's Note: Map I is on file in the City offices.
§ 1203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1203
1:571
(3) Standards. The City recognizes that a certain style of architecture
has evolved within the City. This architecture is characterized by:
(a) Adobe building construction;
(b) Roofs which are steeply pitched, although flat roofs are
common with the roofline extending minimally past building
walls for drainage;
(c) Facades are flat, varied by inset portals, exterior portals,
projecting vigas or roof beams, canales or water spouts,
structural buttresses, wooden lintels and architraves which
(along with doors and lintels) are frequently carved in ornate
detail with bright colors inset into the carved areas. In this
district, the influences of the mercantile era of the Valley are
sought to be preserved. This includes Victorian and Gothic
styles of architecture which were adapted to the local building
materials available to local builders at the time, found locally
or brought in by covered wagon or the railroad. Designs in
keeping with the mercantile era of the City will be encouraged
and promoted as the design character of this district; and, but
not limited to
(d) All exterior walls of a building or structure are to be colored
alike with exterior stucco-type finishes. Colors may only range
from light earth tones to dark earth tones or shades of white.
(4) Principal uses. The following principal uses are allowed within the
Plaza de Española Historic District:
(a) Retail establishments, including incidental manufacturing of
goods for sale only on said premises; sales and display rooms
and lots, including yards for storage of new building materials,
but not yards for any scrap or salvage operations nor for
storage or display of any scrap, salvaged or secondhand
materials;
(b) Eating and drinking establishments, but excluding fast-food
establishments;
(c) Service and repair establishments, including filling stations
and repair garages;
(d) Personal service establishments, including barbershops and
beauty shops, shoe repair and cobbler shops, funeral homes,
dry cleaner and dressmaking/tailoring shops with processing
on the premises;
(e) Hotels, motels, rooming houses and boardinghouses;
(f) Commercial recreational uses and structures, such as theatres,
poolrooms and the like;
§ 1203 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1203
1:572
(g) Commercial parking lots;
(h) Offices, studios, medical or dental clinics and related
laboratories;
(i) Banking and other financial institutions;
(j) Private clubs and lodges;
(k) Public or private utilities;
(l) Public and cultural buildings and grounds, including
elementary or secondary schools;
(m) Churches and related uses;
(n) Business and vocational schools not involving operations of an
industrial character;
(o) Wholesaling and distribution operations not involving over
3,000 square feet for storage of wares to be wholesaled or
distributed;
(p) Greenhouses and plant nurseries;
(q) Private day-care nurseries and kindergartens; and
(r) Single-family, two-family and multifamily dwellings.
(5) Permitted accessory uses and structures in the Plaza de Española
Historic District shall be:
(a) Customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate
to permitted and principal uses and structures; and
(b) Located on the same lot as the principal permitted use or
structure, or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership.
(6) Prohibited uses and structures in the Plaza de Española Historical
District are:
(a) Yard for storage of used building materials, for any scrap or
salvage operations or for storage of any scrap, salvaged or
secondhand materials;
(b) Truck terminals, storage warehouses containing over 3,000
square feet;
(c) Bulk petroleum products storage and distribution;
(d) Erection of signs not relating to establishments, goods or
services on premises on which signs are erected;
(e) Outdoor displays of merchandise in any required yard or on
any public right-of-way;
§ 1203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1203
1:573
(f) Erection of private signs on or overhanging any public street,
alley, sidewalk or way;
(g) Mobile home units; and
(h) All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or
provisionally permitted herein, and any use which the Board of
Adjustment, upon appeal and after investigating similar uses
elsewhere, shall find to be potentially noxious, dangerous or
offensive to adjacent occupancies in the same or neighboring
districts or to those who pass on public ways by reason of
smoke, odor, noise, glare, fumes, gas, vibration, threat of fire
or explosion, emission of particulate matter, interference with
radio or television reception or radiation, or likely for other
reasons not herein defined to be incompatible with the
character of the Plaza de Española Historic District.
(7) Special exceptions in the Plaza de Española Historic District are:
(a) Home occupations; or
(b) After a public hearing as required by Article X, §§ 1001 and
1002, other uses may be permitted under a special exception, if
in the opinion of the Board of Adjustment the proposed use is
not offensive or incompatible and is in keeping with the
character of the Plaza de Española Historic District.
(8) Dimensional requirements in the Plaza de Española Historic
District are as follows:
(a) Minimum lot areas and width.
Use
Minimum Lot
Area
(square feet)
Minimum Width
(feet)
Single-family dwelling 6,000 60
Two-family dwelling 8,000 60
All other permitted
uses
10,800 80
(b) Yard requirements in the Plaza de Española Historic District.
[1] Front yard.
[a] Structure: setback of 25 feet.
[b] Off-street parking: setback of 10 feet.
[c] The front 10 feet of the lot shall be developed or
landscaped.
§ 1203 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1203
1:574
[2] Side yard. No setback shall be required if a building on an
adjacent lot is built to the property line or if the adjacent
lot is vacant and the owner thereof agrees by deed
restriction with enforcement running to the City that any
building constructed will either be built in such a manner
as to:
[a] Leave no space between the building on the property
in question and the building on the adjacent property;
or
[b] Leave at least 10 feet between the buildings involved.
[3] Rear yard. Ten feet shall be required, except on the rear of
a lot abutting a dwelling district, in which case there shall
be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet or 20% of the depth
of the lot, whichever is less.
(c) Maximum lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage for all
structures shall be no more than 35% of the total lot area.
(d) Building height. No building shall exceed 36 feet in height
except for flagpoles, antennas, chimneys and similar
accessories which are excepted from this height limitation.
(e) Off-street parking, loading and unloading. Restrictions for offstreet
parking, loading and unloading are as defined in Article
VIII of this chapter.
(9) Signage. Designs for all associated signs within the district must
accompany all building applications. Signs will be in the historical
mode of the Plaza de Española Historic District. Proper illumination
will be allowed so long as it is determined by the City Zoning
Administrator to be in keeping with the traditional character of the
mercantile era of the district. No flashing lights, neon signs or
offensive lighting will be allowed.
(10) Hearings, appeals and notice.
(a) Appeals to the City Council may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any aggrieved office, department or board of
the City affected by any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Board of Adjustments which pertains to
the subject matter of administration of this subsection. Such
appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as shall be
prescribed by the Council by general rules, by filing with the
City Manager and with the Council a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds for such appeal. The Board of
Adjustments shall then transmit to the Council within a
reasonable time all the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from is taken.
§ 1203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1203
1:575
(b) An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from except when the Board certifies to the Council
after the notice of appeal is filed that a stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such a case, a stay of
proceedings may be avoided by a restraining order, which may
be granted by the City Council or by a court of record on
application or notice to the Board and on due cause shown.
(c) The City Council shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
the appeal, give public notice thereof, give due notice to all
interested parties and rule on the appeal within a reasonable
time. At the hearings of the appeal, any party may appear in
person or by agent or attorney. The concurring vote of 2/3 of all
members of the City Council shall be required to revise and
order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board of
Adjustments charged with administering this ordinance. The
concurring vote of two-thirds of all members of the City
Council shall also be required to decide a case in favor of an
application any matter upon which the Council is required to
pass or to effect any variation or special exception to the terms
of these regulations.
T. Planned Unit Development District. [Added 11-19-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-02]
(1) General. The Planned Unit Development (PUD) Zoning District is
intended for the control of large-scale developments, either single
or mixed-use, in any district in the City. Planned unit development
in this zoning district shall be utilized whenever applicable.
(2) Guidelines. The following are the guidelines for when a PUD zoning
regulation is to be utilized:
(a) The location and design of the PUD shall be consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan and with other plans for streets, utilities,
parks, etc.;
(b) The location and design of the PUD shall ensure its compatible
integration with developments on adjoining properties and
should create an attractive, healthful and stable environment
for living and working that is superior to the development
attainable under separate zoning regulations;
(c) The dedication of land for proper usage and the reservation of
land for common usage in a PUD shall be undertaken as
follows: Each final development plan shall have its streets,
parking areas, recreation open spaces, etc. provided according
to the requirements of that plan or purpose, and common use
areas for the ultimate development shall be provided in the
initial phase of the Master Plan of the PUD.
§ 1203 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1203
1:576
(d) A planned unit development shall be defined as meeting all of
the above criteria and also the following requirements:
[1] It shall be a development of land which shall be developed
as a unified whole;
[2] It shall be for integrated projects planned as a whole and
including, but not limited to, dwellings and related
facilities, travelers’ services, commercial centers,
industrial parks and urban renewal projects; and
[3] It shall be in accordance with comprehensive and detailed
plans which include streets, utilities, lots, site plans, floor
plans and elevations for all buildings as intended to be
located, constructed, used and related to each other and
detailed plans for other land use as related to the
surrounding buildings.
(3) Submittals with preliminary application.
(a) Applicants for rezoning to PUD shall submit to the Planning
Commission a preliminary plan covering the entire tract
proposed for development, indicating existing conditions and
development for an additional area, including at least 200 feet
from the tract boundaries. This preliminary plan shall be
drawn at a scale of 50 feet or 100 feet to the inch, shall indicate
topography at two-foot contour intervals and shall show all
existing drainage or other significant natural features.
(b) This plan shall show with appropriate dimensions an
arrangement of buildings and their uses, off-street parking and
loading facilities, internal circulation, ingress to and egress
from adjoining streets, service areas and facilities, drainage
systems, landscaping, fences and walls, the size, location,
orientation and type of all signs proposed , proposed lighting of
the premises and relation to all property within 200 feet of the
tract. If it is proposed to develop the PUD in stages, the stages
and time of development shall be indicated in the plan.
(c) This plan shall show the identity of property owners and
evidence of unified control of property within the proposed
PUD.
(4) Processing preliminary applications.
(a) When a preliminary application has been filed, the Planning
Commissioner shall review it for compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and of the subdivision regulations
and shall make a finding as to whether the proposed change is
in accordance with the objectives of the City’s Comprehensive
Plan. In the course of such review, the Planning Commission
§ 1203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1203
1:577
§ 1204. Accessory uses or structures.
may suggest changes in the preliminary plan as a condition of
Planning Commission approval.
(b) The Planning Commission shall then transmit the application
and the preliminary plan to the City Council, together with a
recommendation as to approval, disapproval, desirable
changes and special conditions and safeguards. This
recommendation may include suggested time limits within
which all construction or specified stages of construction, or
both, shall be started or completed.
(5) Procedure for final development plan.
(a) After the City Council has approved preliminary plans with
such changes and conditions and safeguards as the City
Council may have included in the amendment, the Official
Zoning District Map shall be amended to designate the zoning
classification of the PUD district of the tract covered by the
preliminary development plan.
(b) The applicant shall prepare a final development plan to be
followed in construction operations and submit it to the
Planning Commission for approval, together with final drafts of
all agreements, contracts, deed restriction(s) and other legal
instruments pertinent to the implementation of the
development plan. The final development plan may be
submitted separately for the first and each successive stage of
development.
(c) The final development plan (or successive stages thereof as
approved) becomes the final plat and the basis for issuance of
zoning and building permits and for acceptance of public
dedications.
A. Permitted accessory uses and structures.
(1) R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-6, R-O-I. The following accessory uses and
structures are permitted in the above-mentioned zoning districts:
(a) Home occupations, as provided in § 607.
(b) Noncommercial greenhouses.
(c) Private garages.
(d) Utility sheds, located within the rear yard only.
(e) Children's play areas and play equipment.
§ 1203 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1204
1:578
(f) Other uses and structures customarily accessory and clearly
incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses
and structures.
(2) All accessory uses and structures allowed under the Subsection
A(1) of this section shall:
(a) Not involve the conduct of business on the premises, except
home occupations.
(b) Be located on the same lot as the permitted principal use or
structure or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership.
(c) Not be likely to attract visitors in larger numbers than would
normally be expected in a single-family residential
neighborhood.
(d) Not exceed the total lot coverage by all structures in the
provisions set forth in Table I, Table II and Table III of this
chapter.33
(e) Not be less than five feet from a side or rear lot line.
(f) Not be less than 25 feet from the front lot line.
B. Accessory dwelling units in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and B-2 Zoning Districts.
(1) Accessory dwelling units are permitted in the above-mentioned
zoning districts, provided that the properties are being served by
City water and City sewer.
(2) Accessory dwelling units (not more than 50% of the main dwelling
and not greater than 1,200 square feet) are permitted, provided
that:
(a) Total lot coverage by all structures does not exceed the
provisions set forth in Table I, Table II and Table III of this
chapter.34
(b) The accessory dwelling unit shall not be less than five feet from
a side or rear lot line.
(c) The accessory dwelling unit shall not be less than 25 feet from
the front lot line.
33.Editor's Note: Tables I, II and III are included at the end of this chapter.
34.Editor's Note: Tables I, II and III are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 1204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1204
1:579

ARTICLE XIII
Development Standards
§ 1300. Street development standards. [Added 11-19-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-02]
The following standards shall apply to all arterials, collectors, local streets
and private drives.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ARTERIAL — A major thoroughfare which serves as a major traffic way
for travel between and through the municipality.
COLLECTOR — Streets which serve as feeders to arterial streets and
collectors of local streets.
LOCAL STREET — A street which is primarily residential and is used
primarily by residents of a neighborhood serving up to 30 dwelling
units.
PRIVATE DRIVE — A paved or unpaved roadway serving up to eight
dwelling units.
B. Table of standards. See the following table for construction and
engineering standards for roadways.35
C. Construction and engineering standards of public streets shall be in
accordance with the City engineering and construction standards as
recommended by the City and illustrated in the above table and shall be
as follows:
(1) All new City streets shall be paved and dedicated public streets;
however, the City shall not maintain private drives;
(2) All dedicated City streets and private drives shall contain
turnaround capability. The following are acceptable means of
turnarounds on local and private streets:
(a) A forty-foot cul-de-sac with landscaped island.
(b) A cul-de-sac with a thirty-foot radius.
(c) A sixty-foot by twenty-foot Y-shaped turnaround.
(d) A loop road.
(3) Arterial roads shall have a one-hundred-foot right-of-way
comprised of the following:
(a) Driving lanes: 66 feet wide;
35.Editor's Note: The table is available in the office of the City Planner.
§ 1300 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1300
1:581
(b) Bike lanes: 10 feet;
(c) Gutter and curb: four feet;
(d) Landscape buffer: 10 feet; and
(e) Sidewalk: 10 feet.
(4) Collector roads shall have a fifty-foot right-of-way comprised of the
following:
(a) Driving lanes: 20 feet wide;
(b) Parking lanes: 12 feet wide;
(c) Gutter and curb: four feet; and
(d) Sidewalks: 14 feet wide.
(5) Local streets shall have a forty-two-foot right-of-way comprised of
the following:
(a) Driving lanes: 18 feet wide;
(b) Gutter and curb: four feet wide;
(c) Landscape buffer: 10 feet wide; and
(d) Sidewalks: 10 feet wide.
(6) Paved private drives shall have a twenty-foot right-of-way
comprised of the following:
(a) Driving lanes: 20 feet wide. If paved in asphalt, a two-inch
minimum thickness of asphalt is required on top of a six-inch
minimum compacted base course; and
(b) A utility easement of required width if deemed necessary by
the Public Works Department shall be dedicated to the City.
(7) Unpaved private drives.
(a) Unpaved private drives shall have a twenty-foot right-of-way
comprised of the following:
[1] Driving lanes: 20 feet wide. Where abutting a paved or
dedicated street, the first 25 feet shall be surfaced with a
nonpermeable surface;
[2] A utility easement of required width if deemed necessary
by the Public Works Department shall be dedicated to the
City; and
(b) Any private drives which are subsequently proposed to be
dedicated to the City, however, must be paved and shall meet
all applicable public street standards.
§ 1300 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1301
1:582
§ 1301. General standards.
A. Exemptions. The following are exempt from the requirements of this
article to prepare impact reports, to provide municipal services, to
construct temporary improvements, and to submit landscape plans:
(1) A single-family or two-family residential dwelling on a legal lot of
record.
(2) Any nonresidential development where a site plan is not required.
B. Impact reports. Within 21 calendar days of the written request by an
owner or agent, the Planning Department shall provide available
baseline data for the owner's use in the completion of impact reports. If
the Planning Department does not have all requested baseline data, the
requirement for impact reports shall not be waived. Impact reports are
studies to identify the potential adverse effects of the proposed
development on public infrastructure and land as well as adjoining
private properties. The DRT will evaluate the alternate solutions
proposed for mitigating adverse impacts and will forward its
recommendation to the Planning Commission. The purpose of this
section is to advise applicants that traffic generation, stormwater
drainage, utility capacity analysis and soils reports may be required.
The City of Española Planning Department will advise the applicant in
writing of any and all required impact studies. The Planning Director
shall notify the applicant of the requirement for specific impact studies
as set forth in this section at or prior to the first DRT meeting where the
development request is formally reviewed. The Planning Director shall
provide the applicant with any available baseline data regarding the
existing status or capacity of the City of Española roads, intersections,
water service, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, etc. The Planning
Director may require additional impact studies after notification as set
forth in this subsection; if the impact resulting from the development
request is modified by results of the impact studies or by the applicant,
the DRT, Planning Commission or City Council may request further
impact studies after notification of required impact studies by the
Planning Director.
C. Grading and erosion control plans. The Planning Director may require
grading and erosion plans to be submitted and approved as part of any
preliminary plat or site plan application. Requirements for grading and
erosion control plans are set forth in Subsections D(2) and E(2) of this
section, respectively. The notification requirements set forth in
Subsection B of this section shall apply to the requirements for grading
and erosion control plans.
D. Standards for impact study preparation.
(1) Traffic generation report required:
§ 1301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1301
1:583
(a) For residential development, when the proposed development
for all phases exceeds 20 dwelling units, or when the report is
in the best interest of the City of Española.
(b) For commercial, industrial, recreational and mixed uses, when
the estimated average daily traffic (ADT) generated by the
proposed development exceeds 300 ADT or peak-hour criteria
set by the Planning Department.
(c) Where plan review or field inspection indicates that site design
for the proposed development will not meet minimum City of
Española engineering standards for any of the following
conditions:
[1] Sight visibility at points of access to public streets.
[2] Street gradients.
[3] Points of conflict between vehicular traffic and pedestrian
movements caused by future on-site development or
existing adjacent development.
[4] Acceptable levels of service for adjoining roadways as a
result of the complete development of the proposed site.
[5] Impact on intersections at arterial streets in the immediate
vicinity causing significant traffic delays, or traffic volumes
creating need for modifications to intersection geometrics,
or traffic volumes satisfying warrants for traffic control
devices.
(2) Stormwater drainage report required:
(a) Where there is a drainage basin of five or more acres upstream
from the site.
(b) When there is known evidence of flooding immediately
downstream from the proposed development.
(c) When additional stormwater runoff caused by the development
of the property will result in the substantial increase in the
volume and velocity of stormwaters discharged from the site.
(d) When improvements or realignments to major drainage
channels are proposed.
(3) Utility capacity analysis report required. If the size of utility lines
does not conform to the sizes specified by the utilities master plan,
the developer shall prepare an engineering report providing data to
justify the difference in line sizing. The Utilities Department shall
consider the report in its decision to deviate from the
recommendation of the utilities master plan.
(4) Soils report required:
§ 1301 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1301
1:584
(a) When there are known geologic conditions that will create
hazardous conditions for public improvements and private
structures.
(b) When soils have characteristics that require specialized
engineering for building foundations or public roadways as
shown on Rio Arriba County Soils Report.
(c) Where unconsolidated fill material is known to exist within the
tract of land that is proposed for development;
E. Minimum impact report standards.
(1) Traffic generation report. The following minimum requirements
serve as a guideline for preparing the traffic generation report:
(a) Average daily traffic (ADT) and level of service (LOS) counts for
surrounding public streets for pre-development and postdevelopment
conditions.
(b) Preliminary road profiles and street sections.
(c) Minimum sight distances for intersections for pre-development
and post-development conditions.
(d) Quantify the amount and direction of pedestrian traffic on
public streets, and isolate locations where points of conflict
will occur between pedestrians and vehicular traffic, creating
hazardous conditions.
(e) The City Engineer shall determine the off-site impacts to street
intersections, in the immediate vicinity of the proposed
development, with and without traffic control, including the
need for signalized intersections and recommend measures
that will be required to mitigate any adverse impacts created
by development of the site.
(2) Stormwater drainage report. The following minimum requirements
serve as a guideline for preparing the stormwater drainage report:
(a) The stormwater drainage report will be prepared and stamped
by a professional engineer.
(b) Graphic description of upstream drainage area for
stormwaters which flow through the subject site, including
number of acres in the upstream basin.
(c) Quantities of water measured in cubic feet per second entering
and discharged from the site for conditions existing prior to
construction of the development and conditions represented at
completion of all phases of the development, based on a onehundred-
year- frequency rainfall.
§ 1301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1301
1:585
(d) Graphic description of the direction of flow for stormwater
through the development.
(e) Graphic description indicating points of stormwater discharge
upon completion of development and description of suggested
methods for controlling erosion at points of discharge.
(f) Impact on downstream properties upon completion of all
phases of the development.
(g) Capacity of public storm drainage facilities to accept existing
runoff and anticipated runoff from future development of the
subject site as well as potential development of vacant lands
upstream from the subject site. The assumed intensities of
development for upstream lands shall be based on the land use
recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan or the zoning
district designation as shown on the Official Zoning Map,
whichever is more restrictive.
(h) Recommended measures that will be required to mitigate any
adverse impacts created by development of the site.
(3) Utility capacity analysis report required. A utility capacity analysis
report is required for an improvement exceeding four residential
dwelling units and commercial improvements exceeding 5,000
square feet of heated area. The report shall include the capacity of
existing and proposed gas, water, electric and sanitary sewer
systems. The report shall include the calculated demand on the
utility systems of the improvement.
(4) Soils report required.
(a) The following minimum requirements serve as a guideline for
preparing the soils report:
[1] Location, on a scaled drawing, of any soils or geologic
conditions within and contiguous to the proposed
development area which create hazardous conditions or
require specialized engineering design.
[2] Written description of the soils types or natural or manmade
land features that are shown on the required sealed
drawings.
[3] Recommended measures that will be required to mitigate
any adverse soils or geologic conditions which have been
mapped within the proposed development.
(b) The soils report shall be reviewed by the City Engineer, who
shall recommend approval, conditional approval or denial to
the Planning Commission prior to review of the preliminary
plat or site plan.
§ 1301 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1302
1:586
§ 1302. Waivers.
The City Engineer may waive strict compliance with the requirements of
this article if the development satisfies the intent and purpose of this article.
The applicant shall state in writing the type and extent of the waiver and the
reasons for requesting the waiver. Waivers will generally only be granted
to smaller developments, where access, terrain and stormwater drainage
do not require mitigation measures. Any request for waiver of development
standards must be included in the application, submitted at the time of the
development request.
§ 1303. Design guidelines for improvements.
Design guidelines for improvements shall be available for developers from
the Planning Department.
§ 1304. Landscaping performance standards.
A. Site landscaping standards. Development of any tract of land where a
landscape plan is required shall conform to the following standards:
(1) The landscape design should emphasize native plants and water
conservation practices and should give due consideration to the
recommended plant materials list.
(2) The landscape design should use a variety and mixture of plant
materials to avoid destruction of singular species through blight
and/or disease.
(3) Where there is a need for buffer areas, parking lot or parking
facility landscaping or any combination thereof, there shall be
compatibility of plant materials and design themes within the
development and with adjacent properties.
(4) Permanent irrigation facilities may be required to ensure the
survival and growth of plant materials. The requirements of this
subsection will depend on the type of landscaping proposed.
Temporary irrigation facilities, such as hose bibs, may be required
to ensure survival of newly landscaped areas. When required,
irrigation facilities shall consist of, but are not limited to:
(a) Automatic or manual sprinkler heads, valves, valve boxes, and
all other mechanical equipment which shall be installed flush
or lower than adjacent sidewalks, drainageways, and streets or
no closer than five feet to a sidewalk, driveway or street.
(b) Bubbler or drip irrigation systems.
(5) A minimum of 5% of the site should be landscaped. Existing
desirable plant materials which meet the requirements of this
subsection shall count towards satisfying the landscape
requirement. This minimum landscaping requirement includes the
§ 1302 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1304
1:587
required landscaping for parking facilities as set forth in
Subsection B of this section, and in addition, the following
standards shall apply to this minimum landscaped area:
(a) Nonplant material within the allowable area for ground cover
should not exceed 50%. Small interstices between plants shall
be considered the same as if they were planted.
(b) Preservation of desirable existing trees on the site shall count
toward the minimum landscape standards of this subsection.
(c) The landscaping between adjacent uses and/or properties is
encouraged.
(6) Up to 50% of the site landscaping requirement may be satisfied by
landscaping within the public right-of-way for streetscape
purposes, subject to a joint landscaping agreement between the
City of Española and the property owner.
(7) Existing desirable trees with a trunk of six inches or more in
diameter, measured at 4 1/2 feet above grade, should be preserved.
New or replacement trees shall have a minimum trunk caliper of
four inches. Preference shall be given to preserving dense
groupings or groves of trees.
(8) Desirable trees that are removed shall be replaced with an equal or
greater number of trees and may be replaced on public property if
it is not appropriate or possible to replace the trees on private
property.
(9) The abutting property owner shall maintain landscaped areas
within the public right-of-way.
(10) Dead, dying, diseased or unwanted vegetation shall be removed
and replaced, and planting areas shall be maintained free of trash
and weeds. All ground cover used in the screening and/or
landscaping of a site shall be maintained in a healthy growing
condition. Fences and/or walls used in screening and landscaping
shall be maintained and kept in a structurally sound condition.
(11) All landscaping shall be completed prior to issuance of final
certificate of occupancy and no later than three months after
completion of construction of all structures unless otherwise
approved by the Planning Director.
B. Parking facility landscaping.
(1) For the purpose of this section, "parking facility" shall be defined as
the spaces utilized for the parking of vehicles, the driving aisles,
ramps and ingress to and egress from the parking facility.
(2) The landscaping for required parking facilities shall satisfy the
following requirements:
§ 1304 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1304
1:588
§ 1305. Landscape plans.
During the course of the review of any request for a landscape plan, the
Planning Director shall utilize the following criteria in making his decision
of approval, conditional approval or denial:
§ 1306. Hillside development standards.
(a) Landscaping shall consist of a mixture of ground cover, shrubs
and trees, and shall be placed and maintained in a manner so
as to not impair vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian visibility at
points of ingress and egress for the parking facility.
(b) As part of the landscaping requirements of Subsection A(5) of
this section, all required parking facilities shall provide
landscaping within the parking facility in a ratio of five square
feet of landscaped area for every 100 square feet of paved
parking area. Landscaped areas shall be located throughout
the parking lot or parking facility in a pattern that reduces the
barren appearance of the area. Covered or decked parking lots
or parking facilities shall incorporate the required landscaping
into the site design so as to screen the parking lot or parking
facility.
(c) As part of the landscaping requirements of this section, each
owner or agent, as a condition of approval, shall be required to
execute a maintenance agreement ensuring that the
landscaping as approved by the Planning Director shall be
installed, irrigated and permanently maintained. Should the
property owner or agent fail to uphold the terms of the
agreement, the City of Española, after proper notice to the
owner or agent, will maintain the landscape improvements and
lien the property for the actual costs of that maintenance. The
lien will be filed with the City of Española City Clerk.
A. Conformance with the standards set forth in § 1304.
B. General compatibility with the existing and proposed improvements
and adjacent land uses and landscaping.
C. Any conditions imposed by the Planning Commission and/or City
Council.
D. Location of all trees to be preserved on the site.
E. Location, size and type of plant material by common and/or botanical
names.
F. Systems for irrigation, if required, of landscaped areas.
A. Description and purpose.
§ 1304 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1306
1:589
(1) Certain areas of the City of Española are characterized by slope,
vegetation, drainage, rock outcroppings, geologic conditions and
other physical factors which, if disturbed for purposes of
development, can cause physical damage to public or private
property, or both. Therefore, the development of such areas and
adjacent land requires special care on the part of the public and
private sectors.
(2) The purpose of these regulations is to specify conditions for any
type of development in sensitive hillside areas where, due to
topography, the natural environment, or for other reasons,
problems may be created which are detrimental to the public
health, safety and welfare. It is the intent of the regulations of this
section to prevent physical damage to public and private property
and to aid in the preservation of the natural heritage of the City of
Española. It is furthermore the purpose of this section to allow an
appreciable degree of development flexibility to protect the
environment of hillside areas. Specifically, the objectives of this
section are to:
(a) Conserve the unique natural features and aesthetic qualities of
the hillside areas.
(b) Provide safe and convenient access to hillside areas.
(c) Minimize water runoff and soil erosion problems incurred in
adjustment of the terrain to meet development needs.
(d) Ensure types, distribution and densities of development which
are compatible with the natural systems and terrain of the
hillside areas.
(e) Ensure that the taxpayers of the City of Española are not
burdened by extraordinary costs for services attributable
solely to the development of hillside areas.
B. Applicability of section; exemptions.
(1) No building or structure may be erected, reconstructed or
structurally altered on land which is designated on the zoning maps
of the City of Española as a hillside area, nor shall such land be
subdivided, graded or otherwise disturbed for purposes of
development, subdivision or any other purpose unless such
construction, subdivision, disturbance or development is
undertaken in accordance with the requirements set forth in this
article.
(2) Upon written request from a landowner or authorized
representative, the Planning Director and the Director of Public
Works may exempt certain property from all or part of the
requirements of this section if the subject property is not a
characteristic hillside area as described in Subsection A(1) of this
§ 1306 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1306
1:590
section. The request shall clearly state the rationale for any
exemptions and list all exemptions being sought. The Planning
Director and Public Works Director shall respond in writing to
the applicant within 15 working days of receiving an exemption
request.
C. Land suitability analysis.
(1) A land suitability analysis shall be required as part of the
justification for the proposed development of a hillside area. The
analysis shall consist of an evaluation of all physical and
environmental factors on the site so that type, density and
distribution of development may be established in the most
environmentally compatible manner that will minimize land
disturbance, protect natural plant and animal communities, and
minimize costs and liability to the City of Española. The suitability
analysis shall be prepared in conjunction with the sketch plan, and
the sketch plan shall be clearly reflective of the analysis. Should
any land in a designated hillside area not be planned, the suitability
analysis shall be prepared in conjunction with the development
plan. The development plan shall be clearly reflective of that
analysis in terms of type, density and distribution of proposed
development.
(2) Should any land in a designated hillside area have an existing,
approved sketch plan which was adopted without an approved
suitability analysis, the landowner may, at his option:
(a) Submit a land suitability analysis upon which the sketch plan
was based;
(b) In lieu of a land suitability analysis, submit written or graphic
material, or both, to the Planning Department, addressing the
physical and aesthetic factors of the hillside site and
demonstrating how these factors influenced the type,
distribution and density depicted by the sketch plan; or
(c) Prior to or at the time that the development plan is submitted,
submit written or graphic material, or both, addressing the
physical and aesthetic factors of the hillside site and
demonstrating how these factors influence the project's design
as shown on the development plan.
D. Development plan.
(1) No site plan shall be submitted until such time as a detailed
development plan has been submitted and approved as set forth in
this section. The development plan shall be a master schematic site
plan which shows all phases of the development proposal, including
lot(s), street(s), drainageway(s) and proposed building site. The
development plan shall be prepared in compliance with this article
§ 1306 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1306
1:591
and shall contain all information required herein unless specifically
exempted under Subsection B(2) of this section.
(2) Review and approval procedures. The development plan shall be
processed in conformance with procedures set forth in § 403,
Development plan review criteria. Consideration and approval by
the Planning Director shall be in conformance with § 202.
(3) Submittal requirements. In addition to the development plan
submittal requirements listed in this article, the following
information is required to accompany a development plan in a
hillside area. The applicant shall not be required to depict actual
construction on individual lots in single-family detached residential
development. This exception shall not apply to single-family
attached developments.
(a) Location of a general building area for each lot. This can also
be shown by proposing preservation areas on lots, where
appropriate. Proposed access shall also be indicated [see
Subsection D(3)(f) of this section];
(b) Location and species of vegetation (common names are
acceptable) and an indication of vegetation to be removed;
(c) Location of rock outcroppings;
(d) A map of proposed road alignments identifying segments at
grades of 0% to 4%, 4% to 8% and above. Center-line profiles
shall be required for all road segments which exceed a grade of
8%. Profiles may be required for segments with grades of less
than 8% if deemed necessary by the Public Works Director;
(e) Where grading is to occur, plans showing the relationship of all
cuts and fills to the existing topography and plans for the
stabilization, restoration and control of erosion for disturbed
areas as required by Subsection F of this section. A letter of
credit or bond shall be required in order to ensure proper
restoration of disturbed areas in accordance with the approved
erosion control reclamation plan;
(f) The manner in which access will be provided or restricted due
to topographic and other physical constraints, from the access
road to each lot; and
(g) Where deviations from those standards contained in the
Design Guidelines are being proposed, a facilities plan shall be
required in accordance with Subsection C of this section.
(4) Criteria for review. In addition to development plan review criteria
outlined in this article, criteria for review of a development plan in
a hillside area shall be as follows:
(a) Is terrain disturbance minimized?
§ 1306 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1306
1:592
(b) Is natural vegetation preserved and incorporated into the
project design to the maximum possible extent?
(c) Have visual impacts upon off-site areas been avoided or
reasonably mitigated? Mitigation measures which may be
demonstrated on the development plan may include, but are
not limited to:
[1] Alternative siting of structures so that there is a mountain
or hillside backdrop to the structure from areas where the
structure is visible.
[2] Use of existing vegetation to soften structural mass when
building sites are located in highly visible areas.
[3] Use of supplementary native landscaping to soften
structural mass when building sites are located in highly
visible areas.
[4] Designation of special height restrictions for highly visible
areas.
[5] Use of visually compatible stabilization measures for cuts
and fills.
(5) Amendments. All amendments to an approved development plan
shall be processed in conformance with requirements and
procedures set forth in this chapter.
E. Facilities plan. To allow for design flexibility, a facilities plan shall be
required concurrent with the detailed development plan when
deviations from this section are being proposed. Due to the unique and
often fragile nature of hillside environs, certain variances from the
hillside standards may be allowed if they will result in superior and
more environmentally compatible design. The facilities plan shall be
used to demonstrate that the proposed deviations will not adversely
affect the public health, safety or welfare, and shall specify how the
unique natural features of the site will be protected through the careful
placement of services.
F. Grading, erosion control and reclamation plan.
(1) The primary objective of the grading, erosion control and
reclamation plan is to minimize terrain disturbance and to restore
and stabilize those areas which are disturbed. Plans for grading
and control of erosion shall be submitted by the applicant with the
development plan, development plan amendment, or replat,
whichever is applicable, in any designated hillside area. No land so
designated shall be subdivided, graded, or otherwise disturbed for
any purposes of development until the plan for grading and erosion
control is approved by the Planning Director and the Public Works
Director. The grading plan shall meet all the requirements of the
§ 1306 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1306
1:593
set forth in the Design Guidelines. In addition, the grading plan
shall show all areas to be disturbed by grading and fill and shall
show proposed final contours for these areas. The contour interval
shall be two feet and the horizontal scale one inch equals 40
inches unless otherwise approved by the Planning Director and
Public Works Director. The erosion control and reclamation plan or
program shall state in detail how each type of restoration situation
will be dealt with, recognizing that different combinations of slope
and material may require varied stabilization methods. No cleared,
graded or otherwise disturbed land may be left without temporary
protective stabilizing cover longer than three months or without
permanent cover as described in the erosion control plan longer
than nine months from the date of disturbance. All grading plans
prepared and submitted under this section shall include measures
for drainage and erosion control to be employed during
construction. Such measures shall remain in place after
construction has been completed until such time as temporary
or permanent protective cover is applied. Whenever possible and
wherever appropriate, erosion control and restoration shall
incorporate the use of live native plant materials. Criteria for
treatment shall include visual compatibility with the surrounding
landscape, sustained survivability under arid conditions, and
effectiveness in prevention of soil erosion and slope failure.
(2) All grading plans prepared and submitted under this section shall
include plans for limiting ecological damage through restrictions
on the use of construction equipment and placement of supply and
equipment storage areas.
(3) Revisions of any approved grading plan shall be submitted to the
City of Española Planning Department for review and shall be acted
upon by the Planning Director and Public Works Director within 15
working days of receipt.
(4) A letter of credit or surety bond shall be required in order to ensure
proper restoration of disturbed areas in accordance with the
approved erosion control and reclamation plan. This letter or bond
need not be submitted for the final plat to be approved, but shall be
submitted prior to any land disturbance, including removal or
alteration of vegetation, or prior to issuance of any building permit,
whichever occurs first.
G. Issuance of building permits. No building permits shall be issued in any
hillside area until such time as:
(1) The surety bond or letter of credit is posted by the developer in
accordance with Subsection F(4) of this section; and
(2) A plan for grading and erosion control for the individual lot is
approved by the Planning Department.
(a) This plan shall consist of the following:
§ 1306 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1306
1:594
[1] Plot plan drawn to scale;
[2] Two-foot contours, existing and proposed;
[3] All existing vegetation and rock outcroppings;
[4] All areas of cut or fill, or both, including driveways;
[5] Erosion control/stabilization methods for cuts and fills; and
[6] Restrictions on equipment use and supply storage areas so
that disturbances and ecological damage are minimized.
(b) The Planning Department shall respond to this plan within 15
working days of receipt.
H. Restoration and maintenance.
(1) Restoration; unpermitted land disturbance or alteration. If any land
disturbance or alteration, including, but not limited to, grading or
otherwise disturbing natural ground cover, occurs in a hillside area
which is not in accordance with the properly approved plans as
required by this article, a stop order may be issued prohibiting all
further activity until all required plans have been submitted and
properly approved. The landowner shall have 45 days after such a
stop order is issued to submit a plan for restoration pursuant to
Subsections D and F of this section. The Planning Director, with the
concurrence of the Public Works Director, may extend this time
period for an additional 45 days for good cause shown. The
Planning Director and Public Works Director may also condition
their approval of any restoration measures upon the applicant's
supplying a satisfactory bond, letter of credit or other suitable
guarantee for the performance of any proposed restoration. Such
plan shall require that restoration commence within 30 days after
the plan approval and proceed with due diligence to completion.
(2) Maintenance.
(a) Obligation to maintain. All facilities, vegetation and other
items required by the approved grading, erosion control and
reclamation plan shall be properly maintained by the owners of
the property. Such maintenance shall include, but not be
limited to, keeping all erosion control facilities in good order
and functional, repairing any erosion damage that occurs,
keeping all vegetation healthy and in growing condition and
replacing any dead vegetation as soon as practicable. This
obligation to maintain shall not apply to individual lots except
as the individual lots may be subject to maintenance
obligations incurred under the approved grading, erosion
control and reclamation plan and except for obligations
incurred under Subsection G of this section.
§ 1306 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1306
1:595
§ 1307. Public lands.
(b) Failure to maintain. If the Public Works Director or the
Planning Director determines the maintenance required under
Subsection H(2)(a) of this section has not been performed in
the manner required, the Planning Director or the Public
Works Director, with the concurrence of the other, may give
notice to the property owner specifying the maintenance
determined to be required under this section. The Planning
Director, with the concurrence of the Public Works Director,
may extend this 45 days for an additional forty-five-day period.
If the maintenance specified in such notice is not satisfactorily
performed within 45 days or an additional forty-five-day
extension after delivery of this notice, the City of Española may
proceed with a formal notice and order to correct as set forth
in Subsection H(3) of this section.
(3) Formal notice and order to correct; City of Española performance
of restoration and maintenance work. If the approval as required by
Subsection H(1) of this section has not been obtained within the
time required or if work is not commenced within the time required
or if maintenance required under Subsection H(2) of this section
has not commenced or concluded within the time required, or at
any time prior to approval or commencement of such work that the
Planning Director determines there is either imminent or existing
erosion damage, drainage damage, dust pollution or other
hazardous condition for which immediate action is necessary, the
Planning Director may cause corrective proceedings to be
undertaken and shall submit a notice and order to correct.
I. Appeals. Appeals of any administrative action under the provisions of
the Section shall be made in accordance with Article XII of this chapter;
provided, however, that whenever the Planning Director issues a notice
and order to correct under the authority of Subsection H(3) of this
section, this section shall apply.
A. Any agency owning land within the City of Española may use the land
and place structures in order to support community needs and the
public health, safety and welfare, where such use is found to be used for
purposes pertaining to the function of that agency after application and
permitting by the Planning Director.
B. Where the land is to be used by any other person under a lease or
contract with the government agency, an application for a special use
permit shall be applied for and acted upon by the Planning Commission.
Under such circumstances, the land may be put to any use accessory to
the governmental use or to any of the uses allowed in the district which
the land is located, upon the approval of the application for a special
use permit.
§ 1306 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § 1308
1:596
§ 1308. Historic districts.
Historic districts are overlay districts and the following regulations are
applicable as additions to the regulations of the underlying district in which
the property is located. In case of conflict, the more restrictive regulations
shall control.
A. No new construction, expansion, addition to, restoration of or major
maintenance to any building, structures or ruins shall be carried on
without the prior approval of a site plan by the Planning Commission.
B. No major changes to landscaping which would alter the character of the
area existing on the date of adoption of this article, including the
removal or planting of trees, shall take place without prior approval of a
site plan by the Planning Commission.
C. When acting on a site plan, the Planning Commission shall consider
recommendations from the State Office of Cultural Affairs, Historic
Preservation Division, or successor agency. This consideration is taken
as advice only and does not bind or obligate the Commission to any of
these findings or recommendations.
D. Requirements, guidelines and regulations for individual historic
districts may be adopted as separate ordinances; however, such
districts shall be bound by the requirements set forth in this
Development Code. Where the two ordinances are in conflict, the
Planning Commission shall determine the standards with which the
applicant must conform.
§ 1308 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1308
1:597
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1997 Code to 2011 Code
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
Chapter Title From 1997 Code Location in 2011 Code
1. General Provisions
Secs. 1-1, 1-3 - 1-8, 1-13 - 1-16 See Ch. 1, Art. I
Sec. 1-2, Definitions and Rules of
Construction
Ch. 1, Art. II
Sec. 1-9, Issuance of summons
or arrest warrant
Ch. 1, Art. III
Secs. 1-10 - 1-12— Ordinance
violations
Ch. 1, Art. III
2. Administration
Art. I, In General Repealed by Ord. No.
2007-06; see Ch. 34
Art. II, City Council Ch. 12
Art. III, Officers and Employees Ch. 78
Art. IV, Finance NI (no text)
Art. V, Boards and Commissions Ch. 7, Art. I
6. Alcoholic Beverages Ch. 133
10. Amusements
Art. I, In General NI (no text)
Art. II, Carnivals and Circuses
Div. 1, Generally NI (no text)
Div. 2, Permit Ch. 163
Art. III, Dances
Div. 1, Generally Ch. 128, Art. I
Div. 2, License Ch. 169
Art. IV, Fiesta del Valle de
Española
Ch. 45
14. Animals Repealed by Ord. No.
2009-02; see Ch. 137
18. Aviation Ch. 142
22. Buildings and Building Regulations
§ 1308 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § DT-1
1:598
Chapter Title From 1997 Code Location in 2011 Code
Art. I, In General NI (no text)
Art. II, Building Code Ch. 150
Art. III, Electrical Code Ch. 150
Art. IV, Gas Code Ch. 150
Art. V, Housing Code Ch. 222
Art. VI, Plumbing Code Ch. 150
26. Businesses Ch. 158
30. Municipal Court Ch. 23
34. Elections Ch. 175
35. Election Districts Ch. 34
38. Emergency Services
Art. I, In General NI (no text)
Art. II, Civil Preparedness
Department
Ch. 16
42. Environment
Art. I, In General NI (no text)
Art. II, Nuisances Ch. 254
46. Fire Prevention and Protection
Art. I, In General Ch. 192
Art. II, Fire Prevention Code Ch. 192
Art. III, Fire Department Ch. 49
Floods
50. Art. I, In General NI (no text)
Art. II, Flood Damage Prevention Ch. 200
54. Health and Sanitation
Art. I, In General NI (no text)
Art. II, Smoking in Municipal
Buildings
Ch. 278, Art. I
58. Human Relations
Art. I, In General NI (no text)
Art. II, Discrimination
Div. 1, Generally NI (no text)
Div. 2, Fair Housing Ch. 184
62. Law Enforcement
Art. I, In General NI (no text)
Art. II, Police Department Ch. 94
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:599
Chapter Title From 1997 Code Location in 2011 Code
66. Library Ch. 67
70. Offenses and Miscellaneous
Provisions
Art. I, General Provisions
§§ 70-1 - 70-3 Ch. 260, Art. I
§ 70-4, Handbills Ch. 218
§ 70-5, Littering Ch. 235
Art. II, Offenses Against the
Person
Ch. 260, Art. II
Art. III, Offenses Against
Property Rights
Ch. 260, Art. III
Art. IV, Offenses Against Public
Peace and Safety
Div. 1, Generally Ch. 270
Div. 2, Weapons Ch. 319
Div. 3, Fireworks Ch. 196
Art. V, Offenses Against Public
Morals
Div. 1, Generally Ch. 128, Art. I
Div. 2, Minors and Other
Underage Persons
Ch. 241
Div. 3, Gambling Ch. 209
Art. VI, Offenses Against Public
Authority
Ch. 260, Art. IV
Art. VII, Anti-Graffiti Ch. 213
74. Personnel
Art. I, In General NI (no text)
Art. II, Merit System Repealed by Ord. No.
2008-04
Art. III, Collective Bargaining Ch. 86, Art. I
78. Planning
Art. I, In General NI (no text)
Art. II, Planning and Zoning
Commission
§§ 78-26 - 78-35 Ch. 90
§§ 78-36 - 78-39 Ch. 72
Art. III, Economic Development
Plan
Ch. 29
§ DT-1 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § DT-1
1:600
Chapter Title From 1997 Code Location in 2011 Code
82. Solid Waste Ch. 290
86. Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public
Places
Art. I, In General Ch. 290
Art. II, Excavations Ch. 180
Art. III, Parades and Other
Demonstrations
Ch. 266
Art. IV, Building Numbering Ch. 154
90. Taxation
Art. I, In General NI (no text)
Art. II, Lodgers Tax Ch. 298, Art. I
94. Traffic and Vehicles Ch. 305
98. Utilities Ch. 311
102. Vehicles for Hire
Art. I, In General NI (no text)
Art. II, Wreckers Ch. 323
Appendix
A
Uniform Traffic Ordinance Repealed by Ord. No.
2004-04; see Ch. 305, Art.
III
Appendix
B
Subdivision Regulations Ch. 294
Appendix
C
Zoning Ch. 350
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No. Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
2011-02 Moving of oversize
loads
Repealed by Ord. No.
2012-03
2011-03 6-28-2011 Social hosts Ch. 280
2011-04 Not adopted
2011-05 Repeal of Ord. No. 540 NCM
2011-06 Not adopted
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:601
Ord. No. Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
2011-07 12-12-2011 Election districts Ch. 34
2012-01 1-10-2012 Special election to
reduce number of
members on governing
body
NCM
2012-02 1-24-2012 Electric franchise:
Jemez Mountains
Electric Cooperative,
Inc.
NCM
2012-03 1-24-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment (moving of
oversize loads)
Ch. 305
2012-04 1-24-2012 Vacant structures Ch. 302
2012-05 2-28-2012 Flood damage
prevention
Repealed by Ord. No.
2012-10
2012-06 Not adopted
2012-07 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
2012-08 Not adopted
2012-09 Not adopted
2012-10 12-10-2012 Flood damage
prevention
Ch. 200
2013-01 Not adopted
2013-02 11-19-2013 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
2013-03 11-19-2013 Lease NCM
2013-04 11-19-2013 Lease NCM
2014-01 1-14-2014 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 311
2014-02 1-14-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment (adoption
of revised UTO)
Ch. 305
2015-01 2-24-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 305
2015-02 2-24-2015 Peddling and
soliciting: panhandling
amendment
Ch. 272, Art. I
2015-03 3-24-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
2015-04
2015-04 12-8-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 305
§ DL-1 ESPA&NTILDE;OLA CODE § DL-1
1:602
Ord. No. Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
2016-01 2-1-2016 Sale of property NCM
2016-02 1-26-2016 Property maintenance Ch. 275
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:603